Eastern European Borders
Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Eastern European Borders
Annual Risk Analysis 2015

1 of 44

Frontex official publications fall into four main categories: risk analysis, training, operations and
research, each marked with a distinct graphic identifier. Risk analysis publications bear a triangular symbol formed by an arrow drawing a triangle, with a dot at the centre. Metaphorically,
the arrow represents the cyclical nature of risk analysis processes and its orientation towards an
appropriate operational response. The triangle is a symbol of ideal proportions and knowledge,
reflecting the pursuit of factual exactness, truth and exhaustive analysis. The dot at the centre
represents the intelligence factor and the focal point where information from diverse sources
converges to be processed, systematised and shared as analytical products. Thus, Frontex risk
analysis is meant to be at the centre and to form a reliable basis for its operational activities.

European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu
Warsaw, May 2015
Risk Analysis Unit
Frontex reference number: 6936/2015
Cover picture © dpsu.gov.ua (State Border Guard Service of Ukraine), 2014
Print version:
OPOCE Catalogue number TT-AG-15-001-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-24-6
ISSN 2443-7700
DOI 10.2819/56205

Online version:
TT-AG-15-001-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-25-3
ISSN 2363-1031
DOI 10.2819/342187

© Frontex, 2015
All rights reserved. Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

DISCLAIMERS
This is a Frontex staff working document. This publication or its contents do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of Frontex concerning the legal status of any
country, territory or city or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or
boundaries. All maps and charts included in this report are the sole property of Frontex and any
unauthorised use is prohibited. Frontex disclaims any liability with respect to the boundaries,
names and designations used on the maps. The contents of open-source boxes are unverified
and presented only to give context and media representation of irregular-migration phenomena.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015 has been prepared by the Frontex
Risk Analysis Unit. During the course of developing this product, many colleagues at Frontex and outside contributed to it and their assistance is hereby acknowledged with gratitude.

2 of 44

Table of contents
Executive summary #5
1. Introduction and methodology #7
1.1.	Data collection and additional information #7
1.2.	Quality of available data #8
1.3.	Application of the Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model #8
2.	Situation at the common borders – the context #10
2.1. Border controls #13
2.2. Irregular migration #17
2.3. Institutional changes #20
2.4.	Selected countries of transit and origin #20
3. Annual risk assessment #22
3.1.	Risk of cross-border smuggling and exploitation of green/blue borders as a
point of entry for smuggled goods #23
3.2.	Risk of significant transiting irregular migration flows originating outside of the
wider EB-RAN region #28
3.3.	Risk of sustained irregular migration flows from the EB-RAN region, including
CIS and Eastern Partnership countries #32
4. Outlook #36
4.1. Regular traffic #36
4.2. Cross-border crime #36
4.3. Irregular migration #36
4.4. Ukrainian crisis #37
5. Statistical annex #39

3 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

List of abbreviations used
ABC 		
Automated Border Control
ATO		
Anti-Terrorist Operation in Ukraine
BCP 		
border-crossing point
CIRAM		
Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model
CIS		
Commonwealth of Independent States
CU		
Customs Union
EaP		
Eastern Partnership
EBC		
Eastern Borders Conference
EB-RAN		
Eastern European Borders Risk Analysis Network
EC		
European Commission
EDF		
European Union Document-Fraud
EDF-RAN		European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network
EMCDDA		European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction
EU 		
European Union
EUR 		
euro
Europol		
European Police Office
Eurostat		European Union’s statistical authority
FRAN 		
Frontex Risk Analysis Network
Frontex		
European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the
External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
ICJ		
International Court of Justice
IDPs		
internally displaced persons
IIHF		
International Ice Hockey Federation
INTERPOL		 International Criminal Police Organization
JO 		
Joint Operation
LBTA		
local border traffic agreement
LBT		
local border traffic
n.a.		
not applicable
OCGs		
organised crime groups
OCHA		
United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
OLAF		
European Anti-Fraud Office
OSCE		
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
Q/Qtr		
quarter of the year
RFI		
Request for Information
RUB		
Russian rouble
SAC		
Schengen Associated Countries
SIS II		
Second generation Schengen Information System
SMM		
Special Monitoring Mission
UK		
United Kingdom
UNHCR		
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UNODC		
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
UNSCR		
United Nations Security Council Resolution
USD		
United States dollar
VIN		
Vehicle Identification Number
VIS		
V isa Information System
VLAP		
V isa Liberalisation Action Plan
WHO		
World Health Organization

4 of 44

Executive summary
In 2014, the situation affecting security at
the borders between EU Member States and
Belarus, Ukraine, Moldova and the Russian
Federation was determined by many correlated factors.
Firstly, the overall regular passenger flow, depending on the border section, was mainly influenced by such factors as: (a) the number of
visas issued by EU Member States; (b) movements under the local border traffic regime;
(c) fluctuation of shopping-related cross-border travel by both EU and EB-RAN countries
and the Russian Federation; (d) economic situation of the EU’s eastern neighbours; (e) entry restrictions.
In 2014, sanctions and other factors such as
oil price declines in the world markets led to a
strong devaluation of the Russian rouble and
the Ukrainian hryvnia, as well as an economic
downturn in the eastern neighbourhood of
the EU. The worsening economic situation has
an effect on the volume and profile of regular
passenger flows. However, the impact seems
to vary strongly between border sections depending on the composition of the flow (EU/
non-EU) and the purpose of travel. Thus, the
year 2014 was marked by decline of traffic
flows at EU Member States’ borders with the
Russian Federation and growth at the borders with Ukraine.
Secondly, the smuggling of excise and illicit
goods, to some extent connected to regular
passenger flows, remained a major threat
to border security. Data collected within the
Eastern European Borders Risk Analysis Network (EB-RAN), as well as during Frontex­-coordinated Joint Operations, indicate that
the smuggling of tobacco products was particularly common. Smuggling occurred pri-

marily through official border-crossing points
(BCPs); however, a variety of modi operandi
were also detected at green borders (between BCPs) varying from the so-called ant
smuggling through BCPs to the use of rafts
on border rivers to smuggle large amounts of
cigarettes across the common borders. Even
though 2014 was marked by fewer incidents,
they involved larger amounts of smuggled illicit cigarettes. Undoubtedly, the economic
crisis in the Russian Federation and Ukraine
deepened the differences in prices of commodities such as tobacco, thus encouraging
smuggling activities. Additionally, cross-border criminal activities also included attempts
to smuggle stolen vehicles and motorbikes
from the EU to EB-RAN countries. Smuggling
of illicit drugs, in turn, ranged from cannabis and synthetic drugs transiting / originating from the EU and smuggled towards the
EB-RAN countries to heroin and precursors
of amphetamines smuggled to the EU.
Thirdly, in 2014 there were fewer people moving irregularly across the common borders.
However, taking into consideration the composition of the flow, purpose of travel or different modi operandi, different trends were
observed.
In 2014, detections of illegal border-crossing
remained at a low level (1 275) in comparison
with other sections of the EU’s external borders: only 0.5% of all illegal border-crossings
reported by EU Member States at the external borders were reported from the 6 000-kilometre-long eastern borders of the EU.
Arguably, this is because irregular migrants
(especially non-regional nationals*) who take
the route via EB-RAN countries or the Russian Federation to the EU face considerable
logistic difficulties and high costs, as well as

* Migrants from
countries other than
the Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS)
or Eastern Partnership
(EaP) countries

5 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

** Migrants from the
Commonwealth of
Independent States (CIS)
and Eastern Partnership
(EaP) countries

6 of 44

a high risk of detection resulting from efficient cooperation of border-control authorities on both sides of the common borders.
Although ‘push factors’ in the origin countries
of irregular migrants, such as Afghanistan,
would point to a growing threat of illegal border-crossing, the magnitude of the threat will
most likely be limited in a wider EU perspective. As regards the origin of migrants detected by EU Member States crossing the
border illegally between BCPs in 2014, the
share of regional migrants** declined in favour of a higher number of non-regional ones.
In contrast to the rather low level of threat
of illegal border-crossing, the number of migrants refused entry remained high in 2014,
even though a significant drop was recorded.
The number of refusals of entry reported
by EU Member States fell to almost 36 700
down from over 50 000 in 2013. However,
refusals of entry reported at the EU’s eastern land borders still represented 32% of the
EU’s total, which may indicate a persisting risk
of the abuse of legal travel channels. While
the large number of refusals of entry can be
partly explained by new key factors affecting movements towards the EU (the ailing
Russian economy and the Ukrainian crisis),
some individual phenomena stood out in 2014:
1.	A sharp increase in Russian citizens refused
entry to Ukraine;

2.	A significant drop when compared to 2013
in refusals of entry issued to Georgians by
Poland, coupled with a decreasing trend of
their asylum applications and detections
of illegally staying Georgian nationals;
3.	A decreasing number of Russian nationals
of Chechen origin,travelling through Belarus to Polish land borders without a visa;
4.	A noticeable increase in the number of
Ukrainian citizens refused entry, applying for asylum and detected for illegal stay
compared to 2013;
5.	A higher number of refusals of entry to
the EU issued to Armenians, Azerbaijanis, Tajiks, Uzbeks and Kyrgyz;
6.	A growing number Syrian nationals using
false documents to enter the EU and subsequently apply for asylum.
The situation in Ukraine, the consequences
of the economic crisis in the Russian Federation and its migration policy remain the
most important uncertainties affecting the
outlook for the region. So far, in terms of
border security at the common borders, the
impact of the Ukrainian crisis has remained
limited. However, continued political and economic pressure in Ukraine does make stabilisation of the situation hard to achieve. The
ongoing crisis in Ukraine remains by far the
most important source of current and future population movements in the region.

1. Introduction and methodology
The European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation at the External
Borders of the Member States of the European Union (Frontex) created a concept of
the Eastern Borders Conference (EBC) in August 2008. The EBC was designed as a regular activity / forum where specific challenges
related to irregular migration at the eastern borders of the EU could be addressed by
FRAN (Frontex Risk Analysis Network) representatives and the relevant neighbouring
third countries.
By 2009 Frontex signed cooperation arrangements with Ukraine, the Russian Federation,
Moldova and Belarus. Subsequently, Frontex proposed to set up a permanent Eastern European Borders Risk Analysis Network
(EB-RAN), to be comprised of the competent
border-control authorities from the four mentioned countries and the Risk Analysis Unit
of Frontex. Additional agreements were later
signed allowing for the establishment of regular information exchange and joint analytical
activities: with Moldova in March 2009 (Cooperation Plan), with Ukraine in November
2010 (Mechanism on information exchange
for risk analysis cooperation) and with Belarus in November 2010 (Memorandum on
regular exchange information and joint analytical activities). Importantly, the Russian
Federation opted to stay out of the EB-RAN.*

1.1.	Data collection and
additional information
In order to facilitate the exchange of information between the EB-RAN countries and
Frontex, the Commission and Frontex set up
a secure Internet platform on the European
Commission’s CIRCABC server, similarly to
what is available for the Frontex Risk Analysis

Network (FRAN). This platform is used exclusively by EB-RAN countries and the Frontex
Risk Analysis Unit.
EB-RAN statistical data from Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine are available for the period 2010–2014. The core of the overview
are EB-RAN and monthly statistical data of
neighbouring FRAN members: Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary and Romania (only common
borders, or borders with the Russian Federation) covering the year 2014. There are five
key indicators of irregular migration: (1) detections of illegal border-crossing; (2) detections of facilitators; (3) detections of illegal
stay; (4) refusals of entry; and (5) asylum applications. The last indicator used in previous reports (detections of false documents)
is now covered by the EDF-RAN (European
Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network) with its statistical templates.
The 2015 Annual Risk Analysis follows the
notion of risk as defined by the updated
Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model,
introduced in 2011.
EB-RAN countries – Belarus, Moldova and
Ukraine – were addressed, prior to the expert meeting of 10 March 2015, with a Request for Information (RFI) covering the
main risks defined in accordance with CIRAM
methodology.
Other sources include, in particular, bimonthly analytical reports from EU Member
States, FRAN Quarterlies, and other analyses
produced in 2014 as well as reporting from
different Joint Operations coordinated by
Frontex. Open sources of information such as
reports issued by government agencies, EU

* Even though the
Russian Federation
opted to stay out of
the Eastern European
Borders Risk Analysis
Network and does not
contribute its work, this
report continues to cover
external land borders of
EU Member States with
the Russian Federation
with data provided only
by the EU Member States
and Schengen Associated
countries.

7 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

institutions and international or non-governmental organisations were also used.

1.2.	Quality of available data
Consistent with other law-enforcement indicators, variation in administrative data related
to border control depends on several factors.
In this case, the number of detections of illegal border-crossing and refusals of entry are
both functions of the amount of effort spent
detecting migrants and the flow of irregular migrants. For example, increased detections of illegal border-crossing might be due
to an actual increase in the flow of irregular
migrants, or they may in fact be an outcome
of more resources made available to detect
them. In exceptional cases, an influx of resources may produce an increase in reported
detections while effectively masking the actual decrease in the flow of migrants, resulting from a strong deterrent effect.
Similar issues should be taken into account
regarding the number of detections of crossborder crime at the borders. Higher numbers
of detection at a particular border-crossing
point might indicate a surge in criminality, but
may also be the result of more efficient border control and / or the deployment of specialists whose expertise in a certain area (the
identification of stolen vehicles, for instance)
may lead to increased detections. The statistical data used for this analysis should not be
considered as official statistics but as management of information to support the planning of joint operational activities. The data
might therefore occasionally vary from data
published officially by national authorities.
The use of slightly adapted FRAN monthly
statistical templates by EB-RAN countries
created some compatibility issues between
the FRAN and EB-RAN data sets. In par-

8 of 44

ticular, reasons for refusals of entry (Indicator 4) are standardised for FRAN members,
but vary among EB-RAN members according to their national legislations. Detections
of illegal border-crossing at BCPs (Indicator
1B), as reported by EB-RAN countries, should
also be analysed with caution since they may
also include figures for persons using forged
documents (Indicator 6). It should also be
taken into consideration that figures for illegal stay (Indicator 3) refer only to detections
at the border on exit of persons overstaying
in a particular country. Considering some of
the neighbouring FRAN members, the indicator on asylum applications does not have
a clear link with the common borders (especially Hungary, Finland and Norway) as most
asylum seekers arrive in these countries using other routes.

1.3.	Application of the
Common Integrated Risk
Analysis Model (CIRAM)
A key development in the CIRAM update released in 2011 was the adoption of a management approach to risk analysis that defines
risk as a function of threat, vulnerability and
impact. Such an approach endeavours to emphasise risk analysis as a key tool in ensuring the optimal allocation of resources within
constraints of budget, staff and efficiency of
equipment. According to the model, a ‘threat’
is a force or pressure acting upon the external borders that is characterised by both its
magnitude and likelihood; ‘vulnerability’ is
defined as the capacity of a system to mitigate the threat and ‘impact’ is determined as
the potential consequences of the threat. In
this way, a structured and systematic breakdown of risk is presented in the risk assessment chapter.

Figure 1.Risk as defined by the Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model (CIRAM)

risk
Threat

Vulnerability

Magnitude and
likelihood

Level of vulnerability
(EU, Member State
of entry/destination)

Modus operandi

Who, where, when

Trends and predictions
(increase, decrease,
stable, historical)

Push factors

Border permeability
(terrain, infrastructure,
capabilities, flows)
Operational activities
(staff, training,
interoperability)
Effectiveness of
countermeasures

Impact
Level of impact of the threat
(EU, Member State
of entry/destination)

Border and internal security

Ability to manage
legitimate passenger flow
at border

Humanitarian impact

Pull factors

Routes (difficulty and distance),
access to facilitation
Source: Frontex Risk Analysis Unit – Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model (CIRAM)

9 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

2.	Situation at the common
borders – the context
Table 1. S
 ummary of FRAN, EB-RAN* and selected Member States** indicators for 2014
Totals

Member States
(eastern land borders only) % of EU total

EB-RAN

Indicator
2 446

283 532

1 275

0.4%

3 052

12

0.4%

1

Facilitators

10 234

82

0.8%

30

Illegal stay

441 780

9 413

2.1%

22 151

Refusals of entry

114 887

36 631

32%

50 476

Applications for asylum

552 055

67 198

12%

386

False travel documents

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

291

Return decision issued

252 003

29 859***

12%

n.a.

Effective returns

161 309

25 245***

16%

n.a.

Illegal border-crossing between BCPs
Clandestine entries

* 2014 data from Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine
** Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary and Romania
*** Total numbers reported in FRAN by Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary and Romania
Source: FRAN data as of 12 February 2015

10 of 44

Figure 2. Evolution of EB-RAN and FRAN indicators – common borders
Monthly applications for international protection reported
by EB-RAN countries

90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

2012
2013
2014

Jan

40
35
30

Feb Mar Apr May Jun

Jul

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Monthly detections of facilitators reported
by EB-RAN and FRAN neighbouring countries
2012
2013
2014

25
20
15
10
5
0

700
600
500

Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun

Jul

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Monthly detections of illegal border-crossing between BCPs reported
by EB-RAN and FRAN neighbouring countries
2012
2013
2014

18 000
16 000
14 000
12 000
10 000
8 000
6 000
4 000
2 000
0

50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0

Jul

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun

Jul

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Monthly detections of illegal border-crossing at BCPs reported by EB-RAN
and FRAN neighbouring countries

150

300

100

2012
2013
2014

50

100

5 000
4 500
4 000
3 500
3 000
2 500
2 000
1 500
1 000
500
0

Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun

2012
2013
2014

250

400

0

2012
2013
2014

Monthly detections of persons using fraudulent documents to illegally
enter the territories of EB-RAN countries

200

200

Monthly applications for international protection reported
by EB-RAN and FRAN neighbouring countries

Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun

Jul

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Monthly detections of illegal stayers reported by EB-RAN
and FRAN neighbouring countries
2012
2013
2014

Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun

Jul

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

0

10 000
9 000
8 000
7 000
6 000
5 000
4 000
3 000
2 000
1 000
0

Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun

Jul

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Monthly refusals of entry reported by EB-RAN
and FRAN neighbouring countries

2012
2013
2014

Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun

Jul

Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec

Source: EB-RAN and FRAN data as of 17 February 2015

11 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Figure 3. Geographical scope of the Eastern European Borders Risk Analysis Network
Note on definitions: in the text ‘common borders’ refers both to borders between EU Members States and EB-RAN countries (covered by both sides) and borders
of EU Member States/Schengen Associated Countries with the Russian Federation (covered only by the EU/Schengen Associated Country side of the border)

Storskog
!
!

Main BCPs
Main BCPs between
EB-RAN countries
Regional borders
Borders covered by EU/SAC data only
Common borders
Pan-European Transport Corridors

Saint
Petersburg !
!
!

SWEDEN

Narva

Estonia

Finland

Russian
Federation

Niirala !
!
Imatra
Nuijamaa !!
!!
ESTONIA
!
Vaalima
a!

Latvia

Terehova !
!

!

Lithuania

Moscow

Belarus

Medininkai

Russian Fed.

!
!

Kuznica !

142.5

Minsk
!

Population
in millions

!

9.6

Poland

!
! Dolsk
!
Terespol! !
!
Domanove
!
!
Pulemets
!
Dorohusk !

Russian
Federation
!
!
Novi

Yarylovychi

!
!

Vystupovychi

! Kiev

Korczowa

!

!
!

Medyka !
Slovakia

! Ubla
!
Sokyriany
!
!
Vysne Nemecke !
! Mohyliv Podilskyi
!!
!
!

Zahony
Hungary

Moldova

3.6

Sculeni !
!
Romania

!
!
Albita !
!
Galati !

!
!
!
!

Tudora

Palanka

Chisinau
!
!

Reni
Source: Open-source data as of December 2013, ESRI geodata

12 of 44

44.5

Ukraine

2.1. Border controls
Regular passenger flows
The total volume of regular passenger flow
entering the EU at the common borders (including the border with the Russian Federation) reached over 36 million in 2014.* The
total share of the third-country nationals
reached 72%, while 28% of the regular passenger flow was associated with EU Member State nationals. Belarus, Moldova and
Ukraine reported additional 36 million border-crossings on exit at its borders with regional neighbours, with a 35% of share related
to foreigners.
Depending on the border section, the main
factors affecting the magnitude of regular
passenger flows include: (a) the number of
visas issued by EU Member States; (b) movements under the local border traffic regime;
(c) fluctuation of shopping-related cross-border travel by both EU and EB-RAN country
and the Russian Federation; (d) economic situation of the EU’s eastern neighbours; and
(e) entry restrictions.
The Polish-Ukrainian border section remained
the busiest in terms of border-crossings, followed by the Finnish-Russian border and
Polish­-Belarusian border.
At the regional borders the busiest section
was the Ukrainian-Russian border, with
a predominance of Ukrainians (62%). The
Ukrainian-Moldovan border section, in turn,
proved the second most frequented regional
border section, with a share of over 61% of
foreigners on entry.
Both common and regional borders have
some distinctive seasonal trends resulting
from labour migration and tourism. Peaks
observed during the holiday seasons and
at weekends put considerable pressure on
BCP capacity, which requires an optimal use

of resources in order to reduce undue waiting time for bona fide travellers. Moreover,
the economic downturn in Ukraine and the
Russian Federation, as well as tense situation in the eastern part of Ukraine inevitably affected regular passenger flow in the
EB-RAN region in 2014.
Composition of regular passenger flows
From the EU Member State point of view,
citizens enjoying free movement are subject
to minimum checks while third-country nationals, whether they require visas or not, are
subject to more thorough checks, as defined
by the Schengen Borders Code. Hence, the
composition and volume of passenger flow
determine, to a large extent, the allocation
of resources for border checks.
Data on composition of the regular traffic on
entry were available at all border sections
for 2014, and generally the share of non-EU
nationals remained clearly higher than that
of EU citizens.

* Data on regular
passenger flow reported
by FRAN members was
collected under the pilot
project for the second
year in a row, starting
from October 2013 (with
data for September
2013). While collection of
EB-RAN countries’ data
started from 2014. Due
to changes in sources as
well as problems in the
traffic-data collection
systems amongst FRAN
members, data sets of
2013 (covering only four
months) are not fully
comparable. Thus, yearly
comparison of the total
regular traffic figures is
not possible.

New developments
In 2014, there was a clear economic downturn in the eastern neighbourhood of the
EU, which led to a strong devaluation of the
rouble and the hryvnia. The devaluation accelerated during December 2014 and in the
beginning of 2015 resulted in a corresponding
decrease of the purchasing power of Russian
citizens in the euro area.
This economic downturn has had a bearing
on the volume and possibly also on the profile of regular passenger flows. However, the
impact seems to vary strongly between border sections depending on different passenger
profiles, i.e. the composition of the flow (EU/
non-EU) and the purpose of travel. Considering the data till the end of 2014, there was
a drop in traffic flows at EU Member States’
borders with the Russian Federation, while

13 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Figure 4. The Polish-Ukrainian border section remained the busiest in terms of regular passenger flow, followed by the
Finnish-Russian border and Polish­-Belarusian border
Data on the number of regular border-crossings on entry in 2014

LVA-RUS
2%
ROU-UKR
3%

LVA-BLR
1%

LTU-RUS SVK-UKR
3%
3%
HUN-UKR
4%

0.2

NOR-RUS
1%

2.2

0.6

POL-UKR
25%

EST-RUS
6%

5.7

1.3

0.5

3.3

ROU-MDA
6%
FIN-RUS
16%

POL-RUS
9%
LTU-BLR
9%

POL-BLR
12%

4.3

6.5

3.4

8.9

3.4
6

0.9

Total passenger flow on entry in million in 2014

1.4
2.4

Note on sources: For common borders and EU MS/SAC border with the Russian Federation,
all data by EU Member States. For the Ukrainian-Moldovan, Ukrainian-Belarusian
and Ukrainian-Russian border, Ukrainian data were used

0.9

Source: FRAN and EB-RAN passenger flow data collection as of 16 February 2015

at the borders with Ukraine the flows were
still growing in 2014.
With regards to EU Member States’ borders
with the Russian Federation, the impacts
on the regular traffic flow became visible
already at the end of 2014. At the border
sections where a large share of the regular
traffic flow consisted of Russian weekend
trippers and shoppers, a strong correlation
between the weakening value of the rouble and the volume of regular traffic flow
was observed. Indeed, as the price of hol-

14 of 44

idays and goods in the euro area rose rapidly the total number of border-crossings
declined. Decreasing regular flows could be
observed in December 2014 at least at the
Estonian, Norwegian and Polish borders with
the Russian Federation. However, situation
at the border sections with larger shares of
EU nationals seems to be more stable. This
is due to the fact that the strengthening
euro increased the purchasing power of EU
nationals on the eastern side of the border
just as it reduced the purchasing power of
Russians in the EU.

In contrast to the EU’s borders with the Russian Federation, the number of crossings at
the border with Ukraine has been growing
despite the conflict in the eastern part of the
country and the deteriorating economic situation in the region.
Outlook on regular traffic
Regular traffic volumes are affected by longterm factors such as development of transport connections and increased issuance of
visas. However, in the short term the passenger flow might fluctuate depending more on
factors other than infrastructural developments or geographical proximity. In this regard, the economic downturn in the Russian
Federation and Ukraine seems to be one of
the most important developments. The weakening of the Russian and Ukrainian currencies in relation to the euro is likely to limit the
growth potential of regular traffic in the coming year as regards tourism, shopping trips as
well as lorry traffic.
Nevertheless, the effect of the economic
downturn on international travel might prove
less dramatic than expected considering that
travelling to the nearby regions is less expensive than long-distance travel. Moreover, regional migrants’ movement to the EU
in search of employment becomes increasingly popular as the value of euro-denominated salaries has now grown in relation to
the hryvnia and the rouble. This might also
have affect the future dynamics of regular
passenger flows. Additionally, the euro-rouble exchange rate has strengthened the EU
citizens’ purchasing power, which may increase the passenger flow from EU Member States, also raising the overall volume of
traffic at the EU’s eastern borders in 2015.
Visas
Data on visa issuance by EU Member States
and third countries of issuance are not yet

Figure 5. The rising trend of issuance of short-term visas continued in 2013
Short-term visas issued in EB-RAN countries and the Russian Federation in 2007–2013

18 000 000
16 000 000
14 000 000

Other

Moldova

Belarus

Ukraine

Russian Federation

12 000 000
10 000 000
8 000 000
6 000 000
4 000 000
2 000 000
0

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

Source: Overview of Schengen Visa Statistics 2007–2013, European Commission Directorate –
General Home Affairs, 2014

available for 2014, but the European Commission, through its Directorate-General Home
Affairs, has released the data for 2013. Visa
data are collected on the basis of the place
of application rather than the citizenship of
the visa applicant. Thus, for instance, applications made in the Russian Federation do
not necessarily only represent Russian nationals. However, for the purpose of the following overview, the country where the visas
were delivered is used as the most accurate
approximation of the number of visas issued
to citizens of that country.
In 2013, a total of 16 196 350 short-term uniform visas were issued by EU Member States,
representing an increase of 14% compared
to 2012. The Russian Federation alone accounted for 43% of all visas issued in 2013,
with more than 6 million visas, followed by
Ukraine (1.5 million, 9%). Multiple-entry visas
accounted for 49% of all visas issued in the
Russian Federation.
The average refusal rate for all visa applications in 2013 was 6.2%. As regards visas issued in Ukraine, Belarus and the Russian
Federation, the refusal rates were considerably lower: 3.4% for visas issued in Ukraine,
1.4% – in the Russian Federation, and 1.2%

15 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

– in Belarus. In relative terms, the highest
rate of visa refusals among EB-RAN countries was registered in Moldova, with the refusal rate of 6.3%.
Possible measures to enhance and
develop border checks
The growing regular passenger flow requires
the border authorities to allocated increasing resources in order to maintain border security and facilitate travel. Consistent efforts
are also needed to develop BCP infrastructure in order to respond to further challenges
of the increasing passenger traffic.
Although expansion or reconstruction of the
BCPs requires huge investments, it simplifies border-crossings, improves travel conditions and enhances the throughput capacity.
For example, construction works of Narva
BCP between Estonia and the Russian Federation, carried out in the framework of a
project funded by the EU under the Estonia-Latvia-Russia Cross-Border Cooperation Programme, is expected to ease traffic
and double the throughput at the border, as
the new pedestrian crossing point will be approximately three times bigger than the old
terminal. As Narva BCP is one of the biggest
road connections between the EU and the
Russian Federation, these developments are
essential for the whole region.

Moreover, the newly constructed BCP Privalka
at the Lithuanian-Belarusian border increased
the BCP’s capacity and improved cargo traffic
security. Modern equipment and appropriate
illegal traffic detection procedures enhance
the effectiveness of smuggling prevention.
Detailed inspection of vehicles does no longer
generate long queues or impede active transit traffic through the area.
Therefore, new approaches and innovative
solutions to increase the efficiency of the
currently available resources are also necessary. The following non-exhaustive list of mitigation measures is intended to give a quick
overview of the measures that have been
planned or already implemented at various
border sections in the region.
a)	New logistical and technical solutions
for border checks

© Finnish Border Guard, 2015

Effectiveness and speed of border checks can
be enhanced by minimising the time required
for passengers to move from the vehicles to
the check point. Possible solutions include
the e-booking projects or pre-checks before
arrival at the BCP. These solutions are in line
with the growing volume of passenger and
vehicle flows, providing better organisation
of the flows and making border checks easier.
Figure 6. Renovation of the BCP of Vaalimaa
at the Finnish-Russian border streamlined
the border checks considerably

16 of 44

Importantly, apart from mitigating the growing pressure on border checks, such investment programmes aim at promoting joint
development activities for the improvement of
the region’s competitiveness by using its potential as the crossroads between the EU and
the Russian Federation. Specifically, they focus
on making the wider border area an attractive place for both its inhabitants and businesses through improving the living standards
and investment climate.

The positive experience of special lanes dedicated, for example, for LBT permit-holders
speeded up border checks and cut queues.

Moreover, high efficiency of green corridors
implemented at some BCPs at the PolishUkrainian border section during the UEFA
Euro 2012 led to further development of this
initiative and introduction of similar green
corridors at the Latvian-Russian border in
2014.
Similarly, border checks performed in trains
have been developed at departure stations
thus minimising long stops at BCPs and giving border guards more time for the checks.
Automated Border Control (ABC) can also
decrease pressure on BCP personnel. However, from the EU side of the border, the main
problem has been the technical difficulty in
using the ABC for border checks of thirdcountry nationals.
b)	Online queuing/registration systems
for border checks
In order to avoid the formation of queues
and to streamline border-crossing of bona
fide travellers, several EU Member States
have adopted or are planning to introduce
on-line systems for lorry/bus or passenger
traffic, where a time slot for border checks
can be booked in advance. This is a response
to the increasing regular passenger and vehicle flows.
In addition to improving the comfort of travellers, these systems make the operational
environment more predictable for the border authorities and help plan the effective
use of resources.
c)	Strengthening of the cooperation
between border and customs
authorities

improving the capacity to counter cross-border crime. Additionally, joint efforts help both
services to use resources more efficiently,
avoid duplication of work and implement
additional necessary measures.
d)	Legislative changes considering
private imports of excise goods
Small-scale smuggling of excise goods, especially gasoline, for resale has been widespread among regular passengers at several
border sections. In some locations these activities produced significant queues at BCPs.
Consequently, the restrictions of these activities can have important impacts on the volume of passenger flows.
The smoothness of border checks is, indeed,
a significant factor encouraging tourist flows.
Importantly, improved transportation links
and shorter queues at the border may stimulate the growth of tourism in the neighbouring countries.

2.2. Irregular migration
In 2014, indicators of irregular migration at
the common borders showed mixed trends.
There were fewer detected attempts of illegal border-crossing, but clearly more asylum
applications and refusals of entry, which indicates a rising risk of the abuse of legal travel
channels. Cross-border criminality, mainly
large- and small-scale smuggling of excise
goods (tobacco), trafficking in stolen vehicles and smuggling of drugs, remained an important threat to border security at several
border sections. In fact, many detections of
illegal border-crossing, especially those involving regional nationals, were linked to
cross-border criminal activities rather than
irregular migration.

Close cooperation between border and customs authorities is one of the key issues in

17 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

2.2.1. Illegal border-crossing
Detections at common and regional
borders
In comparison to 2013, detections of illegal border-crossing between BCPs in 2014
dropped by 21% from 4 708 to 3 721 at the
common and regional borders (including the
border with the Russian Federation, for which
only data from the EU or EB-RAN member
side of the border were available). Similarly,
detections of illegal border-crossing at BCPs
dropped by 25% from 1 771 to 1 326.
However, it needs to be emphasised that
50% of the detected illegal border-crossings
between BCPs, and merely 8.2% at BCPs,
were associated with the purpose of irregular migration. The share of those crossing
illegally for smuggling purposes was 11% between BCPs and 23% at BCPs. ‘Other’ reasons,
which accounted for 36% of detections between BCPs and 68% at BCPs, were reported
mainly at the regional borders and were often linked to illegal hunting, fishing and other
local-level activities with little or no impact
on the wider EB-RAN region.
Detections by EU Member States/
Schengen Associated Countries
In 2014, detections of illegal border-crossing
by EU Member States remained at a low level
in comparison with other parts of the external
border: only 0.5% of all illegal border-crossings
reported by EU Member States at external
borders were reported from the 6 000-kilometre-long eastern borders of the EU.
In line with the figures from the common and
regional borders, EU Member States also reported decreasing (-3.1%) numbers of illegal
border-crossings between BCPs in 2014 (1 275)
compared with the previous year (1 316). The
drop in relation to 2013 can be mainly explained by lower detections of Georgians,

18 of 44

Moldovans, Ukrainians, Somalis, Eritreans
and Russians at the EU’s eastern borders.
The total number of clandestine entry attempts at BCPs at the common borders detected by EU Member States was only 12.
However, considering the high volume of vehicle and lorry as well (cargo and passenger)
train traffic crossing the common borders,
the risk of this modus operandi should not be
underestimated.
Composition of the flow
In contrast to the previous year, in 2014 EU
Member States detected more illegal bordercrossings by transiting non-regional migrants
than regional nationals. In relative terms, illegal border-crossing is the preferred modus
operandi used by non-regional migrants to
enter the EU. Moreover, the purpose of illegal border-crossing tends to differ depending on the type of migratory flow. In the
case of regional nationalities, reasons other
than irregular migration (e.g. smuggling) accounted for almost half of detections of illegal border-crossing, while for non-regional
migrants irregular migration was clearly the
main purpose of illegal entry.
In terms of nationalities reported by EU Member States, Vietnamese ranked first, followed
by Afghans and Georgians. Vietnamese were
the fastest growing detected nationality, even
though their detections remained low in a
wider European comparison.
Main entry points
At the common borders, with data available
from both sides of the border, the greatest
number of detections of illegal border-crossing between BCPs was reported at the Lithuanian-Belarusian border.
While Ukraine, Belarus and Lithuania reported the highest number of illegal bor-

der-crossings between BCPs at the common
borders, the largest increase, both in relative
and absolute terms, was reported by Latvia
and Hungary.
In 2014, the share of regional migrants detected for illegal border-crossing between
BCPs by EU Member States decreased in favour of the growing proportion of non-regional migration.
2.2.2. Abuse of legal entries
In contrast to the decreasing trend in detections of illegal border-crossing, the number of refusals of entry was relatively stable
when compared to 2013, with an increase
of only 2.6% (from 84 929 to 87 107). However, refusals of entry issued at the EU’s
eastern borders represented 32% of the
EU total, what may still indicate a high
risk of the abuse of legal travel channels.
Importantly, significant changes were observed in 2014 in terms of the top nationalities. Undoubtedly, the consequences of
the financial turbulences in the Russian Federation as well as the crisis and worsening
economic situation in Ukraine were important factors affecting movements to the EU,
including cases of the abuse of legal travel
channels. The most important phenomena
in 2014 were:
1.	A sharp increase in the number of Russian
citizens refused entry to Ukraine;
2.	A significant drop in refusals of entry issued to Georgians compared to 2013, together with fewer asylum applications and
illegal stay detections of these nationals;
3.	A decreasing number of Russian nationals of Chechen origin travelling through
Belarus to Polish land borders without a
visa, being refused entry and then apply-

Figure 7. The share of regional migrants in the total Member States’
detections of illegal border-crossing in 2014 shrank in favour of nonregional migration flow
Detections of illegal border-crossing between BCPs by neighbouring FRAN members with
shares of regional and other migrants in 2011–2014

EB-RAN region nationals

1 800

Other

1 600
1 400
1 200
1 000
800
600
400
200
0

2011

2012

2013

2014

Source: FRAN data as of 17 February 2015

ing for asylum in Poland just to travel further to Germany;
4.	A noticeable increase in the number of
Ukrainian citizens refused entry, applying for asylum and detected for illegal stay
compared to 2013;
5.	An increase in refusals of entry issued to
Armenians, Azerbaijanis, Tajiks, Uzbeks
and Kyrgyz;
6.	Increasing use of false documents by Syrian nationals to enter the EU.
2.2.3. Document fraud
Similarly to refusals of entry, detections of
fraudulent documents at the common borders were most commonly made at the
borders with Ukraine. Záhony at the Hungarian-Hungarian land border, followed by
Medyka and Korczowa at the Polish-Ukrainian border, reported the most document fraud
on entry to the EU / Schengen area.

19 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

2.3. Institutional changes
Visa liberalisation process with Eastern
Partnership countries
The EU conducts ‘Visa Liberalisation Dialogues’ with Ukraine and Georgia. Through
these dialogues, the EU is taking gradual steps
towards the long-term goal of visa-free travel
on a case-by-case basis, provided that conditions for well-managed and secure mobility
are in place. The dialogues are built upon ‘Visa
Liberalisation Action Plans’ (VLAP), which include four blocks of benchmarks related to
(block 1) document security, including biometrics; (block 2) border management, migration and asylum; (block 3) public order and
security; and (block 4) external relations and
fundamental rights. The benchmarks concern
both the policy and institutional framework
(legislation and planning).
The EU-Ukraine Visa Liberalisation Dialogue
was launched on 29 October 2008 and the
VLAP was presented to the Ukraine on 22
November 2010. Upon the last Commission’s
report (27 May 2014) and its Council endorsement (23 June 2014) Ukraine is now officially
in the second phase of its VLAP.
The EU-Georgia Visa Liberalisation Dialogue
was launched on 4 June 2012 and the VLAP
was presented to the Georgian authorities
on 25 February 2013. Georgia started implementing the second stage of the VLAP on 29
October 2014.
Impact of EU-Moldova visa liberalisation
By far the most striking impact of visa liberalisation for Moldova was linked to passenger flows at the Romanian border with
Moldova. With an exception of asylum claims
at the EU level, which increased marginally,
other indicators followed a very similar trend
as in the case of visa liberalisation with the
Western Balkans.

20 of 44

Detections of illegal border-crossing declined,
while refusals of entry doubled and illegal stay
increased slightly. In conclusion, visa liberalisation for biometric passport-holders from
Moldova has so far produced the expected
and largely positive effects (greater mobility, better contacts between communities
on both sides of the border, etc.). The situation, however, needs more monitoring, in
particular with regard to persons detected
for staying illegally in EU Member States and
Schengen Associated Countries.

2.4.	Selected countries of
transit and origin
The Russian Federation
The Russian Federation is one of the largest receivers of migrants in the world with
roughly 10 million foreign workers staying
in the country. It is estimated that there is
approximately 3.5–4 million irregular labour
migrants working in the Russian Federation.
The vast majority of them originate from
CIS countries, mostly Uzbekistan, Ukraine
and Tajikistan.
As a result of the influx of immigrants looking
for work, especially in the capital, nationalist
sentiments and tensions between particular
ethnic groups are on the rise. To come up to
the social expectations, between 23 October
and 2 November 2014 the authorities carried
out the operation ‘Migrant-2014’. According
to the press office of the Russian Ministry of
Internal Affairs, in four days the administrative status of 14 000 migrants was checked
and 7 000 people were arrested. A similar operation, named ’Operation Illegal 2014’, was
conducted in St. Petersburg between 22 September and 10 October 2014.
Furthermore, apart from the wide-scale police raids in the country’s major urban centres,
Russian authorities continued with their more
restrictive migration policies by introducing

legal amendments. New rules came into effect on 1 January 2015 abolishing the former quota system and requiring all foreign
workers to obtain work permits, the price of
which more than tripled. Migrants are also
obliged to pass language tests, prove their
knowledge of the Russian history and basic
laws and cover their own health insurance.
In addition, residents of CIS countries must
be in possession of a foreign passport in order to enter the Russian Federation.
Importantly, economic sanctions imposed
on the Russian Federation over its annexation of Ukraine’s Crimea peninsula have adversely affected the Russian financial market.
Indeed, loss of business confidence, shrinking foreign investments as well as outflow
of capital from the Russian Federation has
already had a negative impact on the Russian economy.
The deteriorating economic situation inevitably influenced the labour market making it
difficult for migrants to find low-skilled jobs.
Moreover, working in the Russian Federation has become unprofitable since migrants’
wages almost halved and, consequently, the
amount of remittances sent home significantly shrank.
Georgia
On 1 September 2014 Georgia introduced a
new law on ‘The Legal Status of Aliens and
Stateless Persons’ abolishing hitherto visafree entry and unlimited stay, which made
Georgia one of the most open places in the

world. Visa-free stay will now be limited to
90 days and those who need a visa will need
to apply for it at Georgian embassies or consulates before travelling to Georgia, rather
than just receive it at the border. In general,
foreigners who currently work in Georgia
without a visa will have to apply for work permits. While some argue that Georgia adopted
‘punitive model of migration management’,
Georgian officials state that these measures
lie in Georgia’s national security interest and
will help to combat trafficking and customs
fraud as well as irregular migration.
Nevertheless, shortening the duration of visafree stay from 360 to 90 days might reduce
the number of visitors and possibly translate
into weaker economic indicators in the coming year. The new entry restrictions to Georgia might possibly also result in changing the
migratory routes in the region.
Ukraine
The ongoing crisis in Ukraine is by far the most
important source of current and future population movements. Apart from physical security threat in the conflict zone in the east of
the country, most inhabitants of Ukraine are
also negatively impacted by inflation of consumer prices (nearly 25% in 2014). The central
bank expects to see an inflation rate as high
as 18% in 2015. Ukraine’s economy is also in
a deep financial crisis as the country’s ability
to sustain imports with its currency reserves
is rapidly shrinking. This economic downturn
might push increasing numbers of Ukrainians to move towards the EU.

21 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

3. Annual risk assessment
The following risk assessment is guided by
the CIRAM working definition of risk as a
function of three main components: threat,
vulnerability and impact. A systematic examination of each component allows for classifying risks into categories of significance.

* Commonwealth of
Independent States

22 of 44

Establishing a general context in which border
authorities from EB-RAN countries and the
neighbouring Member States operated during 2014 is therefore important for identifying
the main border (regional and common) security risks. To narrow down the selection, a
detailed analysis of the available monthly statistical data (both FRAN and EB-RAN), Frontex operational data, bi-monthly reports and
previous EB-RAN annual risk analyses was
performed. The following three main risks
have been identified:

1.	Risk of cross-border smuggling and exploitation of green/blue borders as a point of
entry for smuggled goods (tobacco products, drug precursors and drugs, stolen vehicles and other goods);
2.	Risk of significant transiting irregular migration flows originating outside of the
wider EB-RAN region;
3.	Risk of sustained irregular migration flows
from the EB-RAN region, including CIS*
and Eastern Partnership countries.
Each identified risk is described in detail, broken down by its main components.

3.1.	Risk of cross-border smuggling and exploitation of green/
blue borders as a point of entry for smuggled goods (tobacco
products, drug precursors and drugs, stolen vehicles and
other goods)
EB-RAN data, as well as information from
Frontex-coordinated Joint Operations
supported by open sources, indicate that
cross-border criminality, mainly large- and
small-scale smuggling of excise goods, trafficking in stolen vehicles and drug smuggling
remain the most significant threats to border security at the common land borders.
Due to the legal and institutional characteristics, national border guard authorities
along the EU eastern border have different
types and degrees of responsibility in the fight
against cross-border crimes. Moreover, the
nature and extent of inter-agency cooperation at the external borders differs greatly
between these countries. Typically, preventing the smuggling of goods falls under the responsibility of customs authorities rather than
border guards. Nevertheless, border guards
regularly have to react and engage in combating these criminal activities, especially
along the green borders. Indeed, according
to statistical data, at some border sections
smuggling of goods seems to be a more frequent reason of illegal border-crossing than
irregular migration.
Smuggling of excise goods
As a response to formal EU requirements on
the minimum level of excise duty, EU Member States have to bring their national legislation in line with the tobacco directives,
resulting in price changes. Between January
2013 and July 2014, 22 EU Member States increased their excise duties on cigarettes, on
average by EUR 0.10 per pack of cigarettes,
as defined by the European Commission.*

Currently, an average pack of cigarettes
would cost EUR 5 in Finland, whereas across
the Russian border, a customer would pay
less than EUR 1 for the same good.
Large differences in price of excise goods between EU countries and their neighbours remain a major incentive for the smuggling of
tobacco products. Not only individual consumers and small-scale ‘ant-smugglers’ from
economically weak border regions try to take
advantage of the existing price differences.
Large-scale criminal businesses illicitly import large amount of cigarettes hidden on
freight trains and in lorries.
To address the problem of contraband and
counterfeited cigarettes on the EU markets,
the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) has
signed legally binding agreements with the
world’s four largest tobacco manufacturers,
which cover 80% of the global market. Apart
from the companies’ commitments to sell
their products to legitimate clients only, important preventive measures such as a tracking system have been implemented. However,
one of the main problems of cigarettes’ oversupply in the third-country markets, where
only an insignificant share can be absorbed
by the local demand, has not been solved.
Smaller companies outside the EU continue
to sell large quantities of tobacco products
destined for and smuggled to EU Member
States. In particular the seizures of ‘cheap
white brands’ have shown a strong upward
tendency over the past years.
The concept of the tracking system assisting law-enforcement authorities in determining if cigarettes have been traded illegally
was further developed under the Protocol to

* European Commission,
Excise duty tables
– part III, European
Commission, Directorate
General, Taxation and
Customs Union, REF
1042, January 2015,
http://ec.europa.eu/
taxation_customs/
resources/documents/
taxation/excise_duties/
tobacco_products/rates/
excise_duties-part_iii_
tobacco_en.pdf

23 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Figure 8. Large differences in cigarette prices between EU Member States and their neighbours remain a strong
incentive for smuggling
Average cigarette prices (pack of 20) in the EU and neighbouring third countries

European Commission. (2014). Excise duty tables. Part III - Manufactured tobacco. Shows the situation as at 1 July 2014 (Ref 1041).

Source: European Commission (prices in Member States) and open sources (prices outside the EU)

Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products,
closed for signature by the Parties to the
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control on 9 January 2014. To assist in the investigation of illicit cross-border trade in tobacco products, it requires the signatories to
implement a global tracking and tracing regime through unique, secure and non-removable identification markings, such as codes or
stamps on cigarette packages. Within the EU,

24 of 44

this and other measures for public health are
implemented through the revised Tobacco
Products Directive, which entered into force
on 19 May 2014 and will apply after a transposition period of two years.
Undoubtedly, the economic downturn in the
Russian Federation and Ukraine with a sharp
devaluation of the rouble and the hryvnia in
2014 deepened price differences of such ex-

cise commodities such as tobacco, petrol and
alcohol. The smuggling of cigarettes from the
EU eastern border countries affected the by
economic crisis remained highly profitable
and still fuelled the growth of transnational
OCGs active in that business.
In 2014, the largest share of illicit cigarettes
reported though Frontex Joint Operations,
was smuggled across the eastern borders
of the EU. More than 14.6 million cigarettes
were seized by the authorities in 303 incidents. Most detections of small-scale cigarette smuggling were linked to residents of
border regions or other frequently travelling
individuals. While small amounts of cigarettes
were brought by individuals in cars and buses
in primitive hiding places, OCGs used specially
constructed vehicles concealments.
As for fuel smuggling, the contraband of petroleum products was mainly reported from
the EU’s eastern borders with Belarus, the
Russian Federation and Ukraine. It was encouraged by the price difference between
EU Member States and their third-country
neighbours. In many cases, the smugglers
crossed the border several times a week to
fill up the large or illegally extended petrol
tanks of their private vehicles. This type of
smuggling not only caused substantial fiscal losses but also increased the workload of
border guards significantly. Frequently, fuel
smugglers were responsible for large shares
of the border queues at the BCPs at common borders.
Exit of stolen motor vehicles
According to Eurostat, the total number of
vehicles including cars, motorcycles, buses,
lorries, construction and agricultural vehicles stolen in the EU was steadily falling from
1.85 million in 1998 to 0.88 million in 2010.
Among the reasons for the decline were the
advanced technical protection technologies

developed by the producers and intensified
international law-enforcement cooperation.
Only a small share of the vehicles stolen in
the EU are detected at its external borders,
often in the context of Frontex Joint Operations. In contrast to the overall theft statistics, detections at the borders reported
to Frontex showed a decrease from 519 in
2013 to 430 in 2014, around 60% of which at
the EU’s eastern borders. Stolen vehicle detected included passenger cars, lorries, trailers, boats, excavators, agricultural machines
and motorbikes.
Most car thefts were detected by querying SIS II, INTERPOL and national theft data
with the Vehicle Identification Numbers (VIN)
placed on the engine, frame and major parts
of most motor vehicles. Car thieves applied
various modi operandi to conceal the identity of
their stolen vehicles at the external borders.
Stolen vehicles were regularly reported at the
EU’s eastern borders, where such cases detected on exit decreased from 313 in 2013 to
260 in 2014. The brand preferences did not
change over the last years, as more than 40%
of the private vehicles detected were produced by Mercedes Benz, Volkswagen and
BMW. A slight change, in turn, was noticed
in the type of stolen vehicles. More older cars
were reported as stolen than brand new and
luxury ones, which might suggest possible
changes in the preferences of target groups in
response to their diminished financial means.
Most persons driving the stolen vehicles on
exit from the EU were nationals of the country which they intended to enter while leaving the EU. For example, 80% of the persons
caught with a stolen vehicle at the EU’s borders with Ukraine were Ukrainian nationals,
only 18% were EU citizens.
Most stolen cars were reported from the EU’s
eastern borders exiting the EU through Pol-

25 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Figure 9. EB-RAN countries continue to be the market for vehicles stolen in the EU
Main routes of stolen vehicles across the EU’s eastern borders in 2014

Mercedes
22%

Others
52%
Volkswagen
10%
BMW
6%

Honda
5%

Audi
5%

Eastern borders routes
Northern branch
Southern branch
Main route for motorbikes
stolen in Italy

Source: Joint Operations Reporting Application and Member State bi-monthly reports

ish BCPs, particularly Medyka and Korczowa,
to Ukraine. These BCPs are situated at or in
proximity of the economically important European Route E40, which connects Western
Europe with the countries of Central Asia.
Stolen vehicles mainly originated from Italy,
Poland and Germany.
Authorities of EU Member States bordering Ukraine registered a further rise in stolen motorbikes transported hidden in vans or
lorries on the direction to Ukraine. The phenomenon spread to an extent that one-third
of the vehicles detected at this border sec-

26 of 44

tion were motorbikes, which were almost
entirely stolen in Italy.
Smuggling of illicit drugs
In 2014, the overall amount of cannabis reported by border authorities as smuggled
from Poland to Belarus and Ukraine was
higher than in the previous year, even though
the number of detected cases and the period
of seizures were comparable to 2013. This
quantity of the drug detected per detected
case was significantly greater.

Cannabis is smuggled to Europe in the form of
two distinct products, cannabis resin (‘hashish’) and herbal cannabis (‘marijuana’). The
main provider of cannabis resin to Europe is
Morocco, although its production capacities
are in decline.
Belarusian and Polish Border Guards reported
that only between September and December
2014, there were five major trafficking cases
leading to the seizure of a total amount of
around 550 kg of cannabis. The amount detected in Belarus only during the last four
months of 2014 represented 91% of the hashish seized during the whole year at the EU’s
eastern borders.
With regards to cocaine, according to
EMCDDA calculations based on seizure data,
it is the third most smuggled drug in Europe
after cannabis resin and herb. The number of
seizures increased between the mid-1990s
and 2007, but have been declining since 2009.
Reported quantities slightly increased in 2011
and 2012, mostly because of seizures made in
transit countries including Spain and Belgium.
Some of the cocaine seized in the EU was in
fact destined for emerging markets in third
countries such as the Russian Federation.

Africa detected in recent years by Lithuanian
customs officers. The cost of the drugs was
estimated at over EUR 6.6 million.
As regards heroin, most of the drug consumed in the EU is produced in Afghanistan
and, to a lesser extent, in Iran and Pakistan.
Heroin is transported to Europe along a variety of routes, including the Northern route,
which runs though Central Asia and the Russian Federation.
Changes in legislation
Adjustments of legislation and introduction of
limitations for the import of excise goods may
give border officials the authority to tackle
small-scale fuel or cigarette smuggling cases
at BCPs. It would also reduce the workload
of border authorities.
Close cooperation between bordercontrol authorities and customs services
The detection of drugs and smuggled excise
goods requires a close cooperation between
border-control authorities and customs
services.
Border security investments

Although most shipments of cocaine continue
to enter the EU through Western Europe, a
diversification of trafficking routes is taking
place. Apart from direct shipments across the
Atlantic, a large share of cocaine from South
America destined for Europe is smuggled via
the African route. This might have been the
case of the seizure of 116 kg of cocaine in the
seaport Klaipeda in December 2014. This was
the largest shipment of cocaine from Central

Investments in the area of border security
definitely constitute a major deterrent factor for smugglers. As an example, the new
border surveillance system lately installed
in Lithuania along the most vulnerable land
border section with Belarus significantly reduced illicit border-crossings, primarily related to cigarette smuggling.

27 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

3.2.	Risk of significant transiting irregular migration flows
originating outside of the wider EB-RAN region
3.2.1. Description of the threat

3.2.2. Magnitude of the threat

EB-RAN members are transit countries for
irregular migrants originating outside of the
region, including the Middle East, South Asia,
South-East Asia and Africa, moving to the EU.
Illegal entries and transit flows are often combined with further secondary movement inside the EU area. The threat of non-regional
migration flow along the routes via EB-RAN
countries and the Russian Federation remains,
though on a relatively lower level than on other
transiting migration routes (e.g. via Turkey or
North African countries).

Illegal border-crossings

As migrants are facing more logistic difficulties and higher costs while transiting the
EB-RAN countries, the routes along the EU’s
eastern borders seem to be less attractive.
In addition, the risk of detection is regarded
as high while travelling illegally to the EU
due to efficient cooperation of border control authorities at the common borders and
strengthening border security.
Nevertheless, the transit of non-regional migrants via the EB-RAN region and the Russian
Federation should not be underestimated.
Although the EB-RAN countries as such do
not form a unified transiting ‘route’ towards
the EU, there are links between phenomena
observed at different border sections along
the common borders, indicating that facilitators are actively searching for vulnerable
border sections. Notably, in 2014 the EU’s
eastern ‘green’ borders were significantly
affected by the increasing influx of non-regional nationals (Afghans, Vietnamese and
Syrians). Moreover, ongoing pressure of African migrants from the Russian Federation
was also observed.

28 of 44

In 2014, EU Member States reported 754 detections of illegal border-crossing by non-regional migrants at the common borders and
borders with the Russian Federation, which
was 19% more when compared to 2013 (633),
and 15% less than in 2012 (886).
Illegal border-crossings reported on both
sides of the common borders (with available
data for Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine) show
a 24% increase when compared to the previous year (from 1 035 in 2013 to 1 285 in 2014).
The growth resulted from a sharp increase
in Afghans and Vietnamese nationals, predominating in the flow of non-regional migrants via the EU’s eastern borders in 2014.
Routes
As far as the routes are concerned, the Slovakian-Ukrainian border remained the busiest
border section in terms of illegal bordercrossing of non-regional migrants, followed
by the Lithuanian-Belarusian border. Hungary
and Ukraine, in turn, recorded the highest increases in the number of migrants originating
from the wider EB-RAN region detected at
their common border, both in relative and absolute terms compared to the previous year.
It is estimated that well-established facilitation networks as well as significant non-regional communities in the EB-RAN countries
played a key role in choosing the transit
routes via the EU’s eastern borders.

Modi operandi
According to EB-RAN experts, illegal bordercrossing of non-regional migrants is increasingly facilitated. It includes several legs of the
journey and usually involves several criminal
groups or hired local drivers who deal with
particular parts of the trip on both sides of
the common borders.
Seasonality
According to EB-RAN data collected on a
monthly basis, detections at both the common and regional borders show seasonal
fluctuations with the threat of illegal border-crossings peaking in October 2014, similarly to 2013.
In 2014, seasonal movements of non-regional
irregular migrants were also affected by the
situation in Ukraine. By contrast to the previous year, in 2014 a sharp increase in detections of illegal border-crossing between BCPs
was observed between March – marking the
beginning of the crisis in Ukraine – and April.

of Afghans at the common borders hiked by
almost 60% up to 346 in 2014, when compared to 2013.
Notably, in 2014 eastern European green borders were also affected by the influx of Vietnamese migrants reported in the highest
numbers since 2009. The detections of nationals of Vietnam at the common and regional borders increased by 65% (from 209
in 2013 to 345 in 2014).
As Vietnamese comprise a significant portion of economic refugees seeking better living conditions and opportunities they tend
to move further towards Western Europe.
Those who manage to cross the EU external borders target countries such as Poland
and Germany.
Similarly to the previous year, in 2014 Syrian
nationals became the third top non-regional
nationality detected for illegal border-crossing at the EU’s eastern borders. While common border sections saw a 59% increase in
detected Syrians, the regional borders faced
only few incidents related to Syrians in 2014.

Composition of the flow
Composition of the non-regional migration flow depends on a variety of push and
pull factors including the changing situation in their countries of origin, on other
routes leading to the EU, and operational
responses by the EU and EB-RAN country
authorities. In 2014, the flow of non-regional
migration between BCPs at the common
borders was dominated by Afghans, Vietnamese and Syrians, together accounting
for almost 65% of the flow of migrants from
the wider EB-RAN region.

The increasing trend is linked to the ongoing civil war in Syria, which has produced
large displacements and refugee flows, also
towards the EU via EB-RAN countries. It is
worth pointing out that apart from Finland,
there were no detections of Syrian nationals at the EU’s eastern borders on exit from
the Russian Federation.
It is very likely that the Syrians detected at
the common borders are mainly headed for
Sweden and Germany, which are the main
destination countries for Syrian asylum applicants within the EU.

Detections of Afghans illegally crossing the
EU’s eastern borders between BCPs increased
significantly at the common borders in 2014,
placing them on the top of detected nonregional migrants. Illegal border-crossings

29 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Figure 10. As in the previous year, most detections of non-regional
migrants were made in October 2014
Monthly detections of illegal border-crossings between BCPs of non-regional migrants
reported at the common and regional borders in 2013–2014

200

2013

180

The detection of clandestine entries of nonregional nationals reported by EU Member
States at the common borders was limited
to individual cases. Only a minority of incidents reported at the common borders were
related to illegal migration and about 80%
were associated with smuggling or reported
under other reasons.

2014

160
140
120
100
80

Due to the growing regular traffic flow of
goods in lorries and trains the detection of
this modus operandi may become more challenging and should not be underestimated.

60
40
20
0

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Source: FRAN and EB-RAN data as of 17 February 2015

Figure 11. While the common borders saw a 59% increase in detected
Syrians compared to 2013, there were 0nly few such incidents
reported at the regional borders in 2014
Detections of illegal border-crossing between BCPs of Syrians reported at the common and
regional borders as well as those reported exclusively by FRAN members at the EU eastern
border

180
FRAN

Common borders

Regional borders

160
140

False documents
The main change observed in 2014 was the
growing number of non-regional migrants in
possession of false documents. The top five of
the false document users included citizens of
Syria, Sri Lanka, Iran, Afghanistan and Cuba
with the highest increase in relative terms
recorded for migrants from Sri Lanka. In total, as reported by the EU Member States the
number of non-regional top five migrants detected using false documents increased more
than 50% when compared to 2013.
Abuse of legal travel channels

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

Illegal border-crossing at BCPs
(clandestine entries)

2010

2011

2012

Source: FRAN and EB-RAN data as of 17 February 2015

30 of 44

2013

2014

Attempts to abuse legal travel channels, especially visa issuance, are regularly reported
by the EU Member States situated along the
EU’s eastern borders. It is likely that similar
methods are used also in EB-RAN countries.
Non-regional migrants used visas obtained
under false pretences to a much lesser extent
than it was the case for the nationalities from
the EB-RAN region. However, taking into account detections of fraudulently obtained
visas at the EU airports of the reporting EU
Member States (used for example by citizens
of Iraq and Syria) this phenomenon should
not be underestimated at the land borders.

Importantly, the year 2014 was marked by a
new phenomenon related to the abuse of legal travel channels. As Belarus took an unprecedented step abolishing visas for visitors
and participants of the IIHF World Hockey
Championship, fans were able to enter Belarus without a visa if they had valid tickets for the event. Indeed, an increased flow
of non-regional migrants posing as hockey
fans was reported.

3.2.3. Impact

Indeed, apprehensions for attempts or for illegal border-crossing reported by both sides
of the common border with Belarus covered a
wider scope of non-regional nationals in 2014
than in 2013. Apart from the influx of Vietnamese, also detected were citizens of Iraq,
Iran, India, Syria, Afghanistan, Egypt, Senegal,
Bangladesh, Cuba and Morocco.

Labour exploitation and trafficking in
human beings (especially Vietnamese
nationals)

According to EB-RAN experts visa abuse
cases tend to require a lot of effort from the
border authorities. Presumably, the exchange
of information under the VIS system leading
to enhanced cooperation of consulates is likely
to reduce the risk of visa abuse.

Loss of life
Exposure to harsh winter conditions while
crossing the border illegally can prove fatal, especially for those not fully aware of or
prepared for the risks. However, even summertime crossing can be dangerous, e.g. for
people traversing border rivers.

In the EU, Vietnamese irregular migrants
are working unregistered, for example, in
nail bars, as gardeners in cannabis plantations and as couriers for methamphetamine.
There is indeed an increased risk of trafficking
in human beings associated with Vietnamese irregular migration through the common
borders, as Vietnamese were one of the most
detected nationalities of victims of human
trafficking in the EU.
Time consuming second-line checks in
visa abuse cases
Validating a long string of travel plans, work
contracts etc. in second-line checks with limited availability of interpreters creates additional workload at BCPs.

31 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

3.3.	Risk of sustained irregular migration flows from the EB-RAN
region, including CIS* and Eastern Partnership countries

* Commonwealth of
Independent States

The threat of irregular migration flows originating from the EB-RAN region, including
CIS* and Eastern Partnership countries (regional migrants), resulted from a variety of
different migration motives and modi operandi. This is natural due to the geographic
proximity, large regular passenger flows and
sizeable labour migration.
Despite important variations between nationalities and rapid political and economic
changes unfolding in the region, the following main irregular migration trends of recent
years continued in 2014: (a) the threat of illegal border-crossings with the purpose of migration remains relatively low, while (b) the
threat of abuse of legal travel channels (asylum misuse, overstaying, obtaining visas under false pretences) is much higher.
Even though the abuse of legal travel channels may not be facilitated meaning that persons are guided through the border, individual
parts of the journey of irregular migrants
are facilitated starting from production of
fraudulent supporting documents to taxidrivers arranging their intra-EU movements.
As these facilitating acts usually precede or
follow the actual border-crossing, they are
challenging to identify and prosecute by the
border authorities.

the reporting countries still follow slightly
different practices in reporting the purpose
of illegal border-crossing.
In 2014, there was a clear decrease in the
number of detected illegal border-crossings
by regional migrants. EU Member States/
SACs reported a 24% decrease (521 detections
in 2014). Moreover, only 281 detections were
reported to be linked with irregular migration, while 87 were connected with smuggling and 126 with ‘other’ reasons (including
fishing, tourism, etc.).
Considering both sides of the common borders (with data available for Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine), 2014 was also marked
by a clear 27% decrease in detections of regional migrants.
The most affected section of the regional
borders remained the Ukrainian-Moldovan
border; however, it should be underlined that
at the regional borders most cases of illegal
border-crossing involved local inhabitants
and were largely not connected with migration, but rather with activities such as smuggling, illegal logging, fishing or hunting. This
also explains the fact that a great majority
of the detected illegal border-crossings were
made by the nationals of the countries sharing the border.

Illegal border-crossing
Abuse of legal travel channels
When considering data on illegal bordercrossing by regional migrants, two main observations should be made. First, in contrast
to transiting non-regional migrants, regional
migrants are relatively less likely to cross the
border illegally for reasons linked to irregular migration but rather do it in connection
to other (usually economic) activities. Secondly, the data need to be read carefully as

32 of 44

In contrast to the threat of illegal bordercrossing, the magnitude of the abuse of legal travel channels is much higher as can be
seen when indicators such as refusals of entry
and illegal stay are analysed. A considerable
proportion of the refusals and illegal stayers
were not necessarily connected with irregular migration. Some cases simply resulted

from accidental attempts to cross the border on an expired visa or short overstay with
no intention of irregular migration.
The total number of refusals of entry issued at the eastern European borders has
fluctuated over the past few years, with
2014 marking a clear overall decrease. As
regards nationalities, the number of refusals issued to Russian and Georgian nationals decreased significantly, while refusals to
Ukrainian and Belarusian nationals remained
relatively stable. The number of refusals of
entry reported by FRAN members at the
EU’s eastern land borders was over 36 600
in 2014 – a great majority of them issued to
regional nationalities. Although 2014 saw a
marked decrease from roughly 50 000 refusals in 2013, mainly due to fewer refusals
issued to Russian and Georgian nationals,
refusals issued at the EU’s eastern borders
accounted for 32% of the EU total, which
shows that attempts to abuse legal entries
persist at the common borders.
There were also over 41 000 detections of illegal stay by regional migrants detected by all
EU Member States and Schengen Associated
Countries. Poland reported the largest number of detections of illegal stay, followed by
the EU Member States with no shared land
border with EB-RAN countries or the Russian Federation, i.e. Germany, Sweden, and
Austria. This indicates possible secondary
movements from the common borders to
more distant EU Member States.
New developments
The most important new developments were
connected with the crisis in Ukraine. As the
situation in the eastern part of the country
deteriorated, there were increased movements of people inside Ukraine. In comparison to internal displacement, the number of
Ukrainians fleeing the conflict and moving
to the EU was relatively modest.

Citizens of Ukraine
Most displaced Ukrainians stayed in the country (610 413 IDPs as of 25 December 2014) or
moved to neighbouring countries (in total
593 609 externally displaced as of 24 December 2014), mainly to the Russian Federation,
but there were also some increase in movements towards the EU.
Considering indicators of irregular migration,
the number of detections of illegal bordercrossing between BCPs by Ukrainian citizens remained at a very low level. Moreover,
only 60 out of 154 detections of illegal border-crossings between BCPs by Ukrainian
citizens reported at all EU external borders
were linked to irregular migration. This is
most likely due to two factors: (a) Ukrainians tend to prefer legal travel channels; and
(b) Ukraine was able to keep border surveillance at a sufficient level despite transfers of
personnel to eastern parts of the country.
Significant changes in the number of asylum
applications and detections of illegal stay
were recorded in 2014.
Ukrainian nationals increasingly applied for
asylum in many EU Member States/Schengen Associated Countries. In total, there
were over 12 300 applications for asylum by
Ukrainian nationals compared to only 791 in
2013. Most applications were made in October 2014.
Although the number of asylum seekers from
Ukraine is still perceived as high, a steady decreasing trend of submitted asylum claims has
been observed since October 2014.
As to the country of application, Germany
ranked first, followed by Poland, Italy and
Sweden. This is very much in line with the
most popular destination countries of Ukrainian labour migrants and it is possible that
at least during the first half of 2014 many

33 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Ukrainians applying for asylum had in fact
stayed in the EU for a longer period.
Furthermore, a significant increase in detections of Ukrainian nationals illegally staying
in the EU was recorded, from 12 472 in 2013
to 16 744 in 2014. However, it should be noted
that 45% of the detections were made on exit
at the external land and air borders, meaning that most of these persons were in fact
voluntarily returning to Ukraine.
Citizens of the Russian Federation
The main modus operandi to enter the EU for
irregular migrants from the Russian Federation was clearly the abuse of legal travel
channels. In 2014, there were only 131 detections of illegal border-crossing between BCPs
by Russian citizens reported by FRAN members at the common borders, of which only
44 were connected with irregular migration.
In contrast, the number of refusals of entry issued to Russians in recent years was
huge. This is linked to the phenomenon of
Russian nationals of Chechen origin travelling through Belarus to the Polish land border
without a visa. Once refused entry and they
apply for asylum in Poland as a way to travel
further to Germany to make another asylum
application there and subsequently overstay.
However, in 2014 the extent of this phenomenon clearly decreased. Refusals of entry at
the Polish borders issued to Russian nationals decreased threefold from almost 16 000
in 2013 to roughly 5 000 in 2014. The lower
numbers of asylum applications in Poland and
Germany as well as lower detections of illegal
stay in Germany also confirm the decreased
volume of the flow.
Citizens of Georgia
In general, the main modus operandi of Georgian nationals attempting irregular entry to
the EU has remained unchanged over the past

34 of 44

few years, with only minor modifications. The
journey generally includes three legs: (a) from
Georgia to Belarus/Ukraine; (b) to cross the
EU’s eastern green border illegally or to apply for asylum at the BCP; and (c) secondary movements inside the Schengen area to
reach their country of destination.
As far as illegal border-crossings between
BCPs are concerned, detections of Georgian nationals clearly decreased. EU Member States/Schengen Associated Countries
reported 171 detections in 2014 as opposed
to 235 in 2013. The total for all common and
regional borders reveals an even more pronounced drop, i.e. from 686 to 376.
The numbers of refusals of entry, asylum
claims and detections of illegal stay of Georgian nationals decreased. By contrast, at the
same time the number of Georgian illegal
stayers in the EU in fact increased.
Detections of illegal border-crossing and refusals of entry issued to Georgian citizens
show a decreasing inflow of Georgians to
the EU. However, increased detections of illegal stay and a stable trend of asylum applications might point to their continued abuse
of legal entry channels.
Citizens of Moldova
The implementation of visa liberalisation in
May 2014 brought no major negative phenomena. As expected, visa liberalisation
further accelerated the decreasing trend in
detection of illegal border-crossing already
observed in previous years.
With an exception of asylum claims, other
indicators followed a very similar trend as
was the case for visa liberalisation with the
Western Balkans. Detections of illegal border-crossing declined, illegal stay increased,
while refusals of entry doubled. As for refusals of entry, most of the increase was con-

centrated at air borders of EU Member States
such as Italy, thus not impacting the common land borders.
By far the most striking effect was observed
on regular passenger flows at the Romanian
border with Moldova, which showed an increase when compared to 2013.
In conclusion, visa liberalisation for biometric passport-holders from Moldova has so far
produced the expected and largely positive
effects (greater mobility, better contacts between communities on both sides of the border, etc.). The situation, however, needs more
monitoring, in particular with regard to persons detected staying illegally in EU Member
States and Schengen Associated Countries.

Figure 12. Indicators on asylum, refusals of entry and illegal stay in
Germany and Poland show a clear decrease in the flow of Russian
irregular migrants of Chechen origin through the common borders
Quarterly levels of Russian asylum applications (in Poland and Germany), refusals of entry
issued to Russians by Poland and Russian illegal stayers detected in Germany in 2013–2014

10 000
Asylum - Poland

8 000

Asylum - Germany
Refusals of entry - Poland

6 000

Illegal stay - Germany

4 000
2 000
0

Q1

Q2

2013

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

2014

Q3

Source: FRAN data as of 17 February 2015

Other regional nationals
Irregular migration of other CIS-country nationals such as Uzbeks, Azerbaijanis or Tajiks tended to affect the regional rather than
common borders. In this regard, the changes
in migration policy regulations in the Russian
Federation, which is the main destination
for migrants from Central Asian CIS countries, seem to be an important factor. Most
of significant changes refer to labour migrants, which might strongly affect further
movements of migrant labour force within
the Russian Federation.

35 of 44

Q4

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

4. Outlook
4.1. Regular traffic

4.3. Irregular migration

The long-term factors for growth of regular
cross-border traffic remain valid. However,
due to the economic slowdown in Ukraine
and the Russian Federation, deepened further
by the Ukrainian crisis, the prospect for economic growth in 2015 is clearly bleaker than
in previous years, possibly leading to lower
regular traffic flows at some border sections.

The situation of important origin countries of
non-regional migrants, such as Afghanistan
and Syria, as well as in countries of their residence (e.g. Iran) remains highly problematic
and may result in continued refugee flows.
Another factor impacting both regional and
non-regional migrants is the restricted migration policy of the Russian Federation, resulting in significant changes in migration
legislation and migration labour markets. In
the context of the economic downturn and
economic sanctions, this may also act as a
push factor for migration from the Russian
Federation towards the EU.

Nevertheless, the measures to increase the
capacity of BCPs by improving infrastructure, technology and border check processes
should not be abandoned but, on the contrary, further encouraged. This is especially
important in terms of (a) the Visa Information
System requiring fingerprint verification and
biometric visa issuance at BCPs; and (b) possible further visa liberalisations between the EU
and Eastern Partnership countries (Georgia,
Ukraine), which would most likely increase
traffic flows and raise the workload associated with validating the conditions of entry.

4.2. Cross-border crime
Cross-border crime will remain a major challenge affecting both green borders and BCPs.
Price differences of commodities such as tobacco, petrol and alcohol are seen by EB-RAN
experts as a vulnerability encouraging smuggling of excise goods from the region to the
EU. This vulnerability may now be exacerbated by the widening of the price spread
due to the devaluation of the rouble and hryvnia. Evidence is still too patchy to allow for
any reliable conclusions, but the increase in
the profitability of excise goods smuggling
operations will most likely raise the threat
of smuggling activities in 2015.

36 of 44

However, the impacts on the common borders are much more difficult to assess as the
geopolitical or economic developments have
rarely correlated directly with the irregular
migration flows in the region. Indeed, it is
likely that, for example, the number of Afghan migrants attempting illegal bordercrossing will increase in 2015. However, the
magnitude of the threat will depend on several interlinked factors, such as changes in
use of other routes, prices of facilitation and
the possibilities of entering the CIS area. It
is possible that the abuse of legal entry as
a modus operandi may grow also considering
non-regional migrants.
The abuse of legal entries is likely to continue.
Further possible fluctuations in 2015 are difficult to predict as seasonality is not the only
factor affecting this phenomenon; however,
the risk of rumours about low-risk options
to enter the EU being spread remains valid.
Modifications of routes observed in 2014 may
lead to quickly increasing pressure at BCPs

© dpsu.gov.ua, State Border Guard Service of Ukraine

and on the asylum system of the most affected countries.

4.4. Ukrainian crisis
One year after the Euro Maidan protests in
Kyiv and the Russian Federation’s annexation
of Crimea, Ukraine saw mass movements of
civilians from insecure regions. The number
of internally displaced people exceeded 1.1 million as of 11 March 2015, while over 740 000
fled to neighbouring countries, of which number almost 608 000 were seeking legal status in the Russian Federation (including over
290 000 who filed asylum applications).
Moreover, according to OCHA*, between midApril 2014 and 5 March 2015 at least 5 820
people were documented as killed and 15 270
as wounded. Given that definitive reports on
casualties – especially those near Donetsk
airport and in the Debaltseve area – are still
pending, the total number of fatalities in eastern Ukraine is estimated as having passed the
6 000 mark. As the conflict prolongs the period of displacement is growing and it is clear
that the return of many IDPs to the separatist-controlled areas will be impossible.
The latest truce, negotiated in the capital of
Belarus (Minsk II agreement of 12 February
2015), has been largely observed. Both sides,
Ukrainian security forces and pro-Russian
separatists, appear to be honouring the terms
of the ceasefire to end the fighting in eastern Ukraine, yet violations are still occurring.
OSCE Special Monitoring Mission (SMM) reports that fighting continues in areas around
Donetsk airport and to the east of Mariupol.**
Thus, the military situation in Ukraine remains unstable as the willingness of the separatists/Russian Federation to fully implement
the Minsk II agreement is still unclear. Worryingly, the Russian Federation is likely to
continue attempts to destabilise Ukraine in
order to prevent the country’s efforts to integrate with the West. Therefore, the risk of

Figure 13. One of the border-crossing points
destroyed in hostilities at the Ukrainian-Russian
border

further military operations against Ukraine,
especially in the direction of Mariupol, remains valid. Further attacks could also potentially trigger new waves of forced
population movements.
Additionally, the question of the section of
the Ukrainian-Russian border that is currently
not controlled by the Ukrainian government
is one of the key issues to be solved. According to the Minsk II agreement, Ukrainian authorities should return to this border section
by the end of the year. However, there is a
high risk that the separatists/Russian Federation will not be willing to allow this, as
it would impede the supply of weapons and
fighters from the Russian Federation. At the
same time, Ukraine aims to develop border
infrastructure at its Russian border under ‘the
Wall‘ project and to enhance the control of
movements of people and goods to and from
the ATO*** area and across the administrative border with Crimea in order to counter
security threats.
Undoubtedly, the impact of the crisis in
Ukraine together with the worsening economic situation has already instigated many
Ukrainian citizens to move. Further deterioration of the situation may trigger more visible migratory movements towards the EU.

* United Nations Office
for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Affairs

** Latest from OSCE
Special Monitoring
Mission (SMM) to
Ukraine based on
information received
as of 18:00 (Kyiv
time), 16 March 2015,
http://www.osce.org/
ukraine-smm/145331

*** Anti-Terrorist
Operation

37 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Nevertheless, the impact in terms of irregular migration across the common borders
between Ukraine and EU Member States
has remained relatively modest. Abuse of
supporting documents, overstay and unauthorised work will likely remain the main
risks, while the threat of illegal border-cross-

38 of 44

ings between BCPs is likely to remain relatively low. Importantly, despite the extreme
pressure at Ukraine’s eastern borders, the
Ukrainian border guards have continued their
surveillance duties at the western borders
of the country.

5. Statistical annex
LEGEND
Symbols and abbreviations:		 n.a.
:		

not applicable
data not available

Source: EB-RAN and FRAN data as of 16 February 2015, unless otherwise indicated
Note: ‘Member States’ in the tables refer to FRAN Member States, including both
28 EU Member States and three Schengen Associated Countries

39 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Annex Table 1. Illegal border-crossing between BCPs
Detections reported by EB-RAN countries and neighbouring EU Member States, by purpose of illegal border-crossing, top
ten nationalities

2012

2013

2014

Share of
total

% change on
previous year

Purpose of Illegal Border-Crossing
Irregular migration
Other
Smuggling
Not specified

366

1 565

1 868

50

19

30

1 898

1 332

36

-30

24

584

396

11

-32

4 879

661

125

3.4

-81

Top Ten Nationalities
1 475

1 318

990

27

-25

Moldova

937

691

446

12

-35

Georgia

645

686

376

10

-45

Afghanistan

328

263

356

9.6

35

Vietnam

193

209

345

9.3

65

Russian Federation

510

498

334

9.0

-33

Syria

37

114

188

5.1

65

Not specified

86

193

102

2.7

-47

198

163

100

2.7

-39

7

3

38

1

1 167

Ukraine

Belarus
Iraq
Others

883

570

446

12

-22

Total

5 299

4 708

3 721

100

-21

Annex Table 2. Illegal border-crossing at BCPs
Detections reported by EB-RAN countries and neighbouring EU Member States, by purpose of illegal border-crossing and
top ten nationalities

2012

2013

2014

Share of
total

% change on
previous year

Purpose of Illegal Border-Crossing
Other

37

1 252

901

68

-28

Smuggling

26

355

300

23

-15

6

156

109

8.2

-30

2 004

8

15

1.1

88

1 107

791

564

43

-29

544

508

472

36

-7.1

Russian Federation

88

78

59

4.4

-24

Romania

72

61

49

3.7

-20

Tajikistan

52

95

35

2.6

-63

Not specified

24

39

21

1.6

-46

Belarus

42

25

13

1

-48

2

1

10

0.8

900

34

49

9

0.7

-82

7

6

8

0.6

33

Others

101

118

86

6.5

-27

Total

2 073

1 771

1 326

100

-25

Irregular migration
Not specified

Top Ten Nationalities
Ukraine
Moldova

Syria
Kyrgyzstan
Bulgaria

40 of 44

Annex Table 3. Facilitators
Detections reported by EB-RAN countries and neighbouring EU Member States, by place of detection and top ten
nationalities

2012

2013

2014

Share of
total

% change on
previous year

Place of Detection
124

69

110

98

59

Inland

0

3

2

1.8

-33

Others

11

0

0

Ukraine

53

13

17

15

31

Belarus

4

13

15

13

15

14

8

14

13

75

Not specified

4

2

10

8.9

400

Hungary

0

0

9

8

n.a.

Lithuania

7

3

8

7.1

167

Moldova

-22

Land

n.a.

Top Ten Nationalities

Russian Federation

10

9

7

6.3

Poland

6

6

7

6.3

17

Estonia

3

1

5

4.5

400

Latvia

3

0

4

3.6

n.a.

Others

31

17

16

14

-5.9

Total

135

72

112

100

56

Annex Table 4. Illegal stay
Detections reported by EB-RAN countries and neighbouring EU Member States, by place of detection and top ten
nationalities

2012

2013

2014

Share of
total

% change on
previous year

Land

24 176

23 952

23 673

75

-1.2

Air

14 013

16 083

6 433

20

-60

Inland

678

863

1 029

3.3

19

Sea

568

303

288

0.9

-5

Between BCPs

699

137

141

0.4

2.9

Ukraine

6 883

8 159

9 824

31

20

Russian Federation

7 051

6 887

6 140

19

-11

Georgia

4 187

4 938

2 465

7.8

-50

Moldova

2 139

1 707

2 137

6.8

25

Belarus

1 534

1 487

1 394

4.4

-6.3

Uzbekistan

2 889

2 879

957

3

-67

Azerbaijan

2 345

2 261

798

2.5

-65

Turkey

1 359

1 455

696

2.2

-52

Armenia

1 677

1 737

639

2

-63

700

913

613

1.9

-33

Others

9 370

8 916

5 901

19

-34

Total

40 134

41 339

31 564

100

-24

Place of Detection

Top Ten Nationalities

China

41 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Annex Table 5. Refusals of entry
Refusals reported by EB-RAN countries and neighbouring EU Member States, by border type and top ten nationalities

2012

2013

2014

Share of
total

% change on
previous year

Border Type
62 463

77 100

77 278

89

0.2

Air

2 690

4 485

5 952

6.8

33

Sea

3 184

3 344

3 877

4.5

16

Land

Top Ten Nationalities
9 226

22 977

24 408

28

6.2

Ukraine

19 182

19 685

21 770

25

11

Moldova

3 608

3 659

6 763

7.8

85

Georgia

9 640

9 643

5 784

6.6

-40

Belarus

4 972

4 450

5 255

6

18

Lithuania

5 259

5 372

4 110

4.7

-23

Uzbekistan

1 169

2 375

3 056

3.5

29

Armenia

1 217

1 901

1 776

2

-6.6

Tajikistan

1 889

1 588

1 773

2

12

482

770

1 356

1.6

76

Others

11 693

12 509

11 056

13

-12

Total

68 337

84 929

87 107

100

2.6

Russian Federation

Azerbaijan

Annex Table 6. Applications for asylum
Applications for international protection reported by EB-RAN countries and neighbouring EU Member States, by top ten
nationalities

2012

2013

2014

Share of
total

% change on
prev. year

Top Ten Nationalities

Highest share

Reporting Country
519

6 609

21 674

32

228

Hungary (99%)

Afghanistan

2 936

3 661

10 107

15

176

Hungary (87%)

Syria

1 212

3 479

9 926

15

185

Hungary (70%)

Russian Federation

6 801

13 499

3 225

4.8

-76

Poland (84%)

136

109

3 086

4.6

2 731

Poland (72%)

Eritrea

1 224

3 404

2 997

4.4

-12

Norway (95%)

Iraq

1 170

1 148

1 780

2.6

55

Finland (46%)

444

734

1 572

2.3

114

Norway (49%)

Somalia

2 745

2 208

1 442

2.1

-35

Norway (56%)

Georgia

3 900

1 690

1 070

1.6

-37

Poland (61%)

Others

9 644

16 297

10 705

16

-34

Hungary (42%)

Total

30 731

52 838

67 584

100

28

Kosovo*

Ukraine

Not specified

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the
Kosovo declaration of independence.

42 of 44

Annex Table 7. Document fraud
Detections reported by EB-RAN countries, by border type, document type, top ten nationalities and top ten countries of
issuance
Share of
total

% change on
previous year

2012

2013

2014

Land

636

265

125

43

Air

112

109

124

43

14

Sea

2

1

35

12

3 400

Not specified

0

0

7

2.4

n.a.

Passport

189

200

239

82

20

Not specified

540

157

16

5.5

-90
200

Border Type
-53

Document type

10

5

15

5.2

ID card

8

10

10

3.4

0

Stamp

0

0

8

2.7

n.a.

Residence permit

3

3

3

1

0

-2.8

Visa

Top Ten Nationalities
Moldova

59

72

70

24

Ukraine

369

165

56

19

-66

8

8

27

9.3

238

Syria

27

18

14

4.8

-22

Iran

6

4

14

4.8

250

India

0

8

12

4.1

50

Sri Lanka

0

0

10

3.4

n.a.

Egypt

6

0

8

2.7

n.a.

Iraq

4

0

7

2.4

n.a.

15

5

7

2.4

40

256

95

66

23

-31

103

86

59

20

-31

8

10

36

12

260

Russian Federation

Armenia
Others

Top Ten Countries of Issuance of Documents
Ukraine
Moldova

19

19

25

8.6

32

163

137

15

5.2

-89

Russian Federation

4

8

13

4.5

63

India

0

0

12

4.1

n.a.
38

Romania
Not specified

0

8

11

3.8

Turkey

13

7

10

3.4

43

Egypt

0

0

8

2.7

n.a.

Uzbekistan

France

21

2

7

2.4

250

Others

419

98

95

33

-3.1

Total

399

375

291

100

-22

43 of 44

Frontex · Eastern European Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2015

Explanatory note
Detections reported for Member States for
indicators Illegal border-crossing between
BCPs, Illegal border-crossing at BCPs, Refusals
of entry and Persons using false documents
are detections at the common land borders
on entry only. For Facilitators, detections at
the common land borders on entry and exit
are included. For Illegal stay, detections at
the common land borders on exit only are
included. For Asylum, all applications (land,
sea, air and inland) are included.

44 of 44

For EB-RAN countries, all indicators – save
for Refusals of entry – include detections (applications) on exit and entry at the land, sea
and air borders.
Each section in the table (Reporting country, Border type, Place of detection, Top five
border section and Top ten nationalities) refers to total detections reported by EB-RAN
countries and to neighbouring land border
detections reported by Member States.

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union

For Public Release
Risk Analysis Unit
Frontex reference number: 6936/2015

Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

Print version:
TT-AG-15-001-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-24-6
ISSN 2443-7700
DOI 10.2819/56205
Online version:
TT-AG-15-001-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-25-3
ISSN 2363-1031
DOI 10.2819/342187
Warsaw, May 2015

