FRAN Quarterly
Quarter 1 • January–March 2015

Q1 Q2
Q3 Q4

Frontex official publications fall into four main categories: risk analysis, training, operations and
research, each marked with a distinct graphic identifier. Risk analysis publications bear a triangular
symbol formed by an arrow drawing a triangle, with a dot at the centre. Metaphorically, the
arrow represents the cyclical nature of risk analysis processes and its orientation towards an
appropriate operational response. The triangle is a symbol of ideal proportions and knowledge,
reflecting the pursuit of factual exactness, truth and exhaustive analysis. The dot at the centre
represents the intelligence factor and the focal point where information from diverse sources
converges to be processed, systematised and shared as analytical products. Thus, Frontex risk
analysis is meant to be at the centre and to form a reliable basis for its operational activities.

Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

Risk Analysis Unit
11074/2015

DISCLAIMERS
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of Frontex concerning the legal status of
any country, territory or city or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers
or boundaries. All charts included in this report are the sole property of Frontex and any
unauthorised use is prohibited.
Throughout the report, references to Kosovo* are marked with an asterisk to indicate that this
designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the
ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The FRAN Quarterly has been prepared by the Frontex Risk Analysis Unit. During the course
of developing this product, many colleagues at Frontex and outside contributed to it and their
assistance is hereby acknowledged with gratitude.

2 of 40

fran · q1 2015

Table of contents
Introduction #4
Methodology #5
I.	Situational overview #7
FRAN indicators #9
Surveillance #10
Border checks #12
Situation in the EU #14
Fraudulent documents #16
II.	Featured risk analyses #17
South-Eastern Europe: Migrants from Kosovo* ranked first in Q1 #18
Eastern Mediterranean route: Increasing flow of migrants arriving in the Eastern Aegean Sea

#20

Central Mediterranean route: Winter low followed by spring increase #22
Effective returns: Comparison with other indicators shows different patterns #24
Annexes #26

3 of 40

Introduction

FRAN Quarterly reports are prepared by
the Frontex Risk Analysis Unit and provide
a regular overview of irregular migration
at the EU external borders, based on the
irregular migration data exchanged among
Member State border-control authorities
within the cooperative framework of the
Frontex Risk Analysis Network (FRAN)
and its subsidiary, the European Union
Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network
(EDF-RAN).
The main purpose of the FRAN Quarterlies is to provide:
1.	feedback to the FRAN community in
the context of information exchange;
2.	a periodic update to the situational picture of irregular migration at EU level;
and
3.	material for constructive discussion on
reporting protocols and related trends
and patterns.

some of the more detailed data and trends
in this report should be interpreted with
caution and, where possible, cross-referenced with information from other
sources. The statistics should be understood in the context of the different levels of passenger flows passing through
different border sections, the activities
of Member State border-control authorities undertaken to secure different border sections and widespread variation in
reporting and data-collection practices.

This report is intended to simultaneously
serve two objectives: first – to provide
a clear summary of the situation at the
external border of the EU, and second –
to serve as an archive for future reference and comparative analyses.

FRAN members and Member State risk
analysis experts and border-control authorities are considered the primary customers
of these reports. In addition to the discussions taking place during FRAN meetings,
Member State experts are invited and actively encouraged to examine and comment upon the data and analyses presented
here. Despite all efforts of the Frontex Risk
Analysis Unit and Member State experts involved in data exchange and analyses, it is
conceivable that minor errors will occur in
these reports due to very challenging timelines and the growing volume and complexity of the data and other information
exchanged within the FRAN community.

Harmonising complex, multi-source migration data among Frontex and Member
States is an ongoing process. Therefore,

Starting with the current issue, the Frontex Risk Analysis Unit has implemented a
number of changes to present the anal-

4 of 40

ysis of migration related indicators in the
FRAN Quarterly in a more concise and focused way. The first part provides a Situational overview, broken down by main
areas of work of border control authorities and police activities related to irregular migration.
n	
Surveillance, describing and analysing
trends in detections of illegal bordercrossing between BCPs;
n	
Border checks, describing detections
reported during checks at BCPs (people hiding in vehicles or refused entry);
n	
Fraudulent documents, describing
trends and pattern related to document fraud at the border and in the EU;
n	
Situation in the EU, examining developments related to persons applying
for asylum and those detected staying illegally, facilitators, return decisions and effective returns.
The second thematic part of the report
consists of up to five featured analyses,
examining trends and patterns of irregular
migration in a more inclusive way. Eventually it is hoped that some of the featured
analysis topics would be developed by external contributors (FRAN members, EU
agencies and international institutions).

fran · q1 2015

Methodology

This, the 27 th issue of the FRAN Quarterly, is a comparative analysis of FRAN
data collected between January and March
2015 and exchanged between 31 Member
State border-control authorities within the
framework of the FRAN. The report presents the results of statistical analysis of
quarterly variations in eight irregular-migration indicators and one asylum indicator, aggregated at the level of the event.
Bi-monthly analytical reports exchanged
by Member States were also used for interpretative purposes and to provide qualitative information, as were other available
sources of information, such as Frontex
Joint Operations.
Precise definitions of Indicators 1 to 6,
aimed at harmonising the data exchanged
at EU level, were presented in the annexes
of the Q1 and Q2 reports in 2009 and so
are not repeated here.
The FRAN data-exchange has been in
place since September 2008. Data are

exchanged through the ICONet Internet
platform, an interest group of the European Commission’s CIRCA server. Member
State monthly data are based on a country template prepared by the Frontex Risk
Analysis Unit. The deadline for submitting
data for each month is the 25th day of the
subsequent month, with the exception of
the end-of-year data, which are requested
by 15 January each year. For this 27 th issue of the FRAN Quarterly, the target for
Member States to upload the monthly
data was thus 25 April 2015. In principle,
data submitted subsequent to this date
will be reflected in the next FRAN Quarterly, except in cases where clarification
is needed in order to proceed with comprehensive analysis.
In January 2012, the European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network (EDFRAN) was formed as a specialist forum
to oversee the exchange and analyses of
detections of document fraud to illegally
cross the external borders and on all inter-

national flights. Data were backdated and
joined with those exchanged under a pilot Tailored Risk Analysis released in 2011.1
At the beginning of 2014, Member States
started to regularly collect quantitative
information on indicators related to secondary movements. In addition, in July
2014, Frontex organised a workshop for
Member State experts to gather their expertise and analyse available data. Their
input was essential for the analysis of Intra Schengen/EU secondary movements
conducted by undocumented migrants.
External borders refer to the borders between Member States and third countries.
The borders between the Schengen Associated Countries (Liechtenstein, Norway,
Iceland and Switzerland) and third countries are also considered as external bor1

The Nature and Extent of Document Fraud
to Enter the European Union 2009–2010,
Ref. R063/2011

5 of 40

ders. The borders between the Schengen
Associated Countries and Schengen Member States are considered as internal borders. For the indicators on detections of
facilitators, illegal stay and asylum, statistics are also reported for detections at
the land borders between Schengen Member States and Schengen candidates (Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus and Romania) or
non-Schengen Member States (the UK
and Ireland), so that a total for EU Member States and Schengen Associated Countries as a whole can be presented. It was
not possible to make this distinction for air
and sea borders because Member States
do not habitually differentiate between
extra-EU and intra-EU air and sea connections but tend to aggregate data for
all arrivals.

6 of 40

When data are examined at the level of
third-country nationalities, a large percentage usually falls under categories
‘Other (not specified)’ or ‘Unknown’. It is
expected that the percentage reported
under these categories will decrease with
time as Member States improve the quality and speed of their identification, data
collection and reporting practices; nationalities are often reported as ‘Unknown’ if
an individual’s nationality cannot be established before reports are submitted.
Both primary data source, such as interviews with irregular migrants, and secondary data sources, such as reports of
intelligence analysts, daily reports of deployed officers and analytical products
(weekly and bi-weekly analytical reports

for each abovementioned operation) were
used to provide an exhaustive overview
of the situation at the external borders
of the EU. Additionally, open-source data
were researched as background information for the present analysis.

Acknowledgements
The Frontex Risk Analysis Unit would like
to express its gratitude to all FRAN and
EDF-RAN members and their associates
in Member State statistical, migration
and document-fraud units who collect,
aggregate and exchange monthly data,
also to the analysts who compile the bimonthly analytical reports, on which much
of the detailed analyses presented here
are based.

fran · q1 2015

I. S
 ituational overview

7 of 40

Featured
Risk Analyses
I.
Situational
overview

8 of 40

fran · q1 2015

FRAN indicators

Latest situation

Q1 2015

Reported cases
Q1 2014
(dotted circles)

311

2 219

2 018

25 257

37 744

22 038

64 586

87 614

Q1 2015

1 103

2 167

2 611

27 424

37 625

62 385

63 843

108 059

EDF

FAC-2

REF-4

RET-7B

Detections
of illegal
border-crossing
at BCPs
(clandestine
entries)

Detections
of fraudulent
document
users

Detections
Refusals
of facilitators of entry

In the first quarter of 2015, all indicators
showed increasing trends compared to the
situation a year ago. However, compared to
the previous quarter (last quarter of 2014),
the indicators were down, as traditionally
expected during winter months. Yet, two
important indicators (detections of illegal
border-crossing and illegal stay) were the
largest ever recorded for a first quarter
of the year since data collection started in
2008. Compared to the same period in 2014,
detections at the external borders increased
by more than 180%. The number of asylum
applications was also higher than during
the last quarter and was a record number.
While the migratory pressure at the EU’s
external borders in general has not relaxed
much, its distribution among particular border sections has been shifting. For instance,
irregular migration at the Western Balkan route reached the highest level since
FRAN data collection began. It is estimated
that large numbers of migrants detected in
the Western Balkans may have already been
counted on the Eastern Mediterranean
route. This leads to a high probability of
double counting and may partially account
for the large increase in the overall figure
for detections of illegal border-crossing.
On the Eastern Mediterranean route, detections have increased fourfold compared
to one year ago, being higher than during
any previous first quarter. The increase was
mostly reported from the Eastern Aegean
Sea, where the majority of migrants were
of Syrian and Afghan nationality. At the
land border between Bulgaria and Turkey,
in Q1 2015, detections of clandestine entry exceeded the number of illegal bor-

Returns
(effective)

RET-7A

IBC-1A

Detections of illegal
border-crossing
between BCPs

der-crossings between BCPs for the first
time, reaching the mark of 1 000 detections. Additional operational and technical measures implemented along the green
border between Bulgaria and Turkey and
the flooding of the Evros river resulted in a
greater number of irregular migrants taking the alternative route to enter Bulgaria
by clandestinely hiding in vehicles.
By contrast, on the Central Mediterranean
route, the number of irregular migrants
detected in Q1 2015 reached a temporary
low and proved far lower than the peak of
Q3 2014 as the rough weather conditions
at sea led to fewer migrant boats attempting the dangerous crossing. Gambians were
the most reported nationality in the Central Mediterranean, followed by Senegalese, although both were detected in lower
numbers than in Q4 2014.
Migrants from Kosovo* were detected in
their highest numbers between Q4 2014
and Q1 2015. However, their number of detections began to subside already in March.
By contrast, concurrent to seasonal reductions in the Central Mediterranean, a
lower number of irregular migrants from
African countries arrived in the EU in the
fourth quarter. Especially Eritreans and migrants from West African countries were
reported in substantially lower numbers.

ILL-3

Returns
(decisions)

Detections of persons
staying illegally

Trend
Monthly trends, January 2011 to March 2015
Reported cases
50 000

ILL-3
RET-7A
IBC-1A
RET-7B

10 000

REF-4

FAC-2

1 000

EDF
IBC-1B

1 00

10

With 5 000 reported detections in Q1 2015,
the overall number of cases of document
fraud was 7% higher than one year ago.
This growth was related to the ongoing
rise in detections of document fraud on
intra-Schengen flights, mainly caused by
migrants who have previously entered the

2011

2012

2013

Q1 2015

IBC-1B

Q1 2014

(solid circles)

2014 2015

external border illegally, while using fraudulent document for secondary movements
to their final destinations.

9 of 40

Featured
Risk Analyses
I.
Situational
overview

Surveillance

211
(189)

Eastern
borders
route

Routes
Detections of illegal border-crossing
between BCPs at the EU’s external
borders, Q1 2015
(green and blue borders)

Western
Balkan route

3
(3 2 9
34 50
0)

Black
Sea
route

Numbers in parentheses are for Q1 2014

68
(11)

Circular route from
Albania to Greece

1
7
90 73)
3
(1

2 808
(1 835)

Western
Mediterranean route
10 252
(11 056)

Western
African
route

Central
Mediterranean route

1
15 5)
14 19
(4 Eastern
Mediterranean
route

36 9)
(3

FRAN data for the period between January and March 2015 shows a threefold
increase in overall detections of illegal border-crossing compared to the same period
of 2014. While in the past, the first quarters of the year were usually marked by a
relaxation of the irregular migration pressure at the external borders of the EU, in
2015, detections remained at high levels,
exceeding any previous first quarter since
the FRAN data collection began in 2008.

in March. Nevertheless, the detection of
higher numbers of migrants from Syria and
Afghanistan continues to keep the irregular migration pressure on this route at a
high level: In March 2015, there were approximately 60% more detections than in
the month before. Increases of non-regional migrants on the Western Balkan
route are usually a consequence of an increased migration on the Eastern Mediterranean route.

Strong increase and change in the
proportion of migrant nationalities
on the Western Balkan route

Increasing detections on the Eastern
Mediterranean route

Between the beginning of January and
March, the Western Balkan route showed
a tenfold increase compared to the same
period last year. The large number of Kosovo* citizens detected at the Hungarian-Serbian border since September 2014
leading to record numbers reported on
this route, has been decreasing since midFebruary 2015 due to multinational preventive measures (see featured analysis)
and returned to a comparably low figure

10 of 40

On the Eastern Mediterranean route there
was an almost fourfold increase in the
number of detections on the Greek Aegean Islands compared to the same period one year ago. The growing migratory
pressure on the Eastern Mediterranean
route, which exceeded the usual level expected during this season, was mainly related to an increase in Syrian, Afghan and
Iraqi nationals. Effective measures of the
Turkish authorities against cargo vessels
transporting migrants to the EU among

others has led to a displacement of the irregular migration route to the Eastern Aegean Sea and a rise in the importance of
Bodrum or Didim as regional transit centres for migrants travelling from Turkey to
the Greek Islands.
Record number of detections at the
land borders between Morocco and
Spain
Although migration in the Western Mediterranean is still at a comparably low level,
detections of irregular migration have significantly increased. Numbers in the first
quarter of 2015 were 72% higher than during the previous quarter and 53% higher
than one year ago, being at the highest
level of any previous first quarter since
FRAN data collection began. There is a
strong increase in irregular migrants claiming to be from Syria. More than half of
the illegal border-crossings were related
to Syrian nationals – the highest number on this route since FRAN data collection began. Detections also shifted from
the sea to the land border: While a quar-

fran · q1 2015

Trend

Nationalities
Main nationalities
of illegal border-crossers
January-March 2015

Quarterly detections of illegal bordercrossing, 2014-2015
Number
80 000

Western
Balkan

60 000
40 000

Western
Mediterranean

Central
Mediterranean
route

20 000

Kosovo
Central
Mediterranean

Albania

Eastern
Mediterranean

Syria

Afghanistan

40 000
Western
Balkan
route

20 000
40 000

Eastern
Mediterranean
route

20 000

Senegal

Mali

Eritrea

Gambia

Q1 Q2Q3Q4 Q1 Q2Q3Q4 Q1

2 0 1 3

Somalia

2 0 1 4 2 0 1 5
Unspecified
sub-Saharan nationals

ter of detections were reported from the
sea border, the remaining detections were
related to the land borders between Morocco and the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta
and Melilla. This is four times as many as
during the previous quarter and the largest number of detections of illegal bordercrossing since 2008.
Peak in migrant boats after March
2015 on the Central Mediterranean
route
In the Central Mediterranean, the number of
detected migrants departing from the Libyan
coast was somewhat lower between January and March than during the same period
of last year, decreasing by 800 to 10 252 detections. This temporary low was caused by
rougher weather conditions and a possible
temporary lack of wooden boats. However,
the weeks subsequent to the reporting pe-

riod led to a reversal of the trend: According to operational data, 16 005 migrants
were detected on the Central Mediterranean route in April 2015, the highest number recorded in any April. Since the beginning
of 2015, there has also been a change in the
composition of migrants leaving from Libya,
resulting in an increase in migrants from
Western Africa and the Horn of Africa and
a decrease in number of Syrians. The modus
operandi of the facilitation networks is similar to previous quarters: Some 6–7 hours after departing from the Libyan coast, once in
international waters, a distress call is made
to the Italian authorities, who then attempt
to rescue the migrants. The tragedies which
occurred in April 2015 in the Central Mediterranean, when reportedly more than 1 000
irregular migrants died in incidents involving wooden boats, clearly demonstrate the
high risk for migrants’ lives.

Cross-border crime prevalent at the
Eastern land borders
At the Eastern land borders, irregular migration has remained on a comparably low
level. In Q1, 211 persons were detected illegally crossing the border into the EU, with
a majority trying to enter Hungary from
the Ukraine (Syrian and Afghan nationals).
The smuggling of excise goods remained
a prevalent problem at the Eastern borders. A particularly large cigarette smuggling case was for example reported from
the Eastern borders: On 11 February, Lithuanian authorities detected 187 500 packs
of cigarettes floating on a raft on the Neman river, coming from Belarus. This was
the largest shipment of illicit cigarettes
found in the rivers between Belarus and
Lithuania for the past five years.

11 of 40

Featured
Risk Analyses
I.
Situational
overview

Border checks
Illegal stayers on exit
Trend of the total
Q1 2014

10 953

Q1 2015

11 579

Netherlands

Belgium

Poland-Ukraine

Germany

Number of detections, Q1 2015
200

50

5

France

HungarySerbia

Type of border section:
Land

Sea

Air

HungaryUkraine

Switzerland

no data

Cyprus

Most illegal stayers on exit detected
by Polish authorities
During the reporting period, more than
11 500 persons were detected on exit from
the EU or Schengen Area without a permission to stay. Compared to previous
quarters, this figure is clearly below the
average. The available FRAN data does
not give any details on the reason of the
illegal stay: The cases of illegal stay detected on exit thus include migrants who
had either crossed the border to the EU/
Schengen Associated Countries illegally, by
the abuse of legal means, or have entered
the EU/Schengen Associated Countries legally but no longer fulfilled the conditions
of stay or residence.
Most of the cases were related to Ukrainians leaving the EU primarily through Polish
land BCPs. As the number of illegal bor-

12 of 40

der-crossings related to Ukrainians were
comparably low, it can be assumed that
Ukrainian illegal stayers detected on exit
had entered the EU legally and overstayed
or entered the EU through the abuse of legal means, such as fraudulently obtained
work or business visas. Turkish and Chinese travellers ranked second and third
in terms of detections of illegal stayers
on exit, both most reported by Germany.
Long-term increase of migrants
entering the EU hidden in lorries,
buses and trains
In the first quarter of 2015, the total number of detections of migrants clandestinely trying to enter the EU through BCPs
was more than three times higher than
one year ago. Around 1 100 persons attempted to cross the external borders
of the EU by hiding in lorries or trains

between January and March 2015. The
long-term increase of clandestine irregular migrants relates to a large extent to
one travel direction; namely that of irregular migrants entering the EU from
Turkey and moving through South-East
Europe towards the countries in central,
western and northern Europe.
For this reason, the increase is most significant in Bulgaria, where the migratory
flow is channelled and most of these detections were made. Clandestine entries
through BCPs represent an additional possibility for those irregular migrants who
have previously attempted to cross the
green border from Turkey to Greece and
Bulgaria unsuccessfully, or were deterred
by the two countries’ intensified police operations and surveillance of their external EU borders. Moreover, the decisions
of many migrants to try to enter the EU

fran · q1 2015

Clandestine
entries

Refusals of entry

Number, Q1 2015

Number per border type, Q1 2015

Detections of illegal border-crossing at BCPs
(people hiding in vehicles)

500

100

Land ( )
Sea ( )

Air
United
Kingdom

CroatiaSerbia

Germany

Poland

HungarySerbia
Croatia
BulgariaTurkey

Hungary

Italy
Italy

SpainMorocco

Trend of the total

France

Spain

Greece

Trend of the total
Land

Air

Sea

Q1 2014

311

Q1 2014

13 283

10 959

1 015

Q1 2015

1 103

Q1 2015

13 772

12 390

1 262

clandestinely was related to the intermittent flooding of the Evros river in Q1 2015,
which made an illegal crossing of the Greek
border impossible. The number of persons
detected for clandestine entry is likely to
increase in the future, as Bulgaria also announced that it is to significantly extend
the length of its Engineering Technical Obstacle at the border to Turkey.
Most refusals of entry issued to
Ukrainian nationals
The reported 27 424 refusals of entry at the
EU external borders in Q1 2015 represented
a 13% decrease compared to the previous
quarter. This change was largely caused by
fewer refusal decisions issued to Georgian
citizens at the Polish border. Poland also reported 900 fewer decisions of refusals issued to Russian nationals in Q1 2015. The

strongest increase from 4 578 in Q4 2014 to
5 393 during the reporting period has been
reported in relation to Ukrainian nationals,
who ranked first in terms of refusals of entry in Q1 2015. Most of these persons were
refused at the Polish border, mostly because
of a lack of appropriate documentation justifying the purpose and conditions of stay.
Albanians were the second most frequently
refused nationality at the external borders
of the EU. With 3 327 cases reported in Q1
2015, their number of refusals are higher
than the average of the last two years.
While Greece is usually the country issuing
most refusals to Albanians, Italy reported
the most cases in Q1 2015. Although their
number of refusals has been lower than
during the previous quarters, Serbs and
Russians ranked third and fourth in terms
of issued refusals. The example shows that

the number of refusals issued to citizens
of a certain third country does not depend on whether the respective nationality is allowed to travel visa-free to the
Schengen area.
The most often cited reasons for refusals
of entry at the EU external borders continued to be the lack of documentation
justifying the purpose and conditions of
stay and the lack of a valid visa or residence permit. Moreover, among the most
prevalent reasons reported were a lack
of sufficient means of subsistence in relation to the period and form of stay, and
alerts which were issued for the purposes
of refusing entry in the SIS or in the national register.

13 of 40

Featured
Risk Analyses
I.
Situational
overview

Situation in the EU
Sweden

Illegal stayers

Number of detected cases, Q1 2015

1 500

260
Germany

Austria

Trend of the total
Q1 2014

87 614

Q1 2015

110 534

France

Facilitators

Spain

Number of detected persons, Q1 2015
Spain
France
Hungary
Italy

500

In Q1 2015, detections of illegal stay were 26%
higher than during the same quarter of 2014
and amounted to 110 534 persons reported
in the EU/Schengen Area. Most persons detected for illegal stay were from Syria, Kosovo* and Afghanistan. On the other hand,
compared to the record numbers of up to
128 000 illegal stayers registered both during the second and third quarter of 2014, this
indicator has decreased by 12%. This trend in
the number of reported cases of illegal stay
was related to the seasonally lower number
of illegal border-crossing during the winter
season and the corresponding lower levels
of secondary migration. In fact, trends of detections of illegal stay often follow trends of
detections of illegal border-crossing in relation to many migrant nationalities.
Majority of detections of illegal
stay and asylum applications
concentrated on top-reporting
countries
As in Q4 2014, Germany, France, Sweden
and Spain were the top countries for de-

14 of 40

tections of illegal stay, again reporting
more than half of the total EU/SAC number, followed by Austria. This concentration among the highest ranking countries
is even higher in relation to asylum applications. In Q1 2015, of the 181 569 asylum
seekers, which is the highest quarterly
number reported from the EU/Schengen
area since the FRAN data collection began, two-thirds submitted their application in the top-three countries Germany,
Hungary and Italy. On the other hand, figures from Sweden were 55% lower than
in Q3 2014, when it still was the secondranking asylum destination.

tion submitted by migrants from Kosovo*
were submitted in Hungary and then again
in Germany. The peak of the recent wave
of migration from Kosovo*, which started
in the second half of 2014, was reached
with around 22 000 applications in February 2015. Already in March, the number
of asylum applicants began to return to
lower levels due to joint preventive measures implemented by authorities in Kosovo*, Serbia, and some EU Member States.
Asylum applications of Syrian and Eritrean
nationals decreased by 28% in Q1 2015 and
55% respectively since last quarter.

Asylum applications

Numbers of return decisions and
effective returns lower

With a record number of almost 50 000
asylum cases reported from the EU/Schengen countries, citizens of Kosovo* submitted the majority of the applications for
international protection (making up 27% of
all asylum applications reported by Member States in Q1 2015). More than 90% of
all applications for international protec-

In Q1 2015, Member State authorities issued 63 843 decisions to third country nationals with an obligation to leave the EU
following an administrative or judicial decision. This is 3% less than the in the previous quarter and 1% less than one year
ago. The decrease was mainly caused by
fewer return decisions issued by Bulgaria

fran · q1 2015

Russian Federation

Ukraine

Serbia
Albania
China
Tunisia
Morocco

Algeria

Pakistan
India

Bangladesh

Returns
Nationality of returned people, Q1 2015
Nigeria

Number

Member States
which have sent data
4 000

1 000

Unspecified

and Greece to Syrian and Afghan nationals.
It should be noted in the context of Syrian nationals that these decisions did not
imply any potential return to the conflict
region but rather to neighbouring countries (particularly Turkey). Moreover, returns only affected those migrants who
did not apply for asylum.
During the reporting period, 37 625 effective returns took place, which is 12%
fewer than the previous quarter, and -0.3%
fewer than in Q1 of 2014. In general, the
decrease was especially due to fewer Albanian nationals returned by Greece and
fewer Ukrainian nationals returned by Poland. On the other hand, Member States
have sped up the asylum procedures of
migrants from Kosovo*, resulting in very
low recognition rates: the number of effectively returned migrants from Kosovo*
has increased by almost one third, from
1 342 to 1 763. The Member State reporting the highest numbers of returns to Kosovo* in Q1 2015 was Austria.

Numbers of arrested facilitators
remain high
Figures related to detections of facilitators
of irregular migration have remained on
a high level of 2 611 in Q1 2015. Numbers
have been rising since 2011, although facilitation networks showed increasingly
cautious behaviour. A widespread shift
towards the abuse of legal channels and
document fraud has allowed facilitators
to operate remotely and inconspicuously
rather than accompanying migrants during high-risk activities such as bordercrossings. On several routes, an increasing
number of cases of facilitation networks
not accompanying the migrant boats to
the EU are reported.
On the other hand, the expanded logistical
and organisational structures of the facilitation networks and the increased capacities
to transport migrants across the Mediterranean Sea and Europe’s land borders apparently led to a greater exposure of these
criminal groups to police investigations and
consequently to more arrests. More facili-

tators were arrested particularly by France,
where arrests have doubled since the last
quarter, and they were mostly of French,
British and Romanian nationality. More arrests have been also reported by Hungary,
where the number of detected facilitators
has increased by 50% since last quarter.
Here, most alleged perpetrators were of
Serbian and Hungarian nationality, showing that they were most likely connected
to smaller local facilitation networks operating near Hungary’s external border to
the Western Balkans.
The top-four nationalities of detected facilitators were from the Mediterranean countries Morocco, Spain, France, and Albania,
making up 28% of the 732 arrested facilitators. Few facilitators were detected from
the top-ranking origin countries of irregular migration. Among the arrested human
smugglers, only 136 were from Kosovo*,
Syria, or Afghanistan. Member State authorities arrested an even lower number
of facilitators from Libya, the country from
which the largest shares of migrant boats
embarked on their dangerous trip to Europe.

15 of 40

Featured
Risk Analyses
I.
Situational
overview

Fraudulent documents
Nationality of users
Claimed nationality of persons detected
with fraudulent documents, Q1 2015

Number

130

10

Trend between Q1 2014 and Q1 2015:
higher than 50%
between 50% and −50%
Ukraine

Albania

lower than −50%

Syria

Morocco

Nigeria

Increase in document fraud
detections on intra-Schengen flights
In Q1 2015, the overall number of document fraud cases reported by EDF-RAN
increased by 8% compared to the same
period of last year and reached 5 743. This
growth is attributable to the ongoing
rise of document fraud detections on intra‑EU/Schengen movements, which represented 43% of all detections and showed
an 18% increase compared to the same period of time last year. Many migrants on
these routes had illegally crossed the external borders undocumented, while using
fraudulent documents for the secondary
movements to their final destinations.
From Greece for example, document fraud
has increased by 60% compared to the same
period of 2014, but compared to Q4 2014, the

16 of 40

number was 37% lower, which was related
to the seasonally lower number of migrant
boat arrivals to Greece. On intra‑EU/Schengen movements from France, the number of
document fraud cases was 55% higher than
one year ago. This figure mainly consisted
of Ukrainians and Albanians attempting to
reach the UK.
Document fraud on entry from third
countries
The number of detections of document
fraud on arrival to the EU/Schengen Associated Countries from third countries in
the first quarter of 2015 slightly decreased
by 2% compared to the same period in
2014. At EU level, of the 95 nationalities
detected using fraudulent documents to
illegally enter the EU or Schengen area
from a third county, the most commonly
detected were from Syria (257), Morocco
(194) and Nigeria (157). Around half of all
Syrians and two thirds of all Moroccans
were detected at the Moroccan land border with Spain.

As in the previous months, most detections of document fraud were reported
from air routes. The number of detections
on the flights arriving from Istanbul airports, in particular from Istanbul Atatürk
(IST) dropped down by 30% compared to
the first quarter of 2014. Syrian nationals remained the most prevalent nationalities using fraudulent documents on these flights.
At land borders, most detections of
document fraud from Morocco and
Ukraine
Regarding land routes, the most targeted
remains the land border sections between
Spain and Morocco, in particular Melilla
and Ceuta.
The detected number of Ukrainians who
attempted to cross the external borders to
the EU with fraudulent documents was two
thirds higher compared to one year ago.

fran · q1 2015

II. F
 eatured risk analyses

17 of 40

II. Featured risk analyses

South-Eastern Europe

Migrants from Kosovo*
ranked first in Q1
During the first quarter, the EU’s external
land borders with the Western Balkan region was the main entry point for irregular
migrants into the EU. Member States reported nearly 33 000 illegal border-crossings in the region, 11 times more than one
year ago. In addition, despite winter conditions, the number of irregular migrants
entering the EU from the Western Balkans
reached record highs compared to the corresponding periods of previous years.

n From March on, reduced
migration pressure from
Kosovo*
n Displacement to the
Bulgarian border with
Turkey in the form of hiding
in vehicles

Nearly all irregular migrant apprehensions
registered in the first quarter were reported from the Hungarian land border
with Serbia and the rest from the Croatian land border with Serbia. Furthermore,
the composition of the flow has changed
during the last six months: Between November and February, Western Balkans
and especially Kosovo* nationals represented the majority of irregular migrants.
Illegal border-crossings by migrants
from Kosovo*
The large number of illegal border-crossing conducted by Kosovo* citizens was also
reflected by the asylum situation in Hungary. Between Q4 2014 and Q1 2015, more
Figure 1. Between November 2014 and February 2015, the majority of irregular
migrants on the Western Balkan route consisted of Western Balkan nationals
Detections of illegal border-crossing by Western Balkan nationals and migrants of other nationalities

16 000
14 000
12 000
10 000
8 000
6 000
4 000
2 000
0
Jan

WB nationals

Feb

Mar

Apr

Source: FRAN data as of 11 May 2015

18 of 40

Jun
2014

Following the increasing flow of irregular migrants from Kosovo* since August
2014, the Hungarian and Serbian authorities started to implement joint border patrols on their common border in order to
tackle this rise. Germany also supported
these activities by sending additional personnel and surveillance equipment. Further inside the EU territory multi-lateral
arrangements were agreed and signed between Germany, Austria, and Hungary to
establish advanced checks on trains linking the three countries.
In order to curb the outflow, the authorities
in Pristina attempted to persuade citizens
of Kosovo* not to leave through extensive
public information campaigns (e.g. ‘stay in
Kosovo*’).
Due to these measures, from March on the
number of migrants from Kosovo* detected
for illegal border-crossing decreased and
91% of the illegal border-crossings were
again related to non-regional migrants,
especially from Afghanistan and Syria.
Irregular migration of
non-regional migrants

Others

May

than 60% of all asylum applications submitted by Kosovo* nationals were reported by
Hungary. Thus Hungary reported the second-largest number of overall asylum applications in the EU during the reporting
period, compared to being ninth-ranking
one year ago.

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

2015

Jan

Feb

Mar

Most of the non-regional irregular migrants
originally illegally entered Greece or Bulgaria from Turkey and then continued their
travel towards their preferred EU countries
of destination across the Western Balkan

fran · q1 2015

region. Hence, the increased number of migrants detected at the Hungarian-Serbian
border is clearly linked to the sharp increase
in the number of migrant apprehensions
recorded over the past three months on
the Eastern Mediterranean route.
Most migrants travel across the Western Balkan region assisted by peoplesmuggling networks. The journey takes
between two weeks and one month, depending on the agreements made with
the smugglers.
Circular migration route

Figure 2. Western Balkan route reflects migration pressure on the Eastern
Mediterranean route
Monthly detections of non-European migrants on the Eastern Mediterranean route
and on the Western Balkan route

16 000
Eastern Mediterranean route (GRC, BGR, CYP – land and sea)

14 000

Western Balkan route

12 000
10 000
8 000
6 000
4 000

The circular migration route from Albania
and, to a much lesser extent, Macedonia,
to Greece reported 1 907 detectionsof illegal border crossings during the first quarter of 2015. This route showed an increase
from 1 373 witnessed in the same period
of the previous year. The flow was mainly
composed of Albanian nationals.

2 000
0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Jan

Feb

2014

Mar

Apr

2015

Source: FRAN and WB-RAN data as of 12 May 2015

Clandestine entries from Turkey to Bulgaria

© Frontex, 2015

At the two main BCPs at the Bulgarian-Turkish land border, namely the BCPs Kapitan Andreevo and Lesovo, the number of detections of clandestine entries to the
EU/Schengen area reached a significantly high level in the first quarter of 2015,
with 16 times more detections than in the same period of 2014. Bulgarian authorities reported more than 1 000 migrant apprehensions hidden in means of transport from January to March. During the same period the number of apprehended
green-border crossings (between BCPs) along the Bulgarian-Turkish land border
was only slightly lower. Thus, the number of detections of clandestine entry exceeded the number of illegal border-crossings between BCPs for the first time.

More specifically, the BCP Kapitan Andreevo reported many detections of migrants hiding in cargo trains departing from Turkey. Migrants relied on the local
knowledge of people smugglers for information regarding transportation options.
Often big groups of migrants embarked cargo trains, including families with small children. The first train station where
the train stops after departing from Turkey is Svilengrad, about 30 km away from Edirne.
Route of migrants hidden in cargo trains departing from Turkey to Bulgaria

Migrants arriving by cargo train were mainly Syrian, Afghan or Pakistani nationals. After interception the majority of the migrants applied for international protection.
The bad weather conditions in the beginning of 2015 and the flooding of the Evros River along the Greek-Turkish land border were one of the reasons why many migrants chose to clandestinely enter through Bulgarian BCPs.

19 of 40

II. Featured risk analyses

Eastern Mediterranean route

Increasing flow of migrants
arriving in the Eastern
Aegean Sea
n Reduced risk of cargo ships
carrying migrants from
Turkey to Italy leads to shift
towards the Aegean islands
n Increased number of
Afghans in Turkey expected
to raise flows to the EU

In Q1 2015, the external EU border section
with the strongest increase in illegal border-crossings compared to the same period of last year was between Greece and
Turkey in the Eastern Aegean Sea. Since Q1
2014, the number of irregular migrants reported either from the sea border between
Greece and Turkey or from the Eastern Aegean Islands has tripled and exceeded the
mark of 13 000 detections. The increase
has mainly been caused by higher numbers of Syrian and Afghan migrants trying to reach the EU. Around a third of the
migrants detected in the Eastern Aegean
were detected on land, on the Greek islands,
the others at the maritime border. Those
migrants mostly used inflatable boats to
reach Greek land.
Among the reasons why migrants increasingly preferred to reach the EU in the Eastern Mediterranean Sea are the lower costs
and lower weather dependancy compared
to other possible routes. Both factors are
related to the rather short sea distances
between Turkey and Greece.
Syrians arriving in Turkey
by ferry add to the migratory
pressure
In Q1 2014, many Syrian migrants detected
in the Eastern Aegean Sea had arrived in
the harbour of Mersin through ferry connections from Syria and Lebanon. Since the
spring of 2014, ferry companies increased
the number of connections to Turkey. The
ferry connection is heavily used because it
represents the only direct route from Syria
to Turkey not leading through areas of conflict or those controlled by Da’ish or other
islamist rebel groups.

20 of 40

New irregular migration hubs in Turkey
During the fourth quarter of 2014, eleven
cargo ships carrying more than 4 000 migrants departed mainly from the area
around Mersin in Turkey with the intention to reach Italy. In 2015 so far, the Turkish authorities have prevented the further
use of cargo ships to facilitate migrants
and asylum seekers from Turkey to Italy.
As the use of cargo ships for transporting
migrants did not seem anymore feasible
to the facilitation networks, they offered
the Syrian migrants alternative routes.
The Syrian migrants stranded in the area
of Mersin were directed to the west coast
of Turkey to cross over to the Greek Eastern Aegean islands. Geographically, Bodrum
and Didim represented the regional hubs
closest to Mersin, reachable after only 1012 hours driving from Mersin. The importance of these towns as regional centres
for the transfer of migrants from Turkey to
the Greek Islands was reflected by the sharp
increase of migrants recorded especially on
the island of Kos, besides the other most targeted islands of Lesbos, Samos, and Chios.
Indeed, a majority of irregular migrants
apprehended on the Greek Aegean Islands
used the services of the Turkish smugglers.
But besides the large and very well-organised facilitation networks, which often organised the whole journey from the
migrants’ countries of origin to the destination countries, people smuggling activities also represented a lucrative business
for local people smugglers, who provide
individual services such as accommodation, transfers from cities like Izmir, Bodrum or Ayvalik to the embarkation points
or the sale of boats. Sometimes, they accompanied the migrant boats separately
in order to recover them and to make an
additional profit.
However, there have also been cases when
migrants decided to organise their own
transport to the Greek Islands by purchasing inflatable boats by themselves. Usually,

fran · q1 2015

Figure 3. Islands in the Eastern Aegean Sea most targeted by irregular migrants coming from Turkey

Afganistan
Syrian Arab Republic
Lesbos

other African
nationalities

Chios

Iraq
Samos

Congo
Somalia
Pakistan
Palestinian territory
occupied
Unknown

Agathonisi

Other

Fermakonisi

5 000
Lesbos
Chios
Kos

Symi

Kos
Samos
Fermakonisi
Symi
Agathonisi

Source: FRAN data

friends or relatives, who had successfully
used this modus operandi, informed them
about the steps involved and the most
suitable embarkation points.
Once detected by the Greek authorities,
after a few days in detention many irregular migrants were released and given an
expulsion order because of the lack of detention capacities on the Greek Islands. A
majority of the migrants thus tried to get
to the Greek mainland and to reach their
preferred western and northern EU countries via secondary movements through
Bulgaria, Romania, and/or the Western
Balkan countries.

Afghan migrants strongly on the rise
on the Eastern Mediterranean route
A significant increase was also observed
of Afghan migrants, reflected in the detection of over 2 500 persons of this nationality in Q1 2015, i.e. around three times
as many as in the same period of 2014. As
the Syrian crisis escalates, there are about
40 000 Afghan refugees and asylum seekers living in Turkey’s cities. There are no
camps for them and, unlike Syrians, those
who are unregistered run the risk of being deported.

The UNHCR estimates that 10 000 Afghans will arrive in Turkey seeking asylum in 2015. The Turkish government says
it is responding to the surge in arrivals of
non-Syrian refugees by building seven reception centres (financed by the EU for
EUR 90 million).
In addition, almost 14 000 Afghans in Turkey are seeking resettlement in a third
country. As the process of managing their
asylum claims is very time-consuming, going to the EU seems the only viable solution for many.

21 of 40

II. Featured risk analyses

Central Mediterranean route

Winter low followed by
spring increase

n Uncertainty regarding the
availability of boats in Libya
and potential sourcing of
wooden boats from Tunisia

Figure 4. A decrease in migrants from
Syria and Eritrea resulted in Western
African nationalities ranking top
Top nationalities detected in the Central
Mediterranean in Q1 2015
1 800

1 400
1 200
1 000
800
600
400
200

s

ia

er
th
O

ea

i
al

er
ig
N

itr
Er

ria

M

ia
al

Sy

l

m
So

ga

bi
am

ne

a

0

Se

n More Eritreans arriving in
Italy expected to result in
asylum applications in the
Netherlands, Germany and
Nordic Countries with a
one-to-four-week delay

1 600

G

n Reports of Ethiopians
posing as Eritreans to avoid
return

On 13 May, the European Commission presented a European Agenda on Migration outlining the immediate measures that will be taken in order to respond
to the crisis situation in the Mediterranean as well as the steps to be taken in
the coming years to better manage migration in all its aspects. The concrete
and immediate actions to be taken according to the Agenda will include:
n	
Tripling the capacities and assets for the Frontex joint operations Triton and
Poseidon in 2015 and 2016;
n	
Proposing the first ever activation of the emergency mechanism to help
Member states confronted with a sudden influx of migrants under Article
78(3) TFEU. By the end of May, the Commission proposed a temporary distribution mechanism for persons in need of international protection within
the EU. A proposal for a permanent EU system for relocation in emergency
situations of mass influxes will follow by the end of 2015;
n	
Proposing, by the end of May, an EU-wide resettlement scheme to offer
20 000 places distributed in all Member States to displaced persons in clear
need of international protection in Europe with a dedicated extra funding
of EUR 50 million for 2015 and 2016;
n	
Putting in place a Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) operation
in the Mediterranean to dismantle traffickers’ networks and fight smuggling of people, in accordance with international law.

22 of 40

In the first quarter of 2015, 93 detections of
migrant boats have been reported on the
Central Mediterranean route, involving 10
252 migrants, which is a 7% decrease compared to the first quarter of 2014. However,
in the month subsequent to the reporting period, the migration pressure has increased significantly: In April, 116 incidents
have been reported, involving more than
16 000 migrants and representing a 2%
increase compared to April 2014, which
was already very busy in terms of migration pressure.
During the first quarter of 2015, most of
these boats departed from Libya and, to
a lesser extent, from Greece and Turkey,
transporting sub-Saharan and Horn of
African migrants. Syrians were reported
mainly in the Ionian Sea, departing from
the western coast of Greece.
The tragedies that occurred in April 2015 in
the Central Mediterranean, when reportedly more than 1 000 irregular migrants
died in incidents involving wooden boats,
exposed the ruthlessness of the human
smuggling networks operating in Libya.
The large wooden fishing boats used for
the transportation of migrants were usually old and in poor condition, with practically no navigation capacity and engines
that failed in many cases. Moreover, the
number of irregular migrants crowded on
these vessels varied, ranging from 250 to
800, whereas they were designed to carry
10–20 people. In Q1 2015, several indicators pointed to a temporary shortage of
wooden boats to transport the increased
numbers of would-be migrants willing or
forced to take the journey to Europe. In
fact, 61 of the boats detected and seized
were inflatable boats (43 in 2014) and 11
were wooden or composite (23 in 2014).

fran · q1 2015

But in April, it appeared that facilitation
networks have again managed to purchase a number of wooden boats, which
offer a considerably bigger passenger capacity. It has not yet been possible to establish their origin thus far, since in most
cases they were left adrift or sunk after
use. According to several indications, many
had been acquired from Tunisia. The assumption is supported by the fact that
most wooden boats departed from the
areas closer to Tunisia.
However, independently from the type of
boat used, the same modus operandi was
applied: some 6–7 hours after departing
from the Libyan coast, once they reached
international waters, the migrants made a
distress call to the Italian authorities, while
sailing within the Libyan SAR area. With
rescue activities close to the Libyan coast
re-intensifying, people smugglers could
capitalise on the situation and maximise profits by using unseaworthy vessels.

Most migrants detected on the Central Mediterranean route in Q1 2015 were
from the Gambia: Compared to the same period of 2014, their number has
increased by 7% to 1 418 persons. According to interviews with Gambian migrants who arrived in Italy, among the main push factors to leave the Gambia
was the poor economic situation, while others also blamed the bad political
climate after the coup d’état in December 2014.
Their journey was divided into three stages:
n	
From the Gambia to Agadez (Niger) by public bus. According to the U.N.
Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), up to 4 000 migrants without travel
papers can pass through Agadez every week;
n	
From Agadez to Niger and Libya in pick-ups driven by Touareg. Each pickup may carry up to 30 migrants. The trips are often split up with migrants
having to transfer from one pick-up to the other, with the drivers communicating via mobile phones;
n	
From the outskirts of Tripoli to the city migrants usually take taxis whose
owners are linked to the network.

Figure 5. Most wooden boats carrying migrants departed from coastal areas
between Tripoli and the Tunisian border

Number of Eritrean migrants
increasing after Q1 2015
After a low between October 2014 and
March 2015, in April 2015, with 4 356 reported illegal border-crossings, the migratory pressure of Eritreans again reached
the high levels of last summer. Many Horn
of Africa migrants travel across Sudan
with the help of well organised facilitators based in Khartoum and then cross
the border to Libya. From the Libyan
border, the migrants are transported to
the Libyan coast. Many of the Eritreans
stated that they had lived for some time
in Libya but decided to leave because of
the violence.

Italian SAR area

Maltese SAR area

!
Zuwarah

!

Libyan SAR area

Tripoli

SAR areas
Area of high proportion of detected wooden boats

According to media reports, before arriving in Libya, Ethiopians are often advised
by human smugglers to claim Eritrean nationality from there on to avoid possible
return to Ethiopia. This would indicate that
the numbers of Eritreans arriving to Italy
is probably inflated due to this very prevalent nationality swapping.

Main incident areas
Territorial waters

Source: RAU-GIS Team, 2015

23 of 40

II. Featured risk analyses

Effective returns

Comparison with
other indicators shows
different patterns
n Effective returns are most
often linked to economic
migration and not to
unsuccessful migrants who
failed with their application
for international protection
n Many migrants from
Kosovo* are not granted
international protection,
but only a fraction are
returned

There were more than 63 843 third country
nationals in Q1 2015 issued with an obligation to leave the EU following an administrative or judicial decision, because they
do not or no longer fulfil the conditions
for entry or stay. This is 3% more than in
the previous quarter, while representing
a 1% decrease since the same quarter of
2014. Throughout the EU, Albanians ranked
highest in terms of return decisions issued (6 040), which was a decrease of 6%
compared to the previous quarter. Most
return decisions were issued to this nationality by Greece and Italy. The second
highest number of return decisions were
related to Moroccan citizens, of which almost 40% were issued by Spain.
During the reporting period, more than
37 000 effective returns took place, which
is 13% less than the previous quarter, and
2% less than during Q1 of 2014. In general,
the highest number of effective returns
were carried out by the UK, as has been
the case in the same period of last year,
with the main returned nationalities being Indian and Pakistani. Greece is responsible for carrying out the second highest
number of effective returns, the vast majority of which concern Albanian nationals.
The number of return decisions are lower
than effective returns because in many
cases the country of return is considered
as unsafe to effectively implement the
return. The disappearance of migrants
once a decision has been reached can also
play a role.
Compared to detections of illegal bordercrossing (62 385), the number of returns
has always been much lower. This is due
to the fact that many migrants crossed the
border and then apply for asylum. Indeed,
asylum applications (181 569) are also systematically larger than effective return.

24 of 40

In the case of nationals from Kosovo*,
many apply for asylum in Hungary and
then again in Germany, thus inflating the
total number of asylum applications. Asylum is eventually granted only to a small
minority of nationals from Kosovo*, but the
data reveal that only a few also receive a
decision to return (2 674), and even fewer
are effectively returned (1 782). This results in large numbers of detections of illegal stay, totalling 11 970, mostly reported
by Germany and Hungary. Even after Germany organised direct returns to Kosovo*,
few actually show up on those organised
voluntary returns. Some might choose to
return home by their own means, while
others may decide to apply for asylum
in other Member States (in particular
Sweden).
For Syrians, and to a certain extent also
Afghans, the much larger number of asylum applications compared to detections
of illegal border-crossing, does not coincide
with applications filed in several Member
States, but may to some extent be an indication of undetected entries. Indeed, many
Syrians do not wish to apply for asylum in
the country of entry, but prefer to continue travelling to their final destination,
mostly Germany and Northern EU Member
States. As indicated by FRAN data, some
Syrians when detected crossing the border illegally, and not applying for asylum,
are returned to safe countries of transit,
mostly Hungary and Turkey. There are no
reports of forced return to Syria.
By contrast, only few Indian nationals are
detected for illegal border-crossing or applying for asylum, but are among the top
ranking nationalities being returned. This
is due to the fact that India is considered
a safe country for return, and that most
of those returned are believed to have entered through legal channels, mostly as
economic migrants overstaying or abusing the reason for obtaining their visa.
Return flights are usually accompanied
by fundamental rights observers, coming either from the organizing authority or an NGO. The EU Return Directive

fran · q1 2015

Figure 6. Most nationalities effectively returned are distinct from the majority of nationalities seeking international protection
Comparison of indicators of illegal border‑crossing, asylum and effective returns concerning a selection of migrant nationalities

Syria

Kosovo*

Afghanistan

Illegal
border-crossing

13 989

22 631

6 862

Asylum
applications

28 987

Effective returns
to third countries

49 213

13 477

Albania

India

2 033

33

.

7 784
639

5 730
644

(2008/115/ EC) introduced a fundamental
rights safeguard for third-country nationals ordered to leave the EU because they
do not or no longer fulfil the conditions
for entry or stay. According to it, Member States must provide for an effective
forced-return monitoring system. Thus
return flights are usually accompanied
by fundamental rights observers, coming either from a public authority of the
respective country or an NGO. In Estonia
for example, return operations are monitored by the Estonian Red Cross.
Frontex’s role in Return operations
Frontex is currently offering considerable support to the return activities of EU
Member States. However, currently Frontex can only coordinate joint return missions but not initiate its own. The Frontex
Return Operations Sector (ROS), within
its Rolling Operational Plan, collects requests from EU Member States to coordi-

1 782

nate and finance Joint Return Operations
to destinations of common interest for EU
Member States. Besides the ROS supports
EU Member States with the necessary assistance during pre-return phase, namely
acquisition of travel documents or cooperation with third countries. In 2014, the
number of joint return operations (JRO)
increased by 15% compared to 2013. Four
JRO were cancelled due to the Ebola outbreak in some African countries. A total of
45 JRO with 2 271 returnees was coordinated in comparison to 39 JRO with 2 152
returnees in 2013. At the same time it is
the highest yearly number of JRO and returnees achieved since 2006. In Q1 2015
alone 15 JRO were conducted.
Joint return operations (JRO) are in principle carried out on the basis of sharing existing capacities and on the readiness of
Member States to organise them. Seven
Member States took the role of a JRO organiser in Q1 2015. Germany for example

557

1 992

acted as the organising country of four
joint return operations to Bosnia and
Hercegovina, Serbia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia and Georgia. Operations to Pakistan (four times by Greece)
and Kosovo* (three times by Hungary)
were also completed. These were the first
ever joint return operations to be organised by Greece and Hungary.
Towards a reform
On 13 May 2015, the European Commission presented its European Agenda on
Migration including a set of mutually coherent and reinforcing initiatives, based
around four pillars. The first pillar, ‘Reducing the incentives for irregular migration’
proposed reforms in the field of returns,
including stronger partnerships with third
countries and a stronger role of Frontex
in return operations.

25 of 40

Annexes

26 of 40

fran · q1 2015

Statistical tables

Legend
Symbols and abbreviations: n.a. not applicable
										:		 data not available
Source: 	FRAN and EDF-RAN data as of 11 May 2015,
unless otherwise indicated
Note:		‘Member States’ in the tables refer to FRAN Member
States, including both 28 EU Member States
and three Schengen Associated Countries

27 of 40

Annex Table 1. Illegal border-crossing between BCPs
Detections reported by border type and nationality at the external borders

2015 Q1
2013
Q4

2014
Q1

Q2

% change on
Q3

Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

All Borders
Kosovo*
Syria

387

507

689

3 304

17 569

22 631

4 364

29

36

9 597

4 771

14 090

37 894

22 414

13 989

193

-38

22

Afghanistan

3 845

2 054

2 916

7 854

9 308

6 862

234

-26

11

Albania

2 630

1 505

2 239

2 372

3 207

2 033

35

-37

3.3

Somalia

699

1 297

1 906

2 282

2 191

1 664

28

-24

2.7

Iraq

100

50

114

675

1 271

1 561

3 022

23

2.5

1 332

1 340

2 134

2 684

2 572

1 512

13

-41

2.4

Gambia
Senegal

741

848

803

1 088

2 050

1 230

45

-40

2

Mali

874

2 502

3 915

2 643

1 515

1 177

-53

-22

1.9
1.7

Nigeria

880

631

2 054

3 847

2 183

1 088

72

-50

Others

8 964

6 533

38 007

47 875

15 829

8 638

32

-45

14

30 049

22 038

68 867

112 518

80 109

62 385

183

-22

100

Total All Borders
Land Borders
Kosovo*
Syria

387

507

689

3 304

17 569

22 631

4 364

29

58

3 902

1 373

1 599

4 330

5 169

5 307

287

2.7

14

Afghanistan

2 713

1 362

1 062

2 181

4 840

4 308

216

-11

11

Albania

2 581

1 470

2 221

2 370

3 207

2 032

38

-37

5.2

86

41

80

292

526

1 182

2 783

125

3.1

239

71

89

107

288

688

869

139

1.8

Iraq
Pakistan
Bangladesh

124

31

27

78

175

294

848

68

0.8

Palestine

232

29

92

361

502

272

838

-46

0.7

Guinea

12

138

69

109

78

215

56

176

0.6

Iran

77

50

42

76

94

166

232

77

0.4

3 033

2 080

1 742

1 378

1 440

1 659

-20

15

4.3

13 386

7 152

7 712

14 586

33 888

38 754

442

14

100

Syria

5 695

3 398

12 491

33 564

17 245

8 682

156

-50

37

Afghanistan

1 132

692

1 854

5 673

4 468

2 554

269

-43

11

Others

Total Land Border
Sea Borders

Somalia

547

1 223

1 827

2 242

2 148

1 547

26

-28

6.5

Gambia

1 314

1 328

2 101

2 655

2 558

1 471

11

-42

6.2

Senegal

668

839

803

1 084

2 043

1 217

45

-40

5.2

Mali

734

1 909

3 831

2 580

1 469

1 073

-44

-27

4.5

Eritrea

2 433

1 774

16 941

13 637

1 971

1 028

-42

-48

4.4

Nigeria

792

609

1 989

3 780

2 112

1 026

68

-51

4.3

39

104

297

703

690

688

562

-0.3

2.9

619

11 093

12 139

2 490

428

-31

-83

1.8

Côte d'Ivoire
Unspecified sub-Saharan
nationals
Others

Total Sea Border

3 309

2 391

7 928

19 875

9 027

3 917

64

-57

17

16 663

14 886

61 155

97 932

46 221

23 631

59

-49

100

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of
independence

28 of 40

fran · q1 2015

Annex Table 2. Clandestine entries at BCPs
Detections reported by Member State, border type and top ten nationalities

2015 Q1
2013

2014

% change on
Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

949

1 133

1 102

266

-2.7

100

Syria (48%)

16

19

1

-90

-95

0.1

Tunisia (100%)

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Land

208

301

589

Sea

12

10

35

Border Type

Highest share
Nationality

Top Ten Nationalities
Syria
Afghanistan

112

79

250

247

515

531

572

3.1

48

33

35

138

411

438

364

940

-17

33

0

4

6

5

70

98

2 350

40

8.9

13

10

9

12

32

41

310

28

3.7

Guinea

3

10

17

25

14

28

180

100

2.5

Algeria

4

9

52

41

18

15

67

-17

1.4

Iraq
Pakistan

Albania

0

4

0

0

9

8

100

-11

0.7

Iran

1

4

4

17

8

5

25

-38

0.5

Tunisia

0

3

9

1

1

4

33

300

0.4

Turkey

9

1

4

23

4

3

200

-25

0.3

Others

45

152

135

183

43

6

-96

-86

0.5

Total

220

311

624

965

1 152

1 103

255

-4.3

100

Annex Table 3. Facilitators
Detections reported by Member State, place of detection and top ten nationalities

2015 Q1
2013
Q4

2014
Q1

Q2

% change on
Q3

Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Place of Detection
Land
Inland
Land Intra EU
Sea

177

227

215

465

307

1 086

378

254

42

1 281

1 178

1 932

1 742

1 976

918

-22

-54

35

203

249

170

195

197

306

23

55

12

78

144

155

177

109

228

58

109

8.7

Air

72

95

79

77

88

73

-23

-17

2.8

Not specified

99

125

90

157

85

0

n.a.

n.a.

0

Top Ten Nationalities
Morocco

95

91

222

334

312

278

205

-11

11

Spain

72

117

167

110

116

177

51

53

6.8

France

71

100

115

99

103

154

54

50

5.9

Albania

72

87

96

94

136

123

41

-9.6

4.7

Serbia

43

69

64

80

71

101

46

42

3.9

Romania

68

58

61

85

71

100

72

41

3.8

Turkey

53

72

99

135

90

93

29

3.3

3.6

China

145

37

81

69

98

91

146

-7.1

3.5

Italy

129

137

134

99

117

88

-36

-25

3.4

Not specified

183

85

147

212

237

72

-15

-70

2.8

Others

979

1 165

1 455

1 496

1 411

1 334

15

-5.5

51

Total

1 910

2 018

2 641

2 813

2 762

2 611

29

-5.5

100

In the detections, Italy does not distinguish between facilitators of illegal border-crossing and facilitators of illegal stay

29 of 40

Annex Table 4. Illegal stay
Detections reported by Member State, place of detection and top ten nationalities

2015 Q1
2013

2014

% change on

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

78 748

74 930

88 901

111 411

108 265

96 780

29

-11

88

Syria (12%)

Air

7 608

6 998

6 931

10 199

9 661

8 485

21

-12

7.7

Turkey (9.3%)

Land

4 052

2 779

3 192

5 207

4 167

2 977

7.1

-29

2.7

Ukraine (47%)

Land Intra EU

1 300

960

921

1 028

1 020

1 022

6.5

0.2

0.9

Moldova (32%)

Place of Detection
Inland

Highest share
Nationality

13

32

726

530

1 084

862

2594

-20

0.8

Morocco (76%)

Between BCPs

118

1 792

128

176

64

291

-84

355

0.3

Bosnia and Herzegovina (29%)

Sea

319

123

139

276

140

117

-4.9

-16

0.1

Tunisia (67%)

11

Not specified

Top Ten Nationalities
10 698

11 159

14 771

25 924

22 869

12 307

10

-46

Kosovo*

1 453

1 327

1 134

1 471

6 968

11 970

802

72

11

Afghanistan

4 603

4 866

3 741

6 141

8 645

7 920

63

-8.4

7.2

Morocco

6 230

6 123

6 082

6 595

6 529

7 076

16

8.4

6.4

Albania

4 770

4 483

4 688

4 733

6 379

6 603

47

3.5

6

Ukraine

3 322

2 828

3 456

5 029

5 431

4 492

59

-17

4.1

Iraq

1 415

1 333

1 402

2 038

3 004

3 751

181

25

3.4

Eritrea

3 357

2 220

12 072

13 677

6 508

3 734

68

-43

3.4

Pakistan

2 975

2 825

2 686

3 339

2 800

3 282

16

17

3

Algeria

3 631

3 591

3 006

3 154

3 242

3 150

-12

-2.8

2.8

46 859

47 900

56 726

52 026

46 249

-1.3

-11

42

87 614 100 938 128 827 124 401 110 534

26

-11

100

Syria

Others

49 704

Total

92 158

* Data on detections of illegal stay inland have not been available from the Netherlands since 2012.
** This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence

30 of 40

fran · q1 2015

Annex Table 5. Refusals of entry
Refusals reported by border type and nationality at the external borders

2015 Q1
2013

2014

Q4

Q1

Q2

% change on
Q3

Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

All Borders
Ukraine

4 109

3 181

3 854

5 201

4 578

5 393

70

18

20

Albania

2 855

2 980

3 343

3 028

3 650

3 327

12

-8.8

12

Serbia

2 449

2 151

2 075

2 154

2 277

1 838

-15

-19

6.7

Russian Federation

3 110

2 072

2 534

3 351

2 815

1 665

-20

-41

6.1

Morocco

1 187

1 392

1 063

1 122

862

998

-28

16

3.6

Bosnia and Herzegovina

1 111

1 027

944

1 060

979

964

-6.1

-1.5

3.5

Belarus

1 279

1 116

1 191

1 470

1 394

901

-19

-35

3.3

Algeria

591

643

753

623

711

716

11

0.7

2.6

Brazil

611

605

620

451

637

709

17

11

2.6

United States

562

560

620

662

551

609

8.7

11

2.2

Others

Total All Borders

11 662

9 530

10 138

12 020

12 899

10 304

8.1

-20

38

29 526

25 257

27 135

31 142

31 353

27 424

8.6

-13

100

Land Borders
Ukraine

3 835

2 997

3 481

4 842

4 253

5 046

68

19

37

Serbia

2 284

1 933

1 852

1 978

2 105

1 633

-16

-22

12

Albania

1 535

1 443

1 883

1 782

1 897

1 539

6.7

-19

11

Russian Federation

2 635

1 718

2 048

2 818

2 429

1 378

-20

-43

10

Bosnia and Herzegovina

1 071

986

912

1 014

931

907

-8

-2.6

6.6

Belarus

1 243

1 088

1 158

1 405

1 358

861

-21

-37

6.3

Morocco

852

1 012

697

735

531

543

-46

2.3

3.9

FYR Macedonia

406

435

399

466

407

388

-11

-4.7

2.8

Moldova

186

161

169

225

199

326

102

64

2.4

Turkey

304

218

261

779

376

258

18

-31

1.9

2 496

1 292

1 515

2 175

3 338

893

-31

-73

6.5

16 847

13 283

14 375

18 219

17 824

13 772

3.7

-23

100

Albania

953

1 014

923

710

1 115

1 113

9.8

-0.2

9

Brazil

600

602

606

439

628

706

17

12

5.7

Others

Total Land Border
Air Borders

Algeria

578

624

724

602

692

697

12

0.7

5.6

United States

541

549

609

622

527

600

9.3

14

4.8

China

226

226

291

472

433

416

84

-3.9

3.4

Nigeria

513

351

389

420

493

406

16

-18

3.3

India

205

200

260

364

357

356

78

-0.3

2.9

Not specified

548

445

375

326

522

339

-24

-35

2.7

Ukraine

256

180

315

330

299

322

79

7.7

2.6

Morocco

246

227

221

215

230

322

42

40

2.6

Others

Total Air Border

7 116

6 541

6 805

6 965

7 054

7 113

8.7

0.8

57

11 782

10 959

11 518

11 465

12 350

12 390

13

0.3

100

Sea Borders
367

523

537

536

638

675

29

5.8

53

Morocco

89

153

145

172

101

133

-13

32

11

Afghanistan

12

10

4

28

14

81

710

479

6.4

Tunisia

31

33

25

35

43

47

42

9.3

3.7

Albania

Turkey

39

23

39

113

13

34

48

162

2.7

India

19

14

13

34

22

27

93

23

2.1

Ukraine

18

4

58

29

26

25

525

-3.8

2

Syria

15

12

27

53

41

24

100

-41

1.9

Algeria

12

14

23

18

17

18

29

5.9

1.4

2

4

13

24

8

14

250

75

1.1

Pakistan
Others

293

225

358

416

256

184

-18

-28

15

Total Sea Border

897

1 015

1 242

1 458

1 179

1 262

24

7

100

31 of 40

Annex Table 6. Refusals of entry
Refusals of entry at the external borders reported by reasons for refusal, Member State and top ten nationalities
Refused
persons
Total

2015 Q1 – Reasons for refusals of entry (see description below)
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

Total
Reasons

n.a.

Top Ten Nationalities
5 410

Ukraine

5 393

28

33

1 516

5

2 422

258

353

218

22

555

Albania

3 327

25

56

81

9

1 216

129

687

999

56

180

3 438

Serbia

1 838

63

18

71

2

343

523

356

453

18

8

1 855

Russian Federation

1 665

24

4

950

10

190

87

135

35

232

154

1 821

998

202

25

226

15

170

6

58

182

103

17

1 004

Bosnia and Herzegovina

964

165

1

37

0

330

20

364

29

13

5

964

Belarus

901

22

0

435

2

108

64

55

50

114

104

954

Morocco

Algeria

716

8

3

71

4

405

2

191

8

4

21

717

Brazil

709

9

18

262

0

303

36

36

117

1

214

996

609

20

6

40

0

16

47

4

24

0

461

618

Others

10 304

584

510

2 597

164

2 883

443

618

579

148

2 207

10 733

Total

27 424

1 150

674

6 286

211

8 386

1 615

2 857

2 694

711

3 926

28 510

United States

Descriptions of the reasons for refusal of entry:
A has no valid travel document(s);
B has a false/counterfeit/forged travel document;
C has no valid visa or residence permit;
D has a false/counterfeit/forged visa or residence permit;
E has no appropriate documentation justifying the purpose and conditions of stay;
F has already stayed for three months during a six months period on the territory of the Member States of the EU;
G does not have sufficient means of subsistence in relation to the period and form of stay, or the means to return to the country of origin or transit;
H is a person for whom an alert has been issued for the purposes of refusing entry in the SIS or in the national register;
I	is considered to be a threat for public policy, internal security, public health or the international relations of one or more Member States of the EU.

32 of 40

fran · q1 2015

Annex Table 7. Refusals of entry
Refusals of entry at the external borders by reasons for refusal

2015 Q1
2013

2014

% change on

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

E) No justification

6 700

5 720

6 145

5 988

6 714

8 386

47

25

29

Ukraine (29%)

C) No valid visa

9 313

6 754

8 173

10 175

9 739

6 286

-6.9

-35

22

Ukraine (24%)

Reason not available

3 449

2 730

3 291

4 487

4 264

3 926

44

-7.9

14

Ukraine (14%)

G) No subsistence

3 108

2 574

2 789

2 538

2 969

2 857

11

-3.8

10

Albania (24%)

H) Alert issued

2 202

2 904

3 106

3 302

3 370

2 694

-7.2

-20

9.4

Albania (37%)

F) Over 3 month stay

1 827

1 806

1 575

1 941

1 897

1 615

-11

-15

5.7

Serbia (32%)

A) No valid document

1 897

1 669

1 657

1 753

1 254

1 150

-31

-8.3

4

Morocco (18%)

I) Threat

528

662

749

648

694

711

7.4

2.4

2.5

Russian Federation (33%)

B) False document

606

548

563

396

545

674

23

24

2.4

Not specified (13%)

D) False visa

571

295

303

254

287

211

-28

-26

0.7

Morocco (7.1%)

30 201

25 662

28 351

31 482

31 733

28 510

11

-10

100

All Borders

Total All Borders

Highest share
Nationality

Land Borders

Nationality

E) No justification

3 073

2 184

2 431

3 030

3 043

3 954

81

30

28

C) No valid visa

7 130

4 763

5 437

7 490

7 505

3 804

-20

-49

27

Ukraine (38%)

G) No subsistence

2 069

1 643

1 783

1 554

1 614

1 651

0.5

2.3

12

Bosnia and Herzegovina (21%)

H) Alert issued

1 396

1 972

2 184

2 434

2 504

1 610

-18

-36

12

Albania (32%)

F) Over 3 month stay

1 538

1 258

1 211

1 578

1 519

1 156

-8.1

-24

8.3

Serbia (43%)

251

7

185

665

570

640

9043

12

4.6

Ukraine (73%)

Reason not available

Ukraine (58%)

1 061

958

838

921

558

542

-43

-2.9

3.9

Morocco (34%)

I) Threat

282

393

366

423

433

496

26

15

3.5

Russian Federation (46%)

B) False document

111

133

101

97

62

83

-38

34

0.6

Ukraine (37%)

D) False visa

246

49

43

44

40

37

-24

-7.5

0.3

Iraq (16%)

17 157

13 360

14 579

18 236

17 848

13 973

4.6

-22

100

E) No justification

3 466

3 320

3 447

2 674

3 444

3 987

20

16

31

Albania (13%)

Reason not available

3 075

2 605

2 912

3 617

3 507

3 148

21

-10

25

United States (15%)

C) No valid visa

A) No valid document

Total Land Border
Air Borders

Nationality

2 030

1 889

2 554

2 457

2 129

2 225

18

4.5

17

Brazil (9.9%)

G) No subsistence

973

811

861

860

1 117

956

18

-14

7.5

Algeria (20%)

H) Alert issued

596

623

707

599

627

675

8.3

7.7

5.3

Albania (31%)

A) No valid document

698

612

658

582

591

518

-15

-12

4.1

Not specified (22%)

B) False document

491

401

453

279

467

486

21

4.1

3.8

Not specified (12%)

F) Over 3 month stay

260

486

353

349

377

444

-8.6

18

3.5

United States (10%)

I) Threat

228

246

353

185

230

190

-23

-17

1.5

Suriname (18%)

D) False visa

311

220

233

184

217

158

-28

-27

1.2

Cameroon (8.2%)

12 128

11 213

12 531

11 786

12 706

12 787

14

0.6

100

Total Air Border
Sea Borders

Nationality

E) No justification

161

209

267

284

227

315

51

39

25

Albania (57%)

H) Alert issued

209

259

215

269

239

299

15

25

24

Albania (70%)

66

119

145

124

238

247

108

3.8

20

Albania (94%)

C) No valid visa

150

95

182

228

105

143

51

36

11

Tunisia (23%)

Reason not available

123

118

194

205

187

128

8.5

-32

10

Albania (23%)

A) No valid document

G) No subsistence

138

99

161

250

105

79

-20

-25

6.3

Syria (19%)

I) Threat

18

23

30

40

31

25

8.7

-19

2

Albania (68%)

F) Over 3 month stay

29

62

11

14

1

13

-79

1200

1

Turkey (85%)

D) False visa

14

23

27

26

30

9

-61

-70

0.7

Albania (44%)
Not specified (50%)

B) False document

Total Sea Border

4

10

9

20

16

6

-40

-63

0.5

912

1 017

1 241

1 460

1 179

1 264

24

7.2

100

33 of 40

Annex Table 8. Applications for asylum
Applications for international protection reported by Member State and top ten nationalities

2015 Q1
2013

2014

Q4

Q1

Q2

% change on
Q3

Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Top Ten Nationalities
Kosovo*
Syria

2 347

2 093

1 839

5 473

24 066

49 213

2251

104

27

19 852

18 001

22 259

40 752

40 240

28 987

61

-28

16

Afghanistan

7 131

7 994

6 708

10 347

14 611

13 477

69

-7.8

7.4

Albania

1 968

3 248

3 212

3 023

3 876

7 784

140

101

4.3

Iraq

2 605

2 671

2 719

5 271

5 501

6 912

159

26

3.8

Serbia

5 739

4 151

3 109

6 309

7 132

6 464

56

-9.4

3.6

Not specified

6 289

3 737

5 988

9 658

9 621

6 087

63

-37

3.4

Pakistan

3 399

4 331

4 116

5 097

5 386

5 038

16

-6.5

2.8

Ukraine

200

799

2 104

4 372

5 098

4 713

490

-7.6

2.6

Nigeria

2 224

3 094

4 617

5 401

5 783

4 203

36

-27

2.3

Others

48 028

43 822

56 658

68 367

59 401

48 691

11

-18

27

Total

99 782

93 941 113 329 164 070 180 715 181 569

93

0.5

100

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo
declaration of independence

Annex Table 9. Document fraudsters
Fraudulent documents detected at BCPs reported by FRAN Members, by border type and top ten nationalities

2015 Q1
2013
Q4

2014
Q1

Q2

% change on
Q3

Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Border Type

Highest share
Nationality Claimed

1 794

1 677

1 581

1 525

1 729

1 468

-12

-15

68

Land

531

432

607

749

696

660

53

-5.2

30

Syria (22%)

Sea

133

110

127

114

74

35

-68

-53

1.6

Morocco (54%)

0

0

0

0

1

4

n.a.

300

0.2

Air

Not specified

Top Ten Nationalities Claimed

Not specified (12%)

Iran (100%)

Nationality of Document

Syria

361

243

449

348

407

257

5.8

-37

12

Spain (52%)

Morocco

184

143

120

282

222

194

36

-13

9

Spain (81%)
France (44%)

Not specified

235

163

181

163

235

176

8

-25

8.1

Nigeria

160

141

137

106

132

157

11

19

7.2

Italy (59%)

Albania

207

190

133

115

136

153

-19

13

7.1

Greece (36%)

Ukraine

143

109

132

160

118

152

39

29

7

Poland (68%)

68

57

56

75

75

109

91

45

5

Austria (42%)

8

74

4

48

79

888

65

3.6

Spain (96%)

Sri Lanka

49

62

87

108

58

63

1.6

8.6

2.9

Italy (81%)

Iraq

37

62

32

87

157

55

-11

-65

2.5

France (36%)
Spain (23%)

Iran
Israel

Others

1 014

1 041

914

940

912

772

-26

-15

36

Total

2 458

2 219

2 315

2 388

2 500

2 167

-2.3

-13

100

Spanish data include detections on entry, exit and transit

34 of 40

fran · q1 2015

Annex Table 10. Document fraud
False documents detected at BCPs reported by type of document and type of fraud

2015 Q1
2013

2014

% change on
year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

1 228

1 120

1 271

1 233

1 331

1 142

2.0

-14.0

45

545

474

481

529

571

473

-0.2

-17.0

41

Document Type
Passports
Forged
Authentic

367

357

458

449

424

426

19

0.5

37

Counterfeit

186

157

182

144

180

128

-18

-29

11

No more details

105

115

137

79

127

87

-24

-31

8

24

17

12

32

29

28

65

-3.4

2.5

Stolen blank

1

0

1

0

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

ID cards

303

285

359

340

431

261

-8

-39

10

Counterfeit

103

109

122

126

158

104

-5

-34

40

Authentic

115

103

145

142

123

89

-14.0

-28

34

23

20

34

25

43

27

35

-37

10

Pseudo

Stolen blank
Forged

44

42

41

30

45

21

-50

-53

8

No more details

17

10

17

16

59

12

20

-80

5

1

1

0

1

3

8

700

167

3

Pseudo
Visas

446

354

373

440

449

468

32.0

4.2

19

Counterfeit

169

172

194

236

234

261

52

12.0

56

Authentic

191

118

119

150

160

155

31

-3.1

33

Forged

44

42

40

38

34

31

-26

-9

6.6

No more details

35

19

18

10

20

10

-47

-50

2.1

Stolen blank

7

3

2

6

1

10

233

900.0

2

Pseudo

0

0

0

0

0

1

n.a.

n.a.

Residence permits

477

384

365

380

377

328

-15

-13.0

13

Counterfeit

201

166

178

165

161

150

-10

-6.8

46

Authentic

99

112

102

110

82

89

-21

9

27

Forged

67

28

19

26

48

39

39

-19

12

Stolen blank

68

67

35

42

45

33

-51

-27.0

10

No more details

42

11

30

36

41

17

55.0

-59

5

0

0

1

1

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

Pseudo
Stamps

288

281

289

255

222

251

-11

13

Counterfeit

250

228

199

190

167

169

-26

1

67

36

49

75

60

43

76

55

77

30

Forged
No more details
Other

10.0

2

4

15

5

12

6

50

-50

2.4

50

50

61

63

59

60

20.0

2

2.4

Counterfeit

27

31

37

46

33

39

26

18

65

Authentic

16

13

11

10

11

17

31

55

28

Forged

3

4

4

6

4

3

-25

-25

5

Pseudo

4

2

4

0

1

1

-50

0

1.7

-100

No more details

0

0

5

0

10

0

n.a.

Stolen blank

0

0

0

1

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

2 792

2 474

2 718

2 711

2 869

2 510

-12.5

1.5

Total

Spanish data include detections on entry, exit and transit

35 of 40

Annex Table 11A. D
 ocument fraud
Top ten combinations of nationality of document and document fraud by document type

2015 Q1
2013
Q4

2014
Q1

Q2

% change on
Q3

Q1

Q4

year ago prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Document Type
Passports
MAR-Authentic
NGA-Forged

Highest share
Nationality Claimed

1 228

1 120

1 271

1 233

1 331

1 142

2

- 14

45.5

7

17

134

102

148

108

535

-27

9.5

Syria (89%)

12

21

33

16

18

75

257

317

6.6

Nigeria (89%)

Syria (20%)

ISR-Counterfeit

1

7

49

30

70

64

814

-8.6

5.6

Israel (69%)

FRA-Authentic

51

44

44

45

52

63

43

21

5.5

Not specified (54%)

ESP-Authentic

17

32

41

39

34

38

19

12

3.3

Morocco (37%)

ALB-Forged

31

28

19

23

16

34

21

113

3.0

Albania (88%)

SEN-Forged

15

12

21

18

34

25

108

-26

2.2

Senegal (76%)

ISR-Forged

6

15

10

6

21

19

27

-9.5

1.7

Israel (89%)

PAK-Forged

5

5

2

11

13

19

280

46

1.7

Afghanistan (84%)
Syria (47%)

44

40

41

39

25

17

-58

-32

1.5

1 039

899

877

904

900

680

-24

-24

59.5

Syria (15%)

303

285

359

340

431

261

-8

- 39

10

Morocco (26%)

ESP-Authentic

52

41

97

85

76

55

34

-28

21

Morocco (69%)

ITA-Counterfeit

22

15

34

24

23

32

113

39

12

Philippines (19%)

ITA-Stolen blank

16

20

32

24

43

26

30

-40

10

Albania (54%)

ROU-Counterfeit

5

5

14

4

17

13

160

-24

5

Ukraine (38%)

GRC-Counterfeit

18

25

14

15

28

12

-52

-57

5

Albania (58%)

BEL-Counterfeit

11

8

13

13

21

10

25

-52

4

Morocco (40%)

ITA-Forged

22

11

10

8

19

10

-9.1

-47

4

Albania (90%)

BEL-Authentic

12

9

13

14

10

9

0

-10

3

Morocco (67%)

BGR-Counterfeit

10

11

3

7

13

8

-27

-38

3

Morocco (38%)

FRA-Authentic

20

15

18

23

22

8

-47

-64

3

Algeria (38%)

Others

115

125

111

123

159

78

-38

-51

30

Syria (18%)

Visa

446

354

373

440

449

468

32

4

19

Ukraine (16%)

POL-Authentic

SWE-Authentic
Others
ID cards

119

73

82

113

89

107

47

20

23

Ukraine (67%)

FRA-Counterfeit

68

45

41

42

99

51

13

-48

11

Sri Lanka (33%)

ITA-Counterfeit

17

50

62

106

18

50

0

178

11

Sri Lanka (58%)

ESP-Counterfeit

16

17

16

21

28

35

106

25

7

Iran (46%)

BEL-Counterfeit

3

8

4

6

9

26

225

189

6

Nigeria (54%)

CHE-Counterfeit

2

1

4

2

3

24

2300

700

5

Iran (46%)

CZE-Counterfeit

3

1

12

1

18

1700

n.a.

4

Nigeria (50%)

ITA-Forged

21

6

18

11

15

15

150

0

3

Bangladesh (33%)

FRA-Authentic

22

15

9

10

24

13

-13

-46

3

Not specified (23%)

ITA-Authentic
Others

20

13

13

12

8

11

-15

38

2

Côte d'Ivoire (36%)

155

125

112

116

156

118

-5.6

-24

25

Iran (14%)

Total: see Table 11B
Spanish data include detections on entry, exit and transit

36 of 40

fran · q1 2015

Annex Table 11B. D
 ocument fraud
Top ten combinations of nationality of document and document fraud by document type

2015 Q1
2013

2014

% change on

per cent
of total

Highest share

Q4

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

477

384

365

380

377

328

- 15

- 13

13

ITA-Counterfeit

34

29

40

20

24

32

10

33

10

Nigeria (34%)

BEL-Counterfeit

23

22

10

20

25

29

32

16

9

Morocco (34%)

ESP-Authentic

29

28

19

33

30

28

0

-6.7

9

Morocco (39%)

ESP-Counterfeit

49

39

35

45

29

28

-28

-3.4

9

Morocco (46%)

FRA-Authentic

35

40

38

34

23

23

-43

0

7

Not specified (61%)

ITA-Authentic

10

17

13

10

9

15

-12

67

5

Ghana (13%)

8

10

12

8

7

15

50

114

5

Vietnam (27%)

year ago prev. Qtr

Document Type
Residence permits

DEU-Stolen blank

Nationality Claimed
Morocco (19%)

ITA-Forged

12

8

3

6

21

13

63

-38

4

Morocco (31%)

GRC-Counterfeit

34

44

26

30

12

13

-70

8.3

4

Congo (D.R.) (23%)
Georgia (25%)

58

47

10

25

31

12

-74

-61

4

Others

185

100

159

149

166

120

20

-28

37

Nigeria (16%)

Stamps

288

281

289

255

222

251

- 11

13

10

Albania (30%)

GRC-Counterfeit

131

106

92

60

64

57

-46

-11

23

Albania (93%)

POL-Counterfeit

19

16

18

18

16

15

-6.3

-6.3

6

Ukraine (100%)

SVK-Counterfeit

26

14

6

14

5

15

7.1

200

6

Ukraine (100%)

ITA-Forged

14

5

5

6

5

11

120

120

4

Albania (36%)

TUR-Counterfeit

4

14

5

7

1

9

-36

800

4

Iran (56%)

ITA-Counterfeit

13

13

6

13

10

9

-31

-10

4

Senegal (22%)

DEU-Counterfeit

6

6

7

1

10

8

33

-20

3

Nigeria (25%)

FRA-Counterfeit

9

9

12

12

11

7

-22

-36

3

Senegal (29%)

GRC-Stolen blank

ISR-Forged

0

0

13

0

4

7

n.a.

75

3

Israel (100%)

ESP-Counterfeit

7

7

8

5

14

6

-14

-57

2

Morocco (33%)

Others

59

91

117

119

82

107

18

30

43

Ukraine (18%)

Other

50

50

61

63

59

60

20

2

2

Morocco (12%)

ITA-Counterfeit

12

10

9

25

14

13

30

-7.1

22

Morocco (23%)

ITA-Authentic

16

3

8

8

3

7

133

133

12

Bangladesh (71%)

0

FYR Macedonia (50%)

0

0

4

n.a.

n.a.

7

1

2

3

200

50

5

Morocco (67%)

3

1

0

2

-50

n.a.

3

Ukraine (100%)

2

0

0

0

2

0

n.a.

3

Syria (100%)

4

2

2

3

2

-50

-33

3

Albania (50%)

0

0

0

0

4

2

n.a.

-50

3

Algeria (50%)

0

1

0

0

1

2

100

100

3

Morocco (50%)

N.A.-Authentic

0

0

BGR-Counterfeit

4

1

UKR-Counterfeit

3

4

SYR-Counterfeit

0

GRC-Counterfeit

0

ESP-Authentic
FRA-Forged

0

0

0

0

0

2

n.a.

n.a.

3

Iraq (100%)

Others

15

25

39

26

32

21

-16

-34

35

Not specified (9.5%)

Total

2 792

2 474

2 718

2 711

2 869

2 510

1

-13

KWT-Counterfeit

Spanish data include detections on entry, exit and transit

37 of 40

Annex Table 12. R
 eturn decisions issued
Decisions issued by Member State and top ten nationalities

2015 Q1
2013

2014

Q4

Q1

Q2

% change on
Q3

Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Top Ten Nationalities
Albania

5 029

4 574

5 086

5 228

6 399

6 040

32

-5.6

9.5

Morocco

3 003

4 621

5 184

5 414

4 570

5 442

18

19

8.5

Syria

5 476

6 118

5 312

8 400

6 659

4 249

-31

-36

6.7

Pakistan

3 837

3 919

3 448

3 238

3 112

3 374

-14

8.4

5.3

Ukraine

2 376

1 817

2 164

3 180

3 865

3 260

79

-16

5.1

Kosovo*

1 140

1 137

865

743

924

2 674

135

189

4.2

Afghanistan

2 218

2 585

1 883

3 553

3 840

2 447

-5.3

-36

3.8

India

2 485

2 581

2 593

1 822

1 864

2 227

-14

19

3.5

Nigeria

1 945

2 042

1 820

1 658

1 615

1 741

-15

7.8

2.7

Algeria

2 100

2 342

1 836

1 879

1 733

1 632

-30

-5.8

2.6

Others

28 098

32 850

30 128

30 101

27 288

30 757

-6.4

13

48

Total

55 486

64 586

60 319

65 216

61 869

63 843

-1.2

3.2

100

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo
declaration of independence

Annex Table 13. Effective returns
Effective returns by Member State and top ten nationalities

2015 Q1
2013
Q4

2014
Q1

Q2

% change on
Q3

Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Top Ten Nationalities
Albania

6 330

4 514

6 225

6 639

9 064

5 730

27

-37

15

Ukraine

2 098

1 419

1 929

2 814

3 420

2 478

75

-28

6.6

Morocco

1 584

1 822

2 228

2 281

2 264

2 282

25

0.8

6.1

Pakistan

3 122

2 798

2 427

2 132

2 252

2 162

-23

-4

5.7

India

2 080

2 140

2 211

1 601

1 657

1 992

-6.9

20

5.3

Kosovo*

1 268

1 147

1 129

1 126

1 342

1 782

55

33

4.7

Serbia

1 465

1 636

1 701

1 442

1 464

1 721

5.2

18

4.6

Russian Federation

2 331

1 838

1 692

1 775

1 347

1 166

-37

-13

3.1

Nigeria

1 293

1 168

1 085

1 042

1 054

981

-16

-6.9

2.6

China

1 120

1 261

1 269

901

837

963

-24

15

2.6

Others

17 926

18 001

19 395

17 819

18 001

16 368

-9.1

-9.1

44

Total

40 617

37 744

41 291

39 572

42 702

37 625

-0.3

-12

100

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo
declaration of independence

38 of 40

fran · q1 2015

Annex Table 14. E
 ffective returns by type of return
People effectively returned to third countries by type of return and top ten nationalities

2015 Q1
2013
Q4

2014
Q1

Q2

% change on
Q3

Q4

Q1

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Type of Return
Forced

23 262

15 139

18 616

17 860

17 785

16 431

8.5

-7.6

44

20 662

12 055

13 156

12 823

12 384

11 032

-8.5

-11

29

1 957

2 802

4 698

4 667

4 847

4 861

73

0.3

13

643

282

762

370

554

538

91

-2.9

1.4

Voluntary

15 347

16 333

16 375

15 243

15 945

16 076

-1.6

0.8

43

Others

8 302

9 629

10 046

8 778

9 035

9 629

0

6.6

26

Enforced by Member State
Not specified
Enforced by Joint Operation

Not specified

3 245

3 436

3 703

3 836

4 108

3 393

-1.3

-17

9

IOM-assisted

3 800

3 268

2 626

2 629

2 802

3 054

-6.5

9

8

2 008

6 272

6 300

6 469

8 972

5 118

-18

-43

14

40 617

37 744

41 291

39 572

42 702

37 625

-0.3

-12.0

100

Not specified

Total
Top Ten Nationalities
Forced
Morocco
Albania

724

994

2 021

2 070

2 073

2 104

112

1.5

6

5 917

1 410

1 559

1 514

1 823

1 829

30

0.3

4.9

Serbia

828

635

1 051

697

781

741

17

-5.1

2.0

Kosovo*

625

577

699

683

749

731

27

-2.4

1.9

Pakistan

2 233

689

801

711

741

636

-7.7

-14

1.7

686

699

829

565

718

627

-10

-13

1.7

Algeria
India

646

516

654

570

574

612

19

6.6

1.6

Nigeria

702

627

594

647

620

602

-4

-2.9

1.6

Tunisia

752

680

802

873

693

579

-15

-16

1.5

China

458

384

462

439

422

441

15

4.5

1.2

9 691

7 928

9 144

9 091

8 591

7 529

-5

-12

20

23 262

15 139

18 616

17 860

17 785

16 431

9

-7.6

218

Others

Total Forced Returns
Voluntary
Ukraine

1 667

1 130

1 541

2 453

2 998

2 106

86

-30

6

India

1 428

1 554

1 517

999

1 041

1 364

-12

31

3.6

Kosovo*

643

569

430

443

593

1 051

85

77

2.8

Serbia

629

987

637

731

665

978

-0.9

47

2.6

1 911

1 367

1 223

1 356

1 072

905

-34

-16

2.4

852

1 145

890

788

684

814

-29

19

2.2

Russian Federation
Pakistan
Albania

373

430

439

521

623

648

51

4

1.7

China

643

811

783

443

354

494

-39

40

1.3

Bosnia and Herzegovina

153

272

281

245

214

446

64

108

1.2

Bangladesh

403

439

358

262

343

400

-8.9

17

1.1

6 645

7 629

8 276

7 002

7 358

6 870

-9.9

-6.6

18

Total Voluntary Returns

15 347

16 333

16 375

15 243

15 945

16 076

-1.6

0.8

234

Total

40 617

37 744

41 291

39 572

42 702

37 625

-0.3

-12

100

Others

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration
of independence.

39 of 40

Sources and Methods
For the data concerning detections at
the external borders, some of the border types are not applicable to all FRAN
Member States. This pertains to data
on all FRAN indicators since the data
are provided disaggregated by border
type. The definitions of detections at
land borders are therefore not applicable (excluding borders with non-Schengen principalities) for Belgium, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland and the UK. For Cyprus, the land
border refers to the Green Line demarcation with the area not under the effective
control of the government of the Republic
of Cyprus. For sea borders, the definitions
are not applicable for land-locked Member States including Austria, the Czech
Republic, Hungary, Luxembourg, Slovakia and Switzerland.
In addition, data on detections of illegal
border-crossing at land, air and sea BCPs
(1B) are not available for Iceland, Ireland
and Spain and in Greece (these detections
are included in the data for Indicator 1A).
Data for Norway only includes detections
of illegal border-crossing at land and sea
BCPs (1B), not between BCPs (1A).

40 of 40

Data on detections of illegal border-crossing between sea BCPs (1A) are not available for Ireland.
Data on apprehension (FRAN Indicator 2)
of facilitators is not available for Ireland.
For Italy, the data are not disaggregated
by border type, but are reported as total
apprehensions (not specified). Data for Italy and Norway also include the facilitation of illegal stay and work. For Romania,
the data include land intra-EU detections
on exit at the border with Hungary.
For the data concerning detections of illegal stay (FRAN Indicator 3), data on detections at exit are not available for Denmark,
Ireland, Italy, Spain and the UK.
Data on refusals of entry (FRAN Indicator 4) at the external EU borders are not
disaggregated by reason of refusal for Ireland and the UK. Refusals of entry at the
Spanish land borders at Ceuta and Melilla
(without the issuance of a refusal form) are
reported separately and are not included
in the presented FRAN data.
The data on applications for international
protection (FRAN Indicator 5) are not disaggregated by place of application (type

of border on entry or inland applications)
for Austria, the Czech Republic and Slovenia. For these countries, only the total
number of applications is reported. For
France, only asylum applications at the
external borders are reported, not inland
applications. For the UK, data reported for
applications at air BCPs also include applications at sea BCPs.
The data on return decisions issued (FRAN
Indicator 7A) are not available for Ireland,
France, The Netherlands and Sweden. The
data on effective returns (FRAN Indicator 7B) are not available for Ireland. In addition, the data of effective returns are not
disaggregated by return operation (voluntary and forced) for Spain. The data on
voluntary effective returns (FRAN Indicator 7A) are not disaggregated by type of
return operation (IOM-assisted and others) for Belgium, Czech Republic, Finland
and the Netherlands. The data on forced
effective returns (FRAN Indicator 7A) are
not disaggregated by type of return operation (enforced by Member Stated and
by Joint Operations) for Belgium, Finland,
Iceland and the Netherlands.

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

Risk Analysis Unit
11074/2015

