FRAN Quarterly
Quarter 2 • April–June 2015
2013

Q1 Q2
Q3 Q4

fran · q2 2015

FRAN Quarterly
Quarter 2 • April–June 2015

1 of 36

Frontex official publications fall into four main categories: risk analysis, training,
operations and research, each marked with a distinct graphic identifier. Risk analysis
publications bear a triangular symbol formed by an arrow drawing a triangle, with
a dot at the centre. Metaphorically, the arrow represents the cyclical nature of risk
analysis processes and its orientation towards an appropriate operational response.
The triangle is a symbol of ideal proportions and knowledge, reflecting the pursuit
of factual exactness, truth and exhaustive analysis. The dot at the centre represents
the intelligence factor and the focal point where information from diverse sources
converges to be processed, systematised and shared as analytical products. Thus,
Frontex risk analysis is meant to be at the centre and to form a reliable basis for its
operational activities.

European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu
Warsaw, September 2015
Risk Analysis Unit
Frontex reference number: 14851/2015
OPOCE Catalogue number TT-AF-15-002-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-36-9
ISSN 2363-0566
© Frontex, 2015
All rights reserved. Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.

DISCLAIMERS
This is a Frontex staff working document. This publication or its contents do not imply
the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of Frontex concerning the legal
status of any country, territory or city or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation
of its frontiers or boundaries. All charts included in this report are the sole property of
Frontex and any unauthorised use is prohibited.
Throughout the report, references to Kosovo* are marked with an asterisk to indicate
that this designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with
UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The FRAN Quarterly has been prepared by the Frontex Risk Analysis Unit. During the
course of developing this product, many colleagues at Frontex and outside contributed
to it and their assistance is hereby acknowledged with gratitude.

2 of 36

fran · q2 2015

Table of contents

Introduction #5
Methodology #6
I. Situational overview #7
FRAN indicators #7
Surveillance #8
Border checks #10
Fraudulent documents #12
Situation in the EU #14
II. Featured risk analyses #16
Record number of migrants arriving on Lesbos, Chios and Samos #16
Record number of Afghan and Syrian migrants trying to reach the EU from Serbia #18
Human trafficking and labour exploitation on merchant vessels #20
Statistical annex #23

3 of 36

List of abbreviations used
BCP
border crossing point
CIRCA
Communication and Information Resource Centre Administrator
EDF-RAN
European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network
EU
European Union
EUR
euro
FAS
Faroe Islands
FIS
French International Ship Register
FOC
flag of convenience
FRAN
Frontex Risk Analysis Network
Frontex	European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States
of the European Union
GBP
British pound
GIS
German International Ship Register
ICJ
International Court of Justice
ID
identity document
ICONet
Information and Coordination Network for Member States’ Migration Management Services
ITF
International Transport Workers’ Federation
ILO
International Labour Organization
JORA
Joint Operations Reporting Application
n.a.
not available
Q/Qtr
quarter of the year
RAU
Frontex Risk Analysis Unit
SAC
Schengen Associated Country
SIS
Schengen Information System
UNSCR
United Nations Security Council Resolution
UK
United Kingdom
USA
United States of America
VIS
Visa Information System

4 of 36

fran · q2 2015

Introduction

FRAN Quarterly reports are prepared by
the Frontex Risk Analysis Unit and provide
a regular overview of irregular migration
at the EU external borders, based on the
irregular migration data exchanged among
Member State border-control authorities
within the cooperative framework of the
Frontex Risk Analysis Network (FRAN)
and its subsidiary, the European Union
Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network
(EDF-RAN).
The main purpose of the FRAN Quarterlies is to provide:
1.	feedback to the FRAN community in
the context of information exchange;
2.	a periodic update to the situational picture of irregular migration at EU level;
and
3.	material for constructive discussion on
reporting protocols and related trends
and patterns.
This report is intended to simultaneously
serve two objectives: first – to provide a
clear summary of the situation at the external border of the EU, and second – to
serve as an archive for future reference
and comparative analyses.
Harmonising complex, multi-source migration data among Frontex and Member
States is an ongoing process. Therefore,

some of the more detailed data and trends
in this report should be interpreted with
caution and, where possible, cross-referenced with information from other
sources. The statistics should be understood in the context of the different levels of passenger flows passing through
different border sections, the activities
of Member State border-control authorities undertaken to secure different border sections and widespread variation in
reporting and data-collection practices.
FRAN members and Member State risk
analysis experts and border-control authorities are considered the primary customers of these reports. In addition to
the discussions taking place during FRAN
meetings, Member State experts are invited and actively encouraged to examine
and comment upon the data and analyses
presented here. Despite all efforts of the
Frontex Risk Analysis Unit and Member
State experts involved in data exchange
and analyses, it is conceivable that minor
errors will occur in these reports due to
very challenging timelines and the growing volume and complexity of the data and
other information exchanged within the
FRAN community.
Starting with the previous issue, the Frontex Risk Analysis Unit has implemented a

number of changes to present the analysis of migration related indicators in the
FRAN Quarterly in a more concise and focused way. The first part provides a Situational Overview, broken down by main
areas of work of border control authorities and police activities related to irregular migration.
n Surveillance, describing and analysing
trends in detections of illegal bordercrossing between BCPs;
n Border checks, describing detections
reported during checks at BCPs (people hiding in vehicles or refused entry);
n Fraudulent documents, describing
trends and pattern related to document fraud at the border and in the EU;
n Situation in the EU, examining developments related to persons applying
for asylum and those detected staying illegally, facilitators, return decisions and effective returns.
The second thematic part of the report
consists of up to five featured analyses,
examining trends and patterns of irregular migration in a more comprehensive
manner. Eventually it is hoped that some
of the featured analysis topics would be
developed by external contributors (FRAN
members, EU agencies and international
institutions).

5 of 36

Methodology

The current 28th issue of the FRAN Quarterly is a comparative analysis of FRAN
data collected between April and June
2015 and exchanged between 31 Member
State border-control authorities within
the framework of the Frontex Risk Analysis Network (FRAN). The report presents
the results of statistical analysis of quarterly changes of eight irregular-migration
indicators and one asylum indicator, aggregated at the level of the event. Analytical reports exchanged by Member States
were also used for interpretative purposes
and to provide qualitative information, as
were other available sources of information, such as Frontex Joint Operations.
Precise definitions of Indicators 1 to 6,
aimed at harmonising the data exchanged
at EU level, were presented in the annexes
of the Q1 and Q2 reports in 2009 and so
are not repeated here.
The FRAN data-exchange has been in
place since September 2008. Data are
exchanged through the ICONet Internet
platform, an interest group of the European Commission’s CIRCA server. Member
State monthly data are based on a country template prepared by the Frontex Risk
Analysis Unit. The deadline for submitting
data for each month is the 25th day of the
subsequent month, with the exception of
the end-of-year data, which are requested
by 15 January each year. For this 28th issue of the FRAN Quarterly, the target for
Member States to upload the monthly
data was thus 25 July 2015. In principle,
data submitted subsequent to this date
will be reflected in the next FRAN Quarterly, except in cases where clarification
is needed in order to proceed with comprehensive analysis.

6 of 36

In January 2012, the European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network (EDFRAN) was formed as a specialist forum to
oversee the exchange and analyses of detections of document fraud at the external borders and on all international flights.
At the beginning of 2014, Member States
started to regularly collect quantitative
information on indicators related to secondary movements. In addition, in July
2014, Frontex organised a workshop for
Member State experts to gather their expertise and analyse available data. Their
input was essential for the analysis of intra-EU/Schengen secondary movements
of undocumented migrants.
External borders refer to the borders between Member States and third countries.
The borders between the Schengen Associated Countries (Liechtenstein, Norway, Iceland and Switzerland) and third
countries are also considered as external
borders. The borders between the Schengen Associated Countries and Schengen
Member States are considered as internal borders. For the indicators on detections of facilitators, illegal stay and asylum,
statistics are also reported for detections
at the land borders between Schengen
Member States and Schengen candidates
(Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus and Romania)
or non-Schengen Member States (the UK
and Ireland), so that a total for EU Member
States and Schengen Associated Countries
as a whole can be presented. It was not
possible to make this distinction for air
and sea borders because Member States
do not habitually differentiate between
extra-EU and intra-EU air and sea connections but tend to aggregate data for
all arrivals.

When data are examined at the level of
third-country nationalities, a large percentage usually falls under categories of
‘Other (not specified)’ or ‘Unknown’. It is
expected that the percentage reported
under these categories will decrease
with time as Member States improve
the quality and speed of their identification, data collection and reporting practices: nationalities are often reported
as ‘Unknown’ if an individual’s nationality cannot be established before reports
are submitted.
Both primary data sources, such as interviews with irregular migrants, and secondary data sources, such as reports of
intelligence analysts, daily reports of deployed officers and analytical products
were used to provide an exhaustive overview of the situation at the external borders of the EU. Additionally, open-source
data were researched as background information for the present analysis.

Acknowledgements
The Frontex Risk Analysis Unit would like
to express its gratitude to all FRAN and
EDF-RAN members and their associates
in Member State statistical, migration and
document-fraud units who collect, aggregate and exchange monthly data, also to
the analysts who compile analytical reports, on which much of the detailed analyses presented here are based.

fran · q2 2015

I. Situational overview

FRAN indicators

Latest situation

Q2 2015
Reported cases
Q2 2014
(dotted circles)

624

2 315

2 641

27 135

41 291

60 319

100 938

68 867

113 329

Q2 2015

804

2 035

3 162

28 189

42 741

72 168

141 036

170 155

187 437

IBC-1B

EDF

FAC-2

REF-4

Detections
of illegal
bordercrossing
at BCPs

Detections Detections
of
of
fraudulent facilitators
document
users

(solid circles)

While the migratory pressure at the EU’s
external borders in general has further increased, its distribution among particular
border sections has also been shifting. For
instance, compared to other routes, the
share of detections of illegal border-crossing detected at the EU external borders
with Turkey has substantially increased
and reached the highest level in FRAN data
collection history. The increase was mostly
reported from the Eastern Aegean Sea,
where the majority of migrants were Syrian and Afghan nationals. Lesbos, Chios and
Kos were among the most targeted islands.
Also irregular migration on the Western
Balkan route has reached its highest level
since Frontex started its data collection. After a substantial decline in detections of illegal border-crossing in the Western Balkans
in March 2015 (which was mainly caused
by fewer Kosovo* migrants on their way to
Western Europe), irregular migration flow

RET-7A

ILL-3

IBC-1A

FRAN ASY-5

Returns
(effective)

Returns
(decisions)

Detections
of persons
staying illegally

Detections of illegal
border-crossing
between BCPs

Asylum applications
reported to FRAN

composed of Afghans, Syrians, Pakistanis and
other non-regional nationalities has reached
new record levels by June 2015. Subsequent to
the reporting period, the level of irregular migration on the Western Balkan route hit new records
in two consecutive months (July and August).
After the winter season, migratory flows
across the Central Mediterranean Sea have
gained momentum, exceeding the already
high number of detections reported during
the second quarter of 2014. The number of
Eritrean migrants returned to the same level
as one year ago, while the number of Syrians
detected in the Central Mediterranean represented only around one-third of the level
reported back in Q2 2014.
In the reporting period, detections of illegal stay were almost 40% higher than during the same quarter of 2014 and amounted
to more than 140 000 persons reported
in the EU/Schengen area, i.e. the highest
number of detections of illegal stay since
FRAN data collection began in 2007. Most
persons detected for illegal stay were Syrians, Afghans and Eritreans. This composition of nationalities suggests that by and
large they had previously entered the EU
crossing the border illegally.
In line with the larger number of migrants
illegally arriving in the EU, the figure related
to detections of facilitators of irregular migration has also reached the highest level
since FRAN data collection began. In Q2
2015, their number was around 20% higher
than in Q1 2015. Among other reasons, this
was due to more Syrian, Serb, and Albanian facilitators detected by Member States.

Trend
Monthly trends, January 2011 to June 2015
Reported cases

FRAN
ASY-5

50 000

IBC-1A
ILL-3
RET-7A
RET-7B

10 000

REF-4

FAC-2

1 000

EDF
IBC-1B

1 00

10
2011

2012

2013

7 of 36

Q2 2015

In Q2 2015, all indicators showed increasing
trends compared with the situation a year
ago. Compared with Q2 2014, detections
of illegal border-crossing at the external
borders increased by more than 140% and
the number of asylum applicants – by two
thirds. In relation to the previous quarter all
indicators except for illegal border-crossing
at BCPs went up, which was traditionally expected after the winter months. Furthermore, five important indicators (asylum,
apprehended facilitators, detections of illegal border-crossing between BCPs, illegal stay and effective returns) reached their
highest ever recorded levels since data collection for the respective indicators began.

RET-7B

Q2 2014

Refusals
of entry

2014 2015

Featured
Risk Analyses
I.
Situational
overview
Eastern borders
route

Surveillance

506
(222)

Routes
Black Sea
route

Western
Balkan route

Detections of illegal bordercrossing at the EU’s external
borders, Q2 2015

0

34 559

(65)

(3 011)

170 155

Circular route from
Albania to Greece

(68 867)

2 727

Number in parenthesis is for Q2 2014

(2 142)

Western
Mediterranean route

3 890
(1 496)

Central
Mediterranean
route

60 179

Western
African route

Eastern
Mediterranean
route

68 178
(8 767)

(53 054)

114
(107)

FRAN data for the period between April
and June 2015 shows an over twofold increase in overall detections of illegal border-crossing compared to the same period
of 2014. With 170 155 detections in Q2 2015,
Member States reported the highest number of illegal border-crossings since FRAN
data collection began in 2007, clearly exceeding the previous record of more than
112 000 irregular migrants reported in Q3
2014.

ern Aegean islands. Around 58% of the
irregular migrants were of Syrian nationality. The total number of Afghans also
increased significantly, but their share of
about a quarter of all detections has remained at the same level as during the
previous 12 months.

Strong increase in irregular migration
on the Eastern Mediterranean route

Many irregular migrants who had arrived
in Greece or Bulgaria decided to continue
their journey across Western Balkan countries towards Western and Northern Europe. The numbers of persons detected
illegally crossing the EU’s external border
from Serbia increased 12-fold compared
with the same period in 2014 and by 5%
compared to the last quarter, reaching the
highest level since FRAN data collection
began in 2007. Almost all apprehensions
were reported by Hungary.

In the second quarter of 2015, the number of irregular migrants detected on the
Eastern Mediterranean route reached unprecedented levels. A record number of
68 178 illegal border-crossings were reported from the EU’s external borders
with Turkey, which represents an increase
of over 380% compared with the previous quarter and more than 670% in relation to the same period of 2014. As much
as 98% of the illegal border-crossings on
this route were reported from the East-

8 of 36

Influx of migrants from Turkey leads
to secondary movements across the
Western Balkans

In contrast to last winter, the share of migrants from Kosovo* and other Western

Balkan countries has shrunk to below 3%
of all irregular migrants detected on this
route. International cooperation and the
common efforts of Member States, Serbia and Kosovo* to prevent large groups
of people from leaving the region and migrating to the EU has shown to be effective. On the other hand, already in June,
the increase in non-regional migrants has
by far exceeded the flow of persons from
Kosovo* recorded during the first quarter of 2015.
With 40% and 30%, Afghans and Syrians
were the most detected nationalities of
migrants detected on the Western Balkan
route. Compared with the same period of
2014, the number of Syrians reported on
this route has increased 20-fold, while the
number of detected Afghans was 17 times
higher than in Q2 2014. Notably, compared to one year ago, also the number
of sub-Saharan Africans detected on this
route has seen a sixfold increase to almost
1 900 detections during the reporting period, with Congolese and Cameroonians
ranking top among African nationalities.

fran · q2 2015

Nationalities

Trend

Main nationalities
of illegal border-crossers, April–June 2015

Quarterly detections of illegal bordercrossing, 2014–2015
Number
Western
Balkan

80 000
60 000
40 000

Western
Mediterranean

Central
Mediterranean
route

20 000

Kosovo*
Central
Mediterranean

Albania

Eastern
Mediterranean

Syria
Afghanistan

40 000
Western
Balkan
route

20 000

60 000
Eritrea

40 000
Eastern
Mediterranean
route

20 000

Somalia
Nigeria

Q1 Q2Q3Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3Q4 Q1 Q2

2 0 1 3

2 0 1 4 2 0 1 5

Detection numbers in the Central Mediterranean exceed the exceptional levels of Q2 2014
With the end of the winter season, migratory flows across the Central Mediterranean Sea have gained momentum,
exceeding the already high number of
detections reported during the second
quarter of 2014 (+13%). Compared to the
previous quarter, the number of illegal border-crossings reported by Italy and Malta
has increased almost sixfold. Compared to
the second quarter of 2014, there were a
number of changes in the proportion of
nationalities.
On the one hand, the number of Syrians
detected in the Central Mediterranean
only represented around one-third of
the level reported one year ago. For Syrians, the journey to Libya and Italy has
become less attractive than the cheaper
and less dangerous Eastern Mediterranean route.

Unspecified
sub-Saharan nationals

On the other hand, the number of detected
sub-Saharan Africans was about 20% percent higher than in the same period of
2014. In particular, Nigerians were reported
in significantly higher numbers. Moreover,
irregular migrants from the Horn of Africa, in particular Eritreans, but increasingly also Somalis and Ethiopians, tried to
cross the Central Mediterranean in higher
numbers than one year ago.
Steady increase in detections of
irregular migration between Morocco
and Spain
Although migration on the Western Mediterranean route remains relatively low,
detections of illegal border-crossing have
increased compared with both the previous quarter and the second quarter of
2014. There were 3 890 detections in the
second quarter of 2015 – almost 40% more
than during the previous quarter and 160%
more than one year ago – which was the
highest level of any previous second quarter since FRAN data collection began.

The fastest increase was reported in the
case of Syrian nationals, whose detections surged during the reporting period,
accounting for over 50% of all detections
on this route. After substantial increases
in the migration pressure at the land borders of Ceuta and Melilla, the sea route
has also gained more significance, with
the number of detections roughly twice
as high as in the previous quarter and the
corresponding period last year. Large increases in detections were especially reported near the Spanish city of Almeria.
Increased detections at eastern border
Detections of illegal crossings of the eastern external borders of the EU doubled
compared to both the previous quarter
and the second quarter of 2014. However, in comparison with other routes,
the migration pressure at these border
sections remains at a relatively low level
of around 500 detections. The most significant rise was reported from the border with Ukraine.

9 of 36

Featured
Risk Analyses
I.
Situational
overview

Border checks
Clandestine entries Refusals of entry
Detections of illegal border-crossing
at BCPs (people hiding in vehicles), Q2 2015
Total:

804 (624)

Number in parenthesis is for Q2 2014

Refusals per border type, Q2 2015
(only values higher than 500 are stipulated)

Land ( )
Sea ( )

Total:

28 189 (27 135)

Number in parenthesis is for Q2 2014

Air

Poland

United
Kingdom

Lithuania

Germany

HungarySerbia

Croatia

France

Hungary

Italy

BulgariaTurkey

Italy

Spain

Greece

SpainMorocco

Trend of the total
Land

Long-term increase in migrants
entering the EU hidden in lorries,
buses and trains
In the second quarter of 2015, the total
number of detections of migrants trying
to enter the EU through BCPs clandestinely
was about one-third higher than one year
before, but at the same time around 25%
lower than during the peak of the previous quarter. 804 persons attempted to
cross the external borders of the EU hiding in lorries or trains between April and
June 2015. Again, most clandestine irregular migrants were reported from SouthEast Europe, mainly attempting to enter
the EU from Turkey.
Thus, most detections of clandestine entry (almost 90%) were once again reported
by Bulgaria, through which a large share
of the migratory flow transiting Turkey is
channelled. The Bulgarian BCPs most affected by clandestine entries were Kapitan

10 of 36

Sea

Air

Q2 2014

14 375

1 242

11 518

Q2 2015

15 439

1 318

11 432

Andreevo and Lesovo. Illegal border-crossing through BCPs was an option used by
migrants who had previously attempted
to cross the green border from Turkey to
Greece or Bulgaria unsuccessfully or had
been deterred by these countries’ intensified police operations and surveillance
of their external EU borders.
Moreover, many migrants decided to attempt a clandestine entry to the EU due
to the fact that an illegal crossing of the
Greek border river Evros was made difficult by the seasonal high tide at the beginning of the reporting period. The number
of persons detected for clandestine entry
is likely to stay at the current high level
or even to rise in the future, as Bulgaria
also announced its plans to extend the
existing technical obstacle along its border to Turkey.

Most refusals of entry issued to
Ukrainian nationals
In Q2 2015, 28 189 refusals of entry at the
EU external borders were reported, which
is not a significantly higher number than
both during the previous quarter and in
the same period last year. A substantial
increase of around 60% in relation to Q2
2014 was observed for refusals issued to
Ukrainian nationals, 80% of whom were
refused at the Polish border. The number of refused Ukrainians also increased
at the Romanian, Slovakian, British and
Lithuanian external borders. In most cases
Ukrainians were not let into the EU because they could not present appropriate
documentation justifying the purpose and
conditions of stay.
Notably, changes in the number of refusals issued appear to be an early indicator
for detections of illegal stay of Ukrainians
in Poland. Since 2014, hikes in the num-

fran · q2 2015

Illegal stayers
on exit
Total:

15 405 (11 298)

Netherlands
712

Number in parenthesis is for Q2 2014

Germany
4 295

Number of detections, Q2 2015

Poland
1 864

(only values higher than 300 are stipulated)
500

10-100

France
2 103

1-10

Switzerland
494

Slovenia
301

Type of border section:
Land

Sea

Hungary
1 920

Air

no data

Greece
977

bers of refusal have been followed by increased detections of illegal stay with a
1–2 month delay.
The number of refusals issued to Albanians rose by more than 10% compared to
the last quarter, especially at the Greek
and Hungarian borders. The majority of
Albanian nationals was refused because
of an alert existing in the SIS or a national
register. The increasing issuance of refusals to Albanian nationals is clearly in line
with a general upward trend of Albanian
migration, which is also reflected in an increasing number of asylum applications
and detections of illegal stay. Refusals
were also issued to a higher number of
other nationals from the region, including
Bosnian and Turkish citizens, especially
by Croatia and Bulgaria/Greece, respectively. The stated reason for refusal was
mainly a lack of appropriate documentation justifying the purpose and conditions of stay.

Most illegal stayers on exit detected
at German airports
During the reporting period, more than
15 400 persons were detected on exit
from the EU or Schengen area without
a permission to stay. The current level
represents an increase of around 20%
compared to last quarter. The FRAN data
collection does not cover the reason for
illegal stay, so the cases of illegal stay
detected on exit include migrants who
had either crossed the border to the EU/
Schengen Associated Countries illegally,
abused legal channels, or initially entered
the EU/Schengen Associated Countries
legally but no longer fulfilled the conditions of stay or residence.
In Q2 2015, most detections of illegal stay
were related to persons leaving the EU
through German airports. Compared to
the same period in 2014, the reported
number increased by more than one-

Cyprus
301

third. The increase was to a very large
extent caused by Kosovo* citizens trying
to leave through German airports without a residence permit or a valid visa.
In the whole EU/Schengen area, almost
1 100 illegal stayers from Kosovo* were
detected on exit, indicating a significant
return flow after the winter season of
those who had previously entered the
EU illegally.
The highest number of detections of illegal stay on exit was related to Ukrainian
nationals. A large majority of the almost
2 500 Ukrainians was reported from external land BCPs in Poland, Hungary and
Slovakia. The comparably low number
of illegal border-crossings of Ukrainians
indicates that most Ukrainian irregular
migrants had entered the EU legally and
then overstayed, or had entered the EU
through the abuse of legal means, such
as fraudulently obtained work or business visas.

11 of 36

Featured
Risk Analyses
I.
Situational
overview

Fraudulent documents
Detections
(at external and internal borders)
363

Poland

Number of detected
fraudulent documents
per Member State,
Q2 2015

France

Direction:
exit
entry
Spain

150

50

Italy

10

Increased document fraud detections
on intra-EU movements
In Q2 2015, the overall number of document fraud cases reported in the EDF-RAN
was only slightly higher than last quarter, reaching 6 054 detected documents.
Compared to the same period of last year,
however, detections decreased by 8%. This
was mainly due to a substantial decrease
in detections on entry from third countries,
but fewer cases of document fraud were
also reported on other travel directions.
On intra-Schengen flights, the number of
detections decreased from over 2 000 in
Q2 2014 to below 1 500 in Q2 2015, after a
winter low of just under 1 000 in Q1 2014.
The current decrease in false document
use to board intra-Schengen flights compared with one year ago was primarily re-

12 of 36

lated to fewer Eritreans detected with false
documents on flights from Italy to northern Europe. During Q2 2014, Member States
reported as many as 751 false documents
presented by Eritrean nationals who had
previously crossed the external borders illegally and used fraudulent documents on
secondary movements to their final destinations. During the reporting period, this
number fell to 40 detections. A similar reduction can also be seen for Somali nationals. Fraudsters of both nationalities
were mainly detected with Italian travel
documents.
The number of document fraud detections
made on movements from the Schengen
area to the Common Travel Area consisting of the UK and Ireland were more than
88% higher than one year ago, reaching
1 134 cases. Most cases were related to Al-

banians attempting to reach the UK from
the Italian airports mainly using Italian and
Greek counterfeit travel documents. The
number of Albanian and Ukrainian nationals presenting false documents travelling from France to the UK increased more
than three- and sevenfold, respectively,
compared to Q2 2014, together resulting
in around 100 cases reported in Q2 2015.
On entry from third countries,
Istanbul top departure airport again
In the second quarter of 2015, the number of detections of document fraud on
arrival in the EU/Schengen Associated
Countries from third countries substantially decreased, falling by 15% compared
to the same period in 2014. At EU level, of
the 99 nationalities detected using fraudulent documents to illegally enter the EU

fran · q2 2015

Nationality of users
Claimed nationality of persons detected
with fraudulent documents, Q2 2015

Number

130

10

(only highest values are stipulated)

Trend between Q2 2014 and Q2 2015:
higher than 50%
between 50% and −50%
lower than −50%
364
Ukraine

267
Not specified

162
Morocco

179
Syria

or Schengen area from a third county, the
most commonly detected were Ukrainians
(364), Syrians (197) and Moroccans (181).
As in the previous months, most detections were reported from air routes. At
almost 200 detections, the number of detections of document fraud from Istanbul
remained at the same level as in the previous quarter.
Syrian nationals remained the most prevalent nationality using fraudulent documents at the air border, although the
number of related detections on flights
from third countries was only half as high
as during the same period of 2014 (135).
In Q2 2015, the embarkation country with
the largest increase in detections compared to previous quarters was the Do-

minican Republic. Spain reported 80% of
the nearly 100 cases of document fraud,
stating the assumed nationalities of most
of the document bearers as unknown, the
Dominican Republic or Iraq.
At land borders, most detections of
document fraud from Morocco and
Ukraine
As regarding land routes, the most targeted border section was that between
Ukraine and Poland. The detected number of Ukrainians who attempted to cross
the external land borders to the EU with
fraudulent documents was more than two
times as high as one year ago. Most cases
were related to fraudulently obtained Polish visas presented at the BCPs at the Polish-Ukrainian section.

The number of fraudulently obtained visas
presented at this border, however, might
decrease in the long term, due to the recent launch of the VIS in Ukraine and legislative changes in Poland effective as of
June 2015, which introduced a new template for invitations generated and stored
in a central national registry (confirming
the purpose of travel and justifying visa
issuance).
Between Morocco and Spain, detections of
document fraud decreased by nearly one
third compared to both one Q2 2014 and
Q1 2015. Syrian and Moroccan impostors,
of whom relatively large numbers were
detected during the last twelve months,
have returned to far lower levels.

13 of 36

Featured
Risk Analyses
I.
Situational
overview

Situation in the EU
Illegal stayers
Number of detected cases, Q2 2015

2 500

260

Facilitators
Number of detected persons, Q2 2015
compared with Q2 2014
Spain

2014 Q2

500

2015 Q2

France
Italy
Greece
Hungary

In Q2 2015, detections of illegal stay were
almost 40% higher than during the same
quarter of 2014 and amounted to more
than 140 000 persons reported in the EU/
Schengen area. This is the highest number of detections of illegal stay since FRAN
data collection began in 2007. Most persons detected for illegal stay were from
Syria, Afghanistan and Eritrea. As in Q4
2014, Germany, Sweden and France were
the top countries for detections of illegal
stay, reporting almost 50% percent of the
total EU/SAC number, followed by Spain
and Austria.
This particularly large number of detections is a consequence of the high migration pressure on almost all routes in the
beginning of the summer season. Thus,
most cases of illegal stay are indeed related to irregular intra-Schengen movements, which follow an illegal crossing of
the EU external borders or a prior asylum application in another Member State.

14 of 36

Most detections of illegal stay and
asylum applications concentrated on
top-reporting Member States
In Q2 2015, the number of detected undocumented Syrian nationals increased
compared to last quarter and the same
period of 2014, exceeding 23 000 detections. Most of these detections were made
in Germany, leading to a number almost
three times as high as one year ago. Detections almost tripled also in Greece, but
on a lower level. The rate of growth shows
to be most extreme in Hungary, where
number of Syrian nationals detected for
illegal stay increased more than 100 in Q2
2014 to more than 2 000 during the reporting period.
Also some of the lower ranking countries
reported significant increases related to
this nationality. An 16-fold increase to
more than 200 detections was reported
from the Czech Republic and a fourfold
increase to over 120 detections from Ro-

mania. This trend may point to a future
evolution of alternative intra-Schengen
migration routes, avoiding increased police checks and cooperation along the traditional Western Balkans route and on its
continuation across Hungary, Austria to
Western European countries.
Subsequent to the reporting period, national police authorities reported several
cases of overloaded vehicle transporting far too large migrant groups clandestinely. In mid-July, Austrian police freed
54 migrants from a van coming from the
Serbian-Hungarian border. Several passengers were in a serious physical condition and needed medical assistance after
the six-hour journey.
On 27 August, Austria reported a tragic
case involving 71 people who suffocated
due to a lack of oxygen in the storage
space of an abandoned cooling van coming from Hungary.

Russian Federation

fran · q2 2015

Ukraine
Serbia
Kosovo

Russian Federation

Albania

Georgia
China

Tunisia
Morocco

Algeria

Ukraine
Serbia
Kosovo
Albania

Pakistan

Georgia

India
China

Bangladesh

Tunisia
Morocco

Returns

Algeria

Pakistan

Nationality of returned people, Q2 2015
India

Number

Bangladesh

Member States
which have sent data

Nigeria
4 000

1 000

Decisions
vs. Effective
returns
Nationality
of returned
people, Q2
2015

Unspecified
Nigeria

Asylum applications on the highest
Unspecified
level of any previous second quarter
In Q2 2015, Member States reported more
than 187 000 asylum applications, which is
the highest number of any previous quarter since FRAN data collection began in
2007 and 65% more than during the same
period of 2014. Two-thirds submitted their
application in the top-three countries Germany, Hungary and Sweden. Hungary was
also the country where the asylum indicator grew fastest (12-fold compared to
Q2 2014). On the other hand, figures from
Sweden were 16% lower than one year ago,
when it still was the second-ranking asylum destination.
Syrians were again the top-ranking asylum nationality in the EU/Schengen area
with more than 37 000 applications in the
reporting period, which is by two thirds
more than in Q2 2014. Afghan and Iraqi
nationals submitted the highest number
of asylum applications (23 408 and 10 340
respectively) since FRAN data collection
began, being in line with the large migration flows of these nationalities along the
Eastern Mediterranean and Western Balkans routes. Although not reaching last
year’s peak level, also Eritreans resumed

Number Decisions 72 168 (60 319)Member States
which have sent data

Effective 42 741 (41 291)
returns
4 000 1 000

Decisions vs. Effective returns

to apply for asylum in higher numbers ing the same period of 2014. In general,
168 (60 319)
again, reaching almost 12 000 in Q2Decisions
2015. 72
the
increase was especially due to more
Effective 42 741 (41 291)
Albanian
nationals returned by Greece,
returns
While the record number of almost more Ukrainian nationals returned by
50 000 asylum applications of persons Poland and more persons from Kosovo*
from Kosovo* in Q1 2015 has returned to returned by Germany. EU/SAC-wide, the
lower levels during the reporting period, number of effectively returned persons
the number of Albanian nationals apply- from Kosovo* has increased from 1 782
ing for asylum has been more than five in Q1 2015 to more than 3 396 in the retimes higher than during the same period porting period.
of 2014 and reached 17 197 reported asylum applications. Compared to one year Record number of arrested
ago, the total number of asylum appli- facilitators
cants from the Western Balkans, 87% of
which were submitted in Germany, has Figures related to detections of facilitamore than tripled.
tors of irregular migration have been on
the highest level since FRAN data collecNumber of effective returns
tion began in 2007. In Q2 2015, 3 162 faat the same level as in 2014
cilitators were apprehended, around 20%
more than in Q1 2015. Most were of MoIn Q2 2015, Member State authorities is- roccan, Spanish and Albanian nationalsued 72 168 decisions to third country na- ity. Intensified investigations of Spanish
tionals with an obligation to leave the law enforcement authorities in the acEU following an administrative or judi- tivities of criminal networks smuggling
cial decision. This is 13% more than the in large numbers of migrants from Morocco
the previous quarter and 20% more than were apparently effective and resulted in
one year ago.
an increased number of arrests. Also in
Italy, the number of arrested facilitators
During the reporting period, almost has been far above the average of previ43 000 effective returns took place, ous reporting periods. The majority of apwhich is 13% more than in the previous prehensions in Italy were related to Italian
quarter, and almost the same level as dur- and Eritrean nationals.

15 of 36

II. Featured risk analyses

Eastern Mediterranean route

Record number of
migrants arriving on
Lesbos, Chios and Samos
The way across the EU external borders
from Turkey has been the irregular migratory route with strongest increase
in migrant detections compared to one
year ago. More than 65 000 illegal border-crossings were reported by Bulgaria
and Greece during the reporting period,
which represents a 690% increase in relation to the second quarter of 2014. Subsequent to the reporting period, in July and
August, almost 50 000 and 100 000 migrants,
respectively, were reported from the Eastern
Mediterranean route.

n Increase caused by higher
numbers of claimed Syrian
and Afghan migrants
n Lack of reception capacity
due to the extremely high
number of arrivals in Greece

The rise has been particularly significant
in the Eastern Aegean Sea. The proportion of irregular migrants departing from
the Turkish coast in contrast to illegal land
border-crossings has never been higher
since FRAN data collection began: 97% of
all irregular migrants at the Eastern Mediterranean route have been detected at or
near one of the Greek islands.

© Frontex

The increase has mainly been caused by
higher numbers of Syrian and Afghan
migrants trying to reach the EU. Before
reaching the EU borders, many migrants
have been waiting in Izmir for an opportunity to cross over to Greece.

Figure 1. Migrants having arrived on Lesbos

16 of 36

Around a third of the migrants detected
in the Eastern Aegean were detected on
land, on the Greek islands, the other twothirds at sea, close to the Greek maritime
border. The migrants mostly used inflatable boats to reach Greek land. A detailed
look at the situation in the Eastern Aegean
shows that each of the most targeted islands distinguish themselves from each
other in terms of the migrant profiles.
The island with the largest increase in irregular migration since the beginning of

the year has clearly been Lesbos. The island, located in the north-eastern Aegean
Sea, is the third largest Greek Island and
has a population of around 86 000 inhabitants. In the second quarter of 2015, around
every fifth migrant having reached the European Union illegally has arrived through
Lesbos. Of all Pakistani irregular migrants
that have arrived in the EU illegally in Q2
2015, even more than 40% have reached
the EU through the island.
In total, 29 016 irregular migrants have
been reported from Lesbos during the reporting period compared to 5 165 in the
previous quarter and 2 138 in during the
same period of 2014. As long as the migratory pressure remains on this high level,
the detention centre in Lesbos functions
as a reception centre where medical assistance, registration and fingerprinting for
the Eurodac system takes place.
Lesbos is not only targeted by an increasing
number of Syrian migrants, also the share
of Afghan and Pakistani migrants is higher
than on any other island in the Aegean
sea. The migrant nationalities distinguish
themselves from each other in their routes
towards Lesbos. Most Afghan migrants arrive directly from Istanbul or via Canakkale at departure areas north of Lesbos.
As opposed to Afghans, most Syrian and
other migrants arrive from Izmir, which is
the main hub for these nationalities coming from Istanbul or from Mersin.
The emergence of Izmir as a migrant hub
also had a significant effect on Chios, the
fifth-largest Greek island with a population of more than 50 000 inhabitants.
During the reporting period, the level of
detections of irregular migration was 14

fran · q2 2015

Figure 2. Islands in the Eastern Aegean Sea most targeted by irregular migrants coming from Turkey in Q2 2015
98

Alexandroupolis LCC

43

Limnos

Leros

2 426

59

62

185

12 651

47

174
609

Lesbos
10 537

Chios
8 286

346

Kalymnos

969

6 148

81

Kos
365
1 237

1 149

Samos
881
704

239
1 295
1 650

Detections of illegal border-crossing,
by main migrants’ nationalities

51

1 500

790

SYR
AFG
IRQ

120

Symi

Karpathos
221

SOM

Chania

55

50

Rhodes

45

64

Source: JORA data as of 23 July 2015

Unlike in Chios, the majority of the apprehensions in Kos took place at sea. Also Kos
has seen an enormous growth in migration pressure. The number of detected migrants grew from 149 one year ago to 8 568
during the reporting period, of which 73%
were Syrians and 14% Afghans.

(around eight hours) and then taken by
minibuses to rural coastal areas.
Not only on the three abovementioned islands, Greece lacks reception capacity due
to the extremely high number of arrivals.
As a rule, the Greek authorities release
the irregular migrants after registration
and let them travel onwards to mainland Greece, from where they move further mainly via Western Balkan countries
towards their final destinations in the EU
Member States.

© Frontex

times higher than during the same period of 2014 and seven times higher than
during the previous quarter. In comparison to Lesbos, the proportion of Syrian
migrants among all nationalities was far
higher, reaching 80%.

Figure 3. On the street on the Greek island of Kos

Samos is insofar interesting as it is one
of the few islands where the majority of
migrants who arrived in Q2 2015 is of Afghan nationality. Prior to boarding rubber dinghies to Greek islands, migrants are
transported by bus from Istanbul to Izmir

17 of 36

II. Featured risk analyses

Western Balkans route

Record number of Afghan and Syrian
migrants trying to reach the EU from Serbia
After a substantial decline in detections
of illegal border-crossings on the Western
Balkans in March 2015, which was mainly
caused by fewer migrants from Kosovo*
on their way to Western Europe, irregular migration composed of Afghans, Syrians, Pakistanis and other non-regional
nationalities has reached new record levels by June 2015.

n Migrants who have entered
Greece and Bulgaria from
Turkey try to reach Western
EU Member States via the
Western Balkan countries
n New Hungarian measures
to reduce irregular
migration at its border with
Serbia

In the second quarter, 34 775 detections
were reported from the Member States
bordering the Western Balkans, the highest number since Frontex started its data
collection. The level of irregular migration
on this route is 5% higher than during Q1
2015 and 24% higher than during the second quarter of 2014. Subsequent to the reporting period, during the months of July and
August another 35 000 and 50 000 migrants,
respectively, were reported from the Western
Balkans route.

© Hungarian Police

Most of the non-regional migrants detected on the Western Balkans route have
previously travelled on the Eastern Mediterranean route from Turkey, mostly via
the Greek Eastern Aegean Islands. An increase in migration pressure in the Eastern Mediterranean, as registered in 2015,
usually also leads to a higher number of
migrants detected at the EU’s external
borders with the Western Balkans.

Figure 4. Afghan migrants detected by
Hungarian police in August while walking
along the highway M1 to Austria

18 of 36

As in previous months, nearly all irregular
migrant apprehensions registered in the
second quarter were reported from the
Hungarian land border and the rest from
the Croatian land border with Serbia. Most
detections were related to Afghans, whose
number was more than 16 times higher
than one year ago and reached 13 940, followed by 10 134 persons from Syria.
The example of Syrian migrants shows an
increasing preference for the less cost-in-

tensive journey from Turkey through the
Western Balkans in contrast to the dangerous sea crossings from Libya to Italy.
While during the second quarter of 2014,
more than one half of all detections of Syrian nationals were reported from the Central Mediterranean sea, the share reached
roughly only 8% during the reporting period. The remaining Syrian migrants chose
to travel along the Eastern Mediterranean
route and across South-eastern Europe.
Information obtained from interviews indicated that many non-regional migrants
are aware of the pending changes in the
migration and asylum policy announced
by the Hungarian government (see box).
Many of these migrants, especially Syrians living in Turkey attempted to enter
the EU from the Western Balkans before
these measures were adopted.
Prior to the measures taken by Hungary
and reacting to this increasing pressure at
its own borders (up to 3 000 illegal border-crossings from Greece per day), the
authorities in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia amended the Law
on Asylum by introducing a new provision
that allows irregular migrants to legalise
their stay in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for a 72-hour period after
they express their wish to apply for international protection.
These measures are likely to increase the
migratory pressure on Serbia and its EU
neighbours. This policy change also shows
the abandonment of a credible border
enforcement strategy in light of the circumstances of large and sustained migratory flows, which may lead to a possible
domino effect of sometimes reinforcing,
sometimes contradicting new policies and
measures by each of the affected countries in the region.

fran · q2 2015

Figure 5. Main subroutes used by nonregional migrants through the Western
Balkans

Wester Balkans subroutes*

Hungary

Austria

Land borders
Subroute 1

Slovenia

36 956
Croatia

Subroute 2
Subroute 3

1 674%

#
%

Romania

Total number of detections
Trend from the same period
last year

* only non-regional migrants transiting the region
south to north (e.g. exiting Bulgaria or Greece
and entering regional countries/exiting the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and entering Serbia)

Bosnia &
Herzegovina
Serbia
4
-78%
3
-50%

3 759

Montenegro

495%

4 129
15 781%
Bulgaria

Kosovo*

122

FYR
Macedonia

15%

Albania
Italy

6 288
9 881%

757
323%

Greece

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line
with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence

Source: FRAN and WB-RAN data as of 4 August 2015

* This designatio

New legislative measures on migration approved by the Hungarian Parliament

On 6 July, the Hungarian Parliament has approved a set of measures addressing
the increasing number of irregular migrants entering the country. The legislation provides the framework for the construction of a fence along the country’s
southern border with Serbia.
The law shortens the time frame for asylum decisions and will allow Budapest to reject claims from migrants from safe third countries or those who have
passed through these on their journey.
The list of these countries is going to be drawn up by the Hungarian government.
Moreover, the legislative package contains the following measures:
n	The detention of the asylum seeker until a judicial asylum procedure is
complete,
n	The refusal of an asylum request for a number of reasons, including aiding,
abetting, and perpetrating terrorist acts as well as the financing of terrorism,
n	The limitation of the permission to stay in Hungary in case of repeated asylum applications,
n	The obligation for the migrants to do ‘everything in their power to identify
themselves’ in the absence of identity documents.

19 of 36

II. Featured risk analyses

Trafficking in Human Beings

Human trafficking
and labour exploitation
on merchant vessels
In November 2014, The Independent published a story about a Filipino taxi driver
who came to work on a fishing trawler
in Northern Ireland. Before arrival to the
UK, he had paid a trafficker more than
GBP 2 000 (ca EUR 2 800) to secure a visa
and work placement. The contract promised an attractive salary of GBP 700 (ca
EUR 1 000) and 48-hour working week.
However, once aboard the trawler, he realised that none of the recruiter’s promises were true. He was forced to work up
to 20 hours a day and was subject to verbal abuse if he did not work fast enough.
Food was scarcely available and the living conditions were squalid and hazardous. He had no working visa in the UK and
thus, he would have faced deportation if
he had escaped to the mainland.

n Trafficking on all types of
merchant vessels including
cargo ships, fishing boats
and sometimes passenger
ships affects thousands of
victims
n Detection of potential
victims extremely
challenging due to the high
number of regular seafarers
travelling into the EU

© PRADO

One day, he accidentally cut his finger at
work and after requesting help from the
skipper, he was abandoned in a Scottish
port. Luckily, he found assistance from local charities. After two and half months
of work on the fishing trawler, he had
earned less than GBP 100 (EUR 143). His
case is currently investigated by the Police
of Scotland, and those involved in the exploitation are likely to face charges of human trafficking and slave-keeping.

Figure 6. Example of a seafarers’ identity
document from the Republic of Azerbaijan

20 of 36

According to various estimates, thousands
of seafarers are trafficked for labour exploitation on merchant vessels each year.
The European Union is also affected by
the problem as several European member
states are reporting about detections of
potential and confirmed cases of trafficked
seafarers. Victims of sea-based trafficking
originate from many countries, but in largest numbers from the Philippines, Indonesia, China, Ghana, the Russian Federation
and Ukraine – the world’s main suppliers

of regular seafarers. Trafficking takes place
on all types of merchant vessels including
cargo ships, fishing boats and sometimes
passenger ships. As with labour trafficking
inlands, trafficked seafarers are most commonly exploited with the methods of debt
bondage, underpayment or non-payment
of salaries, extremely long working hours,
miserable and dangerous working conditions, confiscation of documents and restricted communication with the outside
world. Most commonly, vessels employing
trafficked crew are old, in poor condition
and registered under flags of convenience
(FOC) to countries with substandard employment rights.* Some seafarers working
on the ‘modern slave ships’ have died after their unseaworthy ships have sank in
the rough seas. Some of the reported incidents have taken place at the Black Sea,
not far away from the EU territorial waters.
Maritime human trafficking is of concern
to the EU external borders in several scenarios. Firstly, many seafarers are travelling
from outside of the EU to embark on their
ships at ports of the member states. Secondly, trafficking and labour exploitation
is not occurring only in the international
waters, but also on territorial waters of
the EU member states. In the latter case,
the seafarers would need an appropriate
work visa to be legally employed in the
member state. Thirdly, seafarers in distress on board are often trapped in their
ships in the coastal waters of the EU as
port authorities may refuse disembarkation of seafarers who lack appropriate visas or Seaman’s Discharge Books. Often,
traffickers confiscate the seafarer’s documents to deter them from escaping. In
several incidents across the EU, supported
exploited and abandoned seafarers have
been able to disembark and return home

fran · q2 2015

only after an intervention for example by
the International Transport Workers’ Federation (ITF).
As in general with human trafficking, early
identification of potential victims as part
of the border control procedures can spare
many seafarers from exploitation. Yet, detection of potential victims is extremely

challenging due to the high number of
regular seafarers travelling into the EU
each year. For example, based on the current state of knowledge, the majority of
the trafficked seafarers are travelling with
genuine – although in some cases, fraudulently obtained – passports and visas.
Thus, document data are not – at least,
on its own – sufficient to help with the

FIRST-LINE

SECOND-LINE

Travel documents

Conclusions from the interview

detection of possible victims. Rather, a
combination of certain first and secondline indicators along with a specific type
of personal history may be useful for detecting at least some of the potential victims. The following table gives an overview
of the indicators within these categories.

PERSONAL HISTORY
Victim risk profile

• Genuine passports with join
ship or transit visas

• Is going to work on a vessel that is
sailing under a flag of convenience*

• Male in working age,
18–65 years old

• Genuine passports with
short-term visit visas

• Has paid a recruitment fee, bribe
or any other type of payment (such
as a fee for medical examinations)
to the crewing agent or another
party**

• In a low-paid profession,
unemployed, underemployed
or in wage arrears

• Contract Seaman’s Discharge
Books
• Counterfeit Seaman’s
Discharge Books and
counterfeit certificates of
competence

Declared purpose of travel
• Joining a ship (usually
supported by a written
and signed contract of
employment from a crewing
agency)
• Work (also supported by
a contract of employment)
• Tourism

• Is traveling to work with a shortterm visit visa and has no transit
visa or Seaman’s Discharge Book
• Final destination is not in
the country that issued the
Schengen-visa
• Has not made the visa nor travel
arrangements himself and is
unable to say details about the
travel documents (such as issuing
authority)

• Sole breadwinner in his family
and under pressure to bring
money home
• Seafarers from Indonesia,
Philippines and other East and
Southeast Asian countries
usually have no previous
experience of maritime work
(However, this is rarely the
case with East European
seafarers)

• Has weak command of English
(apart from a few memorised
statements)

*

The following countries and registers are declared as FOC according to the International Transport Workers’ Federation (ITF): Antigua and Barbuda,
Aruba (Netherlands) Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Bermuda (UK), Bolivia, Burma, Cambodia, Canary Islands (Spain), Cayman Islands (UK), Comoros, Curacao
(Netherlands) Cyprus, Equatorial Guinea, Faroe Islands (FAS), French International Ship Register (FIS), German International Ship Register (GIS), Georgia,
Gibraltar (UK), Honduras, Jamaica, Lebanon, Liberia, Malta, Marshall Islands (USA), Mauritius, Moldova, Mongolia, Myanmar, North Korea, Panama, Sao Tome
and Príncipe, St Vincent, Sri Lanka, Tonga, Tuvalu and Vanuatu
** Ratifying member states of the International Labour Organization (ILO) Recruitment and Placement of Seafarers Convention (Revised) and Recommendation of
1996 shall ‘ensure that no fees or other charges for recruitment or for providing employment to seafarers are borne directly or indirectly, in whole or in part, by
the seafarer.’ (Source: http://www.ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/media-centre/press-releases/WCMS_008074/lang--en/index.htm)

21 of 36

22 of 36

fran · q2 2015

Statistical annex

LEGEND
Symbols and abbreviations: n.a.
										:		

not applicable
data not available

Source: 	FRAN and EDF-RAN data as of 4 August 2015,
unless otherwise indicated
Note:		‘Member States’ in the tables refer to FRAN Member
States, including both 28 EU Member States
and three Schengen Associated Countries

23 of 36

FRAN · q1 2015

Annex Table 1. Illegal border-crossing between BCPs
Detections reported by border type and nationality at the external borders

2015 Q2
2014
Q1

2015

% change on

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

All Borders
Syria

4 771

14 090

37 894

22 414

13 989

54 923

290

293

32

Afghanistan

2 054

2 916

7 854

9 308

6 862

31 022

964

352

18

Eritrea

1 837

17 008

13 712

2 029

1 081

17 440

2.5

1 513

10

Unspecified sub-Saharan nationals

619

11 093

12 139

2 490

428

8 780

-21

1 951

5.2

Pakistan

689

649

1 819

902

1 063

7 793

1 101

633

4.6

Nigeria

631

2 054

3 847

2 183

1 088

7 436

262

583

4.4

1 297

1 906

2 282

2 191

1 664

6 293

230

278

3.7

50

114

675

1 271

1 561

5 321

4 568

241

3.1

133

715

1 862

842

332

3 511

391

958

2.1

Albania

1 505

2 239

2 372

3 207

2 033

2 885

29

42

1.7

Others

8 452

16 083

28 062

33 272

32 284

24 751

54

-23

15

22 038

68 867

112 518

80 109

62 385

170 155

147

173

100

Afghanistan

1 362

1 062

2 181

4 840

4 308

14 455

1261

236

34

Syria

1 373

1 599

4 330

5 169

5 307

13 675

755

158

32

Albania

1 470

2 221

2 370

3 207

2 032

2 878

30

42

6.8

Pakistan

71

89

107

288

688

2 803

3 049

307

6.6

Iraq

41

80

292

526

1 182

2 375

2 869

101

5.6

Bangladesh

31

27

78

175

294

746

2 663

154

1.8

Palestine

29

92

361

502

272

587

538

116

1.4

Congo

31

66

19

22

55

530

703

864

1.2

507

689

3 304

17 569

22 631

515

-25

-98

1.2

50

42

76

94

166

364

767

119

0.9

Others

2 187

1 745

1 468

1 496

1 819

3 666

110

102

8.6

Total Land Border

7 152

7 712

14 586

33 888

38 754

42 594

452

9.9

100

Syria

3 398

12 491

33 564

17 245

8 682

41 248

230

375

32

Eritrea

1 774

16 941

13 637

1 971

1 028

17 295

2.1

1 582

14

Afghanistan

692

1 854

5 673

4 468

2 554

16 567

794

549

13

Unspecified sub-Saharan nationals

619

11 093

12 139

2 490

428

8 780

-21

1 951

6.9

Somalia
Iraq
Sudan

Total All Borders
Land Borders

Kosovo*
Iran

Sea Borders

609

1 989

3 780

2 112

1 026

7 124

258

594

5.6

Somalia

1 223

1 827

2 242

2 148

1 547

6 047

231

291

4.7

Pakistan

618

560

1 712

614

375

4 990

791

1 231

3.9

89

689

1 836

818

310

3 445

400

1 011

2.7

9

34

383

745

379

2 946

8 565

677

2.3

Gambia

1 328

2 101

2 655

2 558

1 471

2 436

16

66

1.9

Others

4 527

11 576

20 311

11 052

5 831

16 683

44

186

13

14 886

61 155

97 932

46 221

23 631

127 561

109

440

100

Nigeria

Sudan
Iraq

Total Sea Border

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence

24 of 36

fran · q2 2015

Annex Table 2. Clandestine entries at BCPs
Detections reported by border type and top ten nationalities

2015 Q2
2014

2015

Q1

Q2

Q3

Land

301

589

Sea

10

35

Syria

79

Afghanistan

35

Pakistan

% change on
Q2

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Q4

Q1

949

1 133

1 102

798

35

-28

99

16

19

1

6

-83

500

0.7

250

247

515

531

425

70

-20

53

138

411

438

364

259

88

-29

32

10

9

12

32

41

34

278

-17

4.2

Algeria

9

52

41

18

15

28

-46

87

3.5

Guinea

10

17

25

14

28

14

-18

-50

1.7

Myanmar

2

25

39

17

3

12

-52

300

1.5

Iraq

4

6

5

70

98

8

33

-92

1

Morocco

6

9

1

0

0

6

-33

n.a.

0.7

Tunisia

3

9

1

1

4

5

-44

25

0.6

Georgia

0

3

1

0

0

2

-33

n.a.

0.2

Others

153

106

182

47

19

11

-90

-42

1.4

Total

311

624

965

1 152

1 103

804

29

-27

100

Border type

Top Ten Nationalities

Annex Table 3. Facilitators
Detections reported by place of detection and top ten nationalities

2015 Q2
2014

2015

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

% change on
Q2

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Place of Detection
1 178

1 932

1 742

1 976

918

1 436

-26

56.0

45

Land

227

215

465

307

1 086

1 184

451

9

37

Land Intra EU

249

170

195

197

306

252

48

-18

8

Sea

144

155

177

109

228

215

39

-5.7

6.8
2.4

Inland

Air
Not specified

95

79

77

88

73

75

-5.1

2.7

125

90

157

85

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

Top Ten Nationalities
91

222

334

312

278

276

24

-0.7

8.7

117

167

110

116

177

183

9.6

3.4

5.8

Albania

87

96

94

136

123

158

65.0

28

5.0

Serbia

69

64

80

71

101

144

125

43

4.6

France

100

115

99

103

154

134

17

-13

4.2

Romania

58

61

85

71

100

113

85

13

3.6

Syria

62

100

109

127

68

113

13

66

3.6

Bulgaria

68

72

114

68

64

107

49

67

3.4

137

134

99

117

88

105

-22

19

3.3

74

70

61

58

67

99

41

48

3.1

Others

1 155

1 540

1 628

1 583

1 391

1 730

12

24

55

Total

2 018

2 641

2 813

2 762

2 611

3 162

20

21

100

Morocco
Spain

Italy
Pakistan

25 of 36

FRAN · q1 2015

Annex Table 4. Illegal stay
Detections reported by place of detection and top ten nationalities

2015 Q2
2014
Q1

Q2

2015
Q3

% change on

Q4

Q1

Q2

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Place of detection
74 930

88 901

111 411

108 265

96 780

124 531

40

29

88

Air

6 998

6 931

10 199

9 661

8 485

9 467

37

12

6.7

Land

Inland

2 779

3 192

5 207

4 167

2 977

4 473

40

50

3.2

Land Intra EU

960

921

1 028

1 020

1 022

1 256

36

23

0.9

Not specified

32

726

530

1 084

862

815

12

-5.5

0.6

1 792

128

176

64

291

356

178

22

0.3

17

Between BCPs

Top Ten Nationalities
11 159

14 771

25 924

22 869

12 307

23 367

58

90

Afghanistan

4 866

3 741

6 141

8 645

7 920

15 860

324

100

11

Eritrea

2 220

12 072

13 677

6 508

3 734

12 858

6.5

244.0

9.1

Albania

4 483

4 688

4 733

6 379

6 603

7 700

64

17

5.5

Iraq

1 333

1 402

2 038

3 004

3 751

7 240

416

93

5.1

Morocco

6 123

6 082

6 595

6 529

7 076

6 339

4.2

-10

4.5

Ukraine

2 828

3 456

5 029

5 431

4 492

5 427

57

21

3.8

Pakistan

2 825

2 686

3 339

2 800

3 282

4 572

70

39.0

3.2

Somalia

1 620

2 512

2 663

2 390

2 206

3 902

55

77

2.8

Algeria

3 591

3 006

3 154

3 242

3 150

3 202

6.5

1.7

2.3

Others

46 566

46 522

55 534

56 604

56 013

50 569

8.7

-9.7

36

Total

87 614

100 938

128 827

124 401

110 534

141 036

40

28

100

Syria

26 of 36

fran · q2 2015

Annex Table 5. Refusals of entry
Refusals reported by border type at the external borders

2015 Q2
2014
Q1

Q2

2015
Q3

Q4

Q1

% change on
Q2

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

All Borders
Ukraine

3 181

3 854

5 201

4 578

5 393

6 094

58

13

Albania

2 980

3 343

3 028

3 650

3 327

3 646

9.1

9.6

13

Russian Federation

2 072

2 534

3 351

2 815

1 665

2 181

-14

31

7.7

Serbia

2 151

2 075

2 154

2 277

1 838

1 665

-20

-9.4

5.9

Belarus

1 116

1 191

1 470

1 394

901

1 119

-6

24

4

Bosnia and Herzegovina

1 027

944

1 060

979

964

1 023

8.4

6.1

3.6

Morocco

22

1 392

1 063

1 122

862

998

1 007

-5.3

0.9

3.6

Algeria

643

753

623

711

716

674

-10

-5.9

2.4

Turkey

645

597

1 137

669

589

670

12

14

2.4

Brazil

605

620

451

637

709

669

7.9

-5.6

2.4

9 445

10 161

11 545

12 781

10 324

9 441

-7.1

-8.6

33

25 257

27 135

31 142

31 353

27 424

28 189

3.9

2.8

100

Ukraine

2 997

3 481

4 842

4 253

5 046

5 704

64

13

37

Albania

1 443

1 883

1 782

1 897

1 539

1 903

1.1

24

12

Russian Federation

1 718

2 048

2 818

2 429

1 378

1 795

-12

30

12

Serbia

1 933

1 852

1 978

2 105

1 633

1 447

-22

-11

9.4

Belarus

1 088

1 158

1 405

1 358

861

1 086

-6.2

26

7

986

912

1 014

931

907

975

6.9

7.5

6.3

Others

Total All Borders
Land Borders

Bosnia and Herzegovina

1 012

697

735

531

543

603

-13

11

3.9

FYR Macedonia

435

399

466

407

388

381

-4.5

-1.8

2.5

Turkey

218

261

779

376

258

352

35

36

2.3

Georgia

701

860

1 141

2 014

150

281

-67

87

1.8

Others

752

824

1 259

1 523

1 069

912

11

-15

5.9

13 283

14 375

18 219

17 824

13 772

15 439

7.4

12

100

Morocco

Total Land Border
Air Borders

1 014

923

710

1 115

1 113

1 113

21

0

9.7

Brazil

602

606

439

628

706

648

6.9

-8.2

5.7

Algeria

624

724

602

692

697

640

-12

-8.2

5.6

USA

549

609

622

527

600

386

-37

-36

3.4

Not specified

445

375

326

522

339

370

-1.3

9.1

3.2

Ukraine

180

315

330

299

322

362

15

12

3.2

China

226

291

472

433

416

353

21

-15

3.1

Russian Federation

327

415

467

375

277

349

-16

26

3.1

Honduras

207

223

129

260

306

318

43

3.9

2.8

Nigeria

351

389

420

493

406

306

-21

-25

2.7

Others

6 434

6 648

6 948

7 006

7 208

6 587

-0.9

-8.6

58

10 959

11 518

11 465

12 350

12 390

11 432

-0.7

-7.7

100

Albania

523

537

536

638

675

630

17

-6.7

48

Morocco

153

145

172

101

133

123

-15

-7.5

9.3

Turkey

23

39

113

13

34

77

97

126

5.8

Tunisia

33

25

35

43

47

57

128

21

4.3

Russian Federation

27

71

66

11

10

37

-48

270

2.8

Syria

12

27

53

41

24

32

19

33

2.4

Algeria

14

23

18

17

18

31

35

72

2.4

India

14

13

34

22

27

29

123

7.4

2.2

4

58

29

26

25

28

-52

12

2.1

10

4

28

14

81

28

600

-65

2.1

202

300

374

253

188

246

-18

31

19

1 015

1 242

1 458

1 179

1 262

1 318

6.1

4.4

100

Albania

Total Air Border
Sea Borders

Ukraine
Afghanistan
Others

Total Sea Border

27 of 36

FRAN · q1 2015

Annex Table 6. Refusals of entry
Refusals of entry at the external borders reported by reasons for refusal and top ten nationalities
Refused
persons
Total

2015 Q2 – Reasons for refusals of entry (see description below)
A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

Total
Reasons

n.a.

Top Ten Nationalities
Ukraine

6 094

26

58

1 504

2

3 204

235

418

195

27

459

6 128

Albania

3 646

27

53

187

1

1 095

143

792

1 118

46

208

3 670

Russian Federation

2 181

29

3

1 326

1

303

82

102

51

228

124

2 249

Serbia

1 665

71

13

91

0

284

495

288

403

11

10

1 666

Belarus

1 119

27

0

470

2

123

46

251

23

85

101

1 128

Bosnia and Herzegovina

1 023

214

1

31

0

365

14

328

39

29

2

1 023

Morocco

1 007

276

18

226

18

123

5

58

184

89

11

1 008

Algeria

674

13

16

61

3

355

6

189

8

2

29

682

Turkey

670

64

3

379

6

79

64

26

19

8

24

672

Brazil

669

9

7

152

0

313

30

36

136

4

192

879

Others

9 441

608

367

2 504

174

2 913

263

548

473

115

1 889

9 854

Total

28 189

1 364

539

6 931

207

9 157

1 383

3 036

2 649

644

3 049

28 959

* Data for Austria and Belgium for June 2015 are not yet available
Descriptions of the reasons for refusal of entry:
A has no valid travel document(s);
B has a false/counterfeit/forged travel document;
C has no valid visa or residence permit;
D has a false/counterfeit/forged visa or residence permit;
E has no appropriate documentation justifying the purpose and conditions of stay;
F has already stayed for three months during a six months period on the territory of the Member States of the EU;
G does not have sufficient means of subsistence in relation to the period and form of stay, or the means to return to the country of origin or transit;
H is a person for whom an alert has been issued for the purposes of refusing entry in the SIS or in the national register;
I	is considered to be a threat for public policy, internal security, public health or the international relations of one or more Member States of the EU.

28 of 36

fran · q2 2015

Annex Table 7. Refusals of entry
Refusals of entry at the external borders by reasons for refusal

2015 Q2
2014

2015

% change on
year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Highest share

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

E) No justification

5 720

6 145

5 988

6 714

8 386

9 157

49

9.2

32

Ukraine (35%)

C) No valid visa

6 754

8 173

10 175

9 739

6 286

6 931

-15

10

24

Ukraine (22%)

Reason not available

2 730

3 291

4 487

4 264

3 926

3 049

-7.4

-22

11

Ukraine (15%)

G) No subsistence

2 574

2 789

2 538

2 969

2 857

3 036

8.9

6.3

10

Albania (26%)

H) Alert issued

2 904

3 106

3 302

3 370

2 694

2 649

-15

-1.7

9.1

Albania (42%)

F) Over 3 month stay

1 806

1 575

1 941

1 897

1 615

1 383

-12

-14

4.8

Serbia (36%)

A) No valid document

1 669

1 657

1 753

1 254

1 150

1 364

-18

19

4.7

Morocco (20%)

I) Threat

662

749

648

694

711

644

-14

-9.4

2.2

Russian Fed. (35%)

B) False document

548

563

396

545

674

539

-4.3

-20

1.9

Ukraine (11%)

D) False visa

295

303

254

287

211

207

-32

-1.9

0.7

Morocco (8.7%)

25 662

28 351

31 482

31 733

28 510

28 959

2.1

1.6

100

E) No justification

2 184

2 431

3 030

3 043

3 954

4 795

97

21

31

Ukraine (63%)

C) No valid visa

4 763

5 437

7 490

7 505

3 804

4 287

-21

13

28

Ukraine (33%)

G) No subsistence

1 643

1 783

1 554

1 614

1 651

1 897

6.4

15

12

Albania (29%)

H) Alert issued

1 972

2 184

2 434

2 504

1 610

1 668

-24

3.6

11

Albania (41%)

F) Over 3 month stay

1 258

1 211

1 578

1 519

1 156

1 065

-12

-7.9

6.9

Serbia (45%)

A) No valid document

958

838

921

558

542

671

-20

24

4.3

Morocco (38%)

All Borders

Total All Borders

Nationality

Land Borders

Nationality

7

185

665

570

640

553

199

-14

3.6

Ukraine (69%)

I) Threat

393

366

423

433

496

441

20

-11

2.8

Russian Fed. (46%)

B) False document

133

101

97

62

83

108

6.9

30

0.7

Ukraine (49%)

49

43

44

40

37

25

-42

-32

0.2

Morocco (20%)

13 360

14 579

18 236

17 848

13 973

15 510

6.4

11

100

E) No justification

3 320

3 447

2 674

3 444

3 987

3 848

12

-3.5

33

Albania (10%)

C) No valid visa

1 889

2 554

2 457

2 129

2 225

2 316

-9.3

4.1

20

Russian Fed. (7.9%)

Reason not available

Reason not available

D) False visa

Total Land Border
Air Borders

Nationality

2 605

2 912

3 617

3 507

3 148

2 273

-22

-28

20

USA (13%)

G) No subsistence

811

861

860

1 117

956

985

14

3

8.5

Algeria (19%)

H) Alert issued

623

707

599

627

675

647

-8.5

-4.1

5.6

Albania (34%)

A) No valid document

612

658

582

591

518

542

-18

4.6

4.7

Not specified (24%)

B) False document

401

453

279

467

486

333

-26

-31

2.9

Not specified (14%)

F) Over 3 month stay

486

353

349

377

444

303

-14

-32

2.6

Turkey (14%)

D) False visa

220

233

184

217

158

168

-28

6.3

1.5

Sri Lanka (7.1%)
Suriname (18%)

246

353

185

230

190

165

-53

-13

1.4

11 213

12 531

11 786

12 706

12 787

11 580

-7.6

-9.4

100

E) No justification

209

267

284

227

315

318

19

1

24

Albania (70%)

H) Alert issued

259

215

269

239

299

256

19

-14

19

Albania (80%)

Reason not available

118

194

205

187

128

214

10

67

16

Albania (17%)

95

182

228

105

143

184

1.1

29

14

Tunisia (19%)

119

145

124

238

247

151

4.1

-39

11

Albania (95%)

A) No valid document

99

161

250

105

79

118

-27

49

9

Turkey (24%)

I) Threat

23

30

40

31

25

38

27

52

2.9

Albania (47%)

F) Over 3-month stay

62

11

14

1

13

15

36

15

1.1

Russian Fed. (47%)

B) False document

10

9

20

16

6

13

44

117

1

Syria (38%)

D) False visa

23

27

26

30

9

11

-59

22

0.8

Morocco (45%)

1 017

1 241

1 460

1 179

1 264

1 318

6.2

4.3

100

I) Threat

Total Air Border
Sea Borders

C) No valid visa
G) No subsistence

Total Sea Border

Nationality

29 of 36

FRAN · q1 2015

Annex Table 8. Applications for asylum
Applications for international protection reported by top ten nationalities

2015 Q2
2014

2015

% change on

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Top Ten Nationalities
18 001

22 259

40 752

40 240

28 987

37 293

68

29

Afghanistan

7 994

6 708

10 347

14 611

13 477

23 408

249

74

12

Albania

3 248

3 212

3 023

3 876

7 784

17 197

435

121

9.2

Eritrea

3 747

14 020

18 900

8 372

3 782

11 924

-15

215

6.4

Iraq

2 671

2 719

5 271

5 501

6 912

10 340

280

50

5.5

Kosovo*

2 093

1 839

5 473

24 066

49 213

9 066

393

-82

4.8

Pakistan

4 331

4 116

5 097

5 386

5 038

7 524

83

49

4

Nigeria

3 094

4 617

5 401

5 783

4 203

5 612

22

34

3

Not specified

3 737

5 988

9 658

9 621

6 069

4 970

-17

-18

2.7

Syria

20

Somalia

4 080

4 388

4 684

3 841

3 723

4 773

8.8

28

2.5

Others

40 945

43 463

55 464

59 418

52 363

55 330

27.0

5.7

30

Total

93 941

113 329

164 070

180 715

181 551

187 437

65

3.2

100

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence

Annex Table 9. Document fraud
Fraudulent documents detected at BCPs reported by border type and top ten nationalities

2015 Q2
2014

2015

% change on
year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Highest share

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

1 677

1 581

1 525

1 728

1 488

1 292

-18

-13

63

Not specified (20%)

Land

432

607

749

696

660

703

16

6.5

35

Ukraine (49%)

Sea

110

127

114

74

35

40

-69

14

2

Bolivia (35%)

0

0

0

1

4

0

n.a.

n.a.

Ukraine

109

132

160

118

152

364

176

139

18

Poland (79%)

Not specified

163

181

163

235

176

267

48

52

13

Spain (37%)

Syria

243

449

348

407

258

179

-60

-31

8.8

Spain (32%)

Morocco

143

120

282

222

194

162

35

-16

8

Spain (82%)

Albania

190

133

115

135

155

90

-32

-42

4.4

Spain (31%)

Iraq

62

32

87

157

55

73

128

33

3.6

Bulgaria (34%)

Sri Lanka

62

87

108

58

65

72

-17

11

3.5

Italy (65%)

Iran

57

56

75

75

110

65

16

-41

3.2

Spain (29%)

Nigeria

141

137

106

132

158

55

-60

-65

2.7

UK (56%)

Senegal

54

66

43

71

47

35

-47

-26

1.7

Spain (29%)
Spain (22%)

Border Type

Nationality Claimed

Air

Not specified

Top Ten Nationalities Claimed

Nationality document

Others

995

922

901

889

817

673

-27

-18

33

Total

2 219

2 315

2 388

2 499

2 187

2 035

-12

-7

100

30 of 36

fran · q2 2015

Annex Table 10. Document fraud
False documents detected at BCPs reported by type of document and type of fraud

2015 Q2
2014
Q1

Q2

2015
Q3

Q4

Q1

% change on
Q2

year ago

per cent
of total

prev. Qtr

Document Type
Passports

1 120

1 271

1 233

1 331

1 157

978

-23

-15

42

Authentic

357

458

449

424

428

397

-13

-7.2

41

Forged

474

481

529

571

481

357

-26

-26

37

No more details

115

137

79

127

92

101

-26

9.8

10

Counterfeit

157

182

144

180

128

94

-48

-27

10

Stolen blank

17

12

32

29

28

28

133

0

2.9

0

1

0

0

0

1

0

n.a.

0.1

Pseudo
ID cards

285

359

340

430

266

289

-19

8.6

13

Counterfeit

109

122

126

157

107

129

5.7

21

45

Authentic

103

145

142

123

89

97

-33

9

34

Stolen blank

20

34

25

43

28

24

-29

-14

8.3

Forged

42

41

30

45

22

22

-46

0

7.6

No more details

10

17

16

59

12

11

-35

-8.3

3.8

1

3

8

6

n.a.

-25

2.1

Pseudo

1

Visa

354

373

440

449

472

496

33

5.1

21

Authentic

118

119

150

160

155

318

167

105

64

Counterfeit

172

194

236

234

263

130

-33

-51

26

Forged

42

40

38

34

31

26

-35

-16

5.2

No more details

19

18

10

20

12

13

-28

8.3

2.6

Stolen blank

3

2

6

1

10

8

300

-20

1.6

Pseudo

0

0

0

0

1

1

n.a.

0

0.2

Residence permits

384

365

380

377

332

295

-19

-11

13

Counterfeit

166

178

165

161

150

114

-36

-24

39

Authentic

112

102

110

82

91

108

5.9

19

37

Forged

28

19

26

48

39

35

84

-10

12

Stolen blank

67

35

42

45

35

24

-31

-31

8.1

No more details

11

30

36

41

17

14

-53

-18

4.7

0

1

1

0

0

0

n.a.

n.a.

Pseudo
Stamps

281

289

255

222

251

212

-27

-16

9.2

Counterfeit

228

199

190

167

169

150

-25

-11

71

49

75

60

43

76

52

-31

-32

25

4

15

5

12

6

10

-33

67

4.7

Forged
No more details
Other

50

61

63

59

60

42

-31

-30

1.8

Counterfeit

31

37

46

33

39

30

-19

-23

71

Authentic

13

11

10

11

17

4

-64

-76

10

Forged

4

4

6

4

3

3

-25

0

7.1

Stolen blank

0

0

1

0

0

2

n.a.

n.a.

4.8

Pseudo

2

4

0

1

1

2

-50

100

4.8

No more details

0

5

0

10

0

1

-80

n.a.

2.4

2 474

2 718

2 711

2 868

2 538

2 312

-15

-8.9

Total

31 of 36

FRAN · q1 2015

Annex Table 11A. Document fraud
Top ten combinations nationality of document and document fraud by document type

2015 Q2
2014

2015
Q1

% change on
Q2

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Highest share

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

1 120

1 271

1 233

1 331

1 157

978

-23

-15

42

MAR-Authentic

17

134

102

148

108

69

-49

-36

7.1

Syria (77%)

FRA-Authentic

44

44

45

52

63

64

45

1.6

6.5

Not specified (47%)

MLI-Authentic

23

15

20

10

17

27

80

59

2.8

Not specified (74%)

SWE-Authentic

40

41

39

25

17

25

-39

47

2.6

Not specified (40%)

ESP-Authentic

32

41

39

34

38

23

-44

-39

2.4

Not specified (39%)

NGA-Authentic

10

11

6

15

14

19

73

36

1.9

Not specified (63%)

GRC-Forged

46

17

22

29

11

18

5.9

64

1.8

Syria (22%)

GBR-Forged

33

20

16

18

10

18

-10

80

1.8

Not specified (28%)

Document Type
Passports

Nationality Claimed
Not specified (22%)

7

49

30

70

64

17

-65

-73

1.7

Israel (35%)

12

21

18

34

26

17

-19

-35

1.7

Senegal (65%)

Others

856

878

896

896

789

681

-22

-14

70

Not specified (18%)

ID cards

285

359

340

430

266

289

-19

8.6

13

Morocco (23%)

ESP-Authentic

41

97

85

76

55

50

-48

-9.1

17

Morocco (66%)

ITA-Counterfeit

15

34

24

23

32

28

-18

-13

9.7

Morocco (21%)

ITA-Stolen blank

20

32

24

43

27

24

-25

-11

8.3

Albania (58%)

ROU-Counterfeit

5

14

4

17

13

18

29

38

6.2

Albania (39%)

GRC-Counterfeit

25

14

15

27

12

14

0

17

4.8

Not specified (43%)

BEL-Counterfeit

8

13

13

21

10

14

7.7

40

4.8

Morocco (50%)

FRA-Authentic

15

18

23

22

8

14

-22

75

4.8

Not specified (36%)

TUR-Counterfeit

3

0

19

11

1

10

n.a.

900

3.5

Iraq (40%)

FRA-Counterfeit

9

4

13

9

5

10

150

100

3.5

Algeria (30%)
Albania (38%)

ISR-Counterfeit
SEN-Forged

6

4

5

3

5

8

100

60

2.8

Others

138

129

115

178

98

99

-23

1

34

Albania (17%)

Visa

354

373

440

449

472

496

33

5.1

21

Ukraine (51%)

POL-Authentic

73

82

113

89

107

268

227

150

54

Ukraine (91%)

FRA-Counterfeit

45

41

42

99

51

28

-32

-45

5.6

Sri Lanka (43%)

ITA-Counterfeit

50

62

106

18

52

23

-63

-56

4.6

Sri Lanka (43%)

DEU-Counterfeit

24

37

36

37

10

19

-49

90

3.8

Iraq (37%)

FRA-Authentic

15

9

10

24

13

18

100

38

3.6

Not specified (44%)

ESP-Counterfeit

ITA-Authentic

17

16

21

28

35

12

-25

-66

2.4

Dominican Republic (25%)

ESP-Forged

2

5

1

5

4

9

80

125

1.8

Dominican Republic (44%)

ITA-Forged

6

18

11

15

15

8

-56

-47

1.6

Iran (38%)

LVA-Authentic

0

0

0

11

2

7

n.a.

250

1.4

Armenia (29%)

TUR-Counterfeit
Others

Total: see Table 11B

32 of 36

0

0

2

0

1

6

n.a.

500

1.2

Not specified (50%)

122

103

98

123

182

98

-4.9

-46

20

Ukraine (9.2%)

fran · q2 2015

Annex Table 11B. D
 ocument fraud
Top ten combinations of nationality of document and document fraud by document type

2015 Q2
2014

2015

% change on
year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Highest share

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

384

365

380

377

332

295

-19

-11

13

Not specified (20%)

FRA-Authentic

40

38

34

23

23

42

11

83

14

Not specified (79%)

ESP-Authentic

28

19

33

30

29

29

53

0

9.8

Not specified (38%)

ITA-Counterfeit

29

40

20

24

32

24

-40

-25

8.1

Morocco (46%)

ESP-Counterfeit

39

35

45

29

28

21

-40

-25

7.1

Morocco (38%)

DEU-Stolen blank

10

12

8

7

16

14

17

-13

4.7

Syria (29%)

ITA-Authentic

17

13

10

9

15

13

0

-13

4.4

Not specified (38%)

DEU-Counterfeit

11

5

4

3

11

13

160

18

4.4

Iraq (46%)

BEL-Counterfeit

22

10

20

25

29

12

20

-59

4.1

Morocco (25%)

FRA-Counterfeit

5

18

21

12

8

10

-44

25

3.4

Tunisia (20%)

DEU-Forged

2

0

2

0

0

10

n.a.

n.a.

3.4

Iraq (70%)

Others

181

175

183

215

141

107

-39

-24

36

Philippines (10%)

Stamps

Document Type
Residence permits

Nationality Claimed

281

289

255

222

251

212

-27

-16

9.2

Ukraine (34%)

POL-Counterfeit

16

18

18

16

15

23

28

53

11

Ukraine (91%)

GRC-Counterfeit

106

92

60

64

57

22

-76

-61

10

Albania (68%)

SVK-Counterfeit

14

6

14

5

15

18

200

20

8.5

Ukraine (100%)

FRA-Counterfeit

9

12

12

11

7

13

8.3

86

6.1

India (23%)

HUN-Counterfeit

10

8

12

5

4

12

50

200

5.7

Ukraine (50%)
Albania (33%)

5

5

6

5

11

12

140

9.1

5.7

14

5

7

1

9

11

120

22

5.2

Iran (36%)

POL-Forged

5

4

8

8

4

8

100

100

3.8

Ukraine (75%)

NLD-Counterfeit

3

1

0

1

6

8

700

33

3.8

Not specified (38%)

ESP-Counterfeit

7

8

5

14

6

7

-13

17

3.3

Morocco (43%)

Others

92

130

113

92

117

78

-40

-33

37

Ukraine (21%)

Other

50

61

63

59

60

42

-31

-30

1.8

Ukraine (17%)

ITA-Counterfeit

10

9

25

14

13

9

0

-31

21

Albania (44%)

CRI-Counterfeit

0

0

0

0

0

2

n.a.

n.a.

4.8

Iraq (100%)

UKR-Counterfeit

4

3

1

0

2

2

-33

0

4.8

Ukraine (100%)

DEU-Authentic

0

0

0

0

0

2

n.a.

n.a.

4.8

Syria (50%)

GTM-Counterfeit

0

0

0

2

0

2

n.a.

n.a.

4.8

Benin (50%)

SYR-Counterfeit

2

0

0

0

2

2

n.a.

0

4.8

Syria (100%)

AUT-Counterfeit

0

0

1

0

0

2

n.a.

n.a.

4.8

Serbia (100%)

DEU-Counterfeit

2

0

0

1

0

2

n.a.

n.a.

4.8

Syria (50%)

UKR-Pseudo

0

0

0

0

0

1

n.a.

n.a.

2.4

Ukraine (100%)

ITA-Forged
TUR-Counterfeit

0

0

0

0

0

1

n.a.

n.a.

2.4

Iraq (100%)

Others

32

49

36

42

43

17

-65

-60

40

Ukraine (24%)

Total

2 474

2 718

2 711

2 868

2 538

2 312

-15

-8.9

USA-Counterfeit

33 of 36

FRAN · q1 2015

Annex Table 12. Return decisions issued
Decisions issued by top ten nationalities

2015 Q2
2014
Q1

Q2

2015
Q3

Q4

Q1

% change on
Q2

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Top Ten Nationalities
Syria

6 118

5 312

8 400

6 659

4 249

9 807

85

131

14

Albania

4 574

5 086

5 228

6 399

6 040

6 540

29

8.3

9.1

Morocco

4 621

5 184

5 414

4 570

5 442

5 297

2.2

-2.7

7.3

Afghanistan

2 585

1 883

3 553

3 840

2 447

4 306

129

76

6

Ukraine

1 817

2 164

3 180

3 865

3 260

4 150

92

27

5.8

Pakistan

3 919

3 448

3 238

3 112

3 374

3 378

-2

0.1

4.7

786

618

727

1 161

1 340

2 863

363

114

4

India

2 581

2 593

1 822

1 864

2 227

1 955

-25

-12

2.7

Nigeria

2 042

1 820

1 658

1 615

1 741

1 728

-5.1

-0.7

2.4

Algeria

2 342

1 836

1 879

1 733

1 632

1 585

-14

-2.9

2.2

Others

33 201

30 375

30 117

27 051

32 091

30 559

0.6

-4.8

42

Total

64 586

60 319

65 216

61 869

63 843

72 168

20

13

100

Iraq

Annex Table 13. Effective returns
People effectively returned to third countries by top ten nationalities

2015 Q2
2014
Q1

Q2

2015
Q3

Q4

Q1

% change on
Q2

year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Top Ten Nationalities
Albania

4 514

6 225

6 639

9 064

5 733

7 342

18

28

17

Kosovo*

1 147

1 129

1 126

1 342

1 782

3 396

201

91

7.9

Ukraine

1 419

1 929

2 814

3 420

2 480

3 297

71

33

7.7

Morocco

1 822

2 228

2 281

2 264

2 288

2 217

-0.5

-3.1

5.2

India

2 140

2 211

1 601

1 657

1 995

1 912

-14

-4.2

4.5

Pakistan

2 798

2 427

2 132

2 252

2 167

1 878

-23

-13

4.4

Serbia

1 636

1 701

1 442

1 464

1 722

1 751

2.9

1.7

4.1

474

436

632

953

644

1 738

299

170

4.1

Russian Federation

1 838

1 692

1 775

1 347

1 166

1 076

-36

-7.7

2.5

Nigeria

1 168

1 085

1 042

1 054

987

983

-9.4

-0.4

2.3

Others

18 788

20 228

18 088

17 885

16 800

17 151

-15

2.1

40

Total

37 744

41 291

39 572

42 702

37 764

42 741

3.5

13

100

Syria

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence

34 of 36

fran · q2 2015

Annex Table 14. Effective returns by type of return
People effectively returned to third countries by to type of return and top ten nationalities

2015 Q2
2014

2015

% change on
year ago

prev. Qtr

per cent
of total

Q1

Q2

Q3

Q4

Q1

Q2

Forced

15 139

18 616

17 860

17 785

16 438

18 993

2

16

Enforced by Member State

12 055

13 156

12 823

12 384

11 039

14 368

9.2

30

34

2 802

4 698

4 667

4 847

4 861

4 090

-13

-16

9.6

Type of Return

Not specified

44

282

762

370

554

538

535

-30

-0.6

1.3

16 333

16 375

15 243

15 945

16 208

17 553

7.2

8.3

41

Others

9 629

10 046

8 778

9 035

9 629

11 063

10

15

26

Not specified

3 436

3 703

3 836

4 108

3 393

3 407

-8

0.4

8

IOM-assisted

3 268

2 626

2 629

2 802

3 186

3 083

17

-3.2

7.2

Enforced by Joint Operation
Voluntary

Not specified

Total

6 272

6 300

6 469

8 972

5 118

6 195

-1.7

21

14

37 744

41 291

39 572

42 702

37 764

42 741

3.5

13.0

100

Top Ten Nationalities
Forced
994

2 021

2 070

2 073

2 104

2 045

1.2

-2.8

4.8

1 410

1 559

1 514

1 823

1 829

1 936

24

5.9

4.5

Syria

305

277

388

534

374

1 595

476

326

3.7

Kosovo*

577

699

683

749

731

1 465

110

100

3.4

Serbia

635

1 051

697

781

741

930

-12

26

2.2

Tunisia

680

802

873

693

579

659

-18

14

1.5

Algeria

699

829

565

718

627

609

-27

-2.9

1.4

Nigeria

627

594

647

620

602

565

-4.9

-6.1

1.3

Pakistan

689

801

711

741

636

551

-31

-13

1.3

Ukraine

242

363

346

394

348

476

31

37

1.1

8 281

9 620

9 366

8 659

7 867

8 162

-15

3.7

19

Ukraine

1 130

1 541

2 453

2 998

2 108

2 798

82

33

6.5

Kosovo*

569

430

443

593

1 051

1 931

349

84

4.5

India

1 554

1 517

999

1 041

1 367

1 447

-4.6

5.9

3.4

Pakistan

1 145

890

788

684

819

905

1.7

11

2.1

987

637

731

665

979

813

28

-17

1.9

1 367

1 223

1 356

1 072

905

775

-37

-14

1.8

Albania

430

439

521

623

651

635

45

-2.5

1.5

FYR Macedonia

269

287

263

229

339

470

64

39

1.1

China

811

783

443

354

494

440

-44

-11

1

Nigeria

489

478

383

417

358

406

-15

13

0.9

Others

7 582

8 150

6 863

7 269

7 137

6 933

-15

-2.9

16

Total

37 744

41 291

39 572

42 702

37 764

42 741

3.5

13

100

Morocco
Albania

Others

Voluntary

Serbia
Russian Federation

* This designation is without prejudice to positions on status, and is in line with UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo declaration of independence

35 of 36

FRAN · q1 2015

Sources and Methods
For the data concerning detections at
the external borders, some of the border types are not applicable to all FRAN
Member States. This pertains to data
on all FRAN indicators since the data
are provided disaggregated by border
type. The definitions of detections at
land borders are therefore not applicable (excluding borders with non-Schengen principalities) for Belgium, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, France, Germany, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta,
the Netherlands, Portugal, Sweden, Switzerland and the UK. For Cyprus, the land
border refers to the Green Line demarcation with the area not under the effective
control of the government of the Republic
of Cyprus. For sea borders, the definitions
are not applicable for land-locked Member States including Austria, the Czech
Republic, Hungary, Luxembourg, Slovakia and Switzerland.
In addition, data on detections of illegal
border-crossing at land, air and sea BCPs
(1B) are not available for Iceland, Ireland
and Spain and in Greece (these detections
are included in the data for Indicator 1A).
Data for Norway only includes detections
of illegal border-crossing at land and sea
BCPs (1B), not between BCPs (1A).

36 of 36

Data on detections of illegal border-crossing between sea BCPs (1A) are not available for Ireland.
Data on apprehension (FRAN Indicator 2)
of facilitators is not available for Ireland.
For Italy, the data are not disaggregated
by border type, but are reported as total
apprehensions (not specified). Data for Italy and Norway also include the facilitation of illegal stay and work. For Romania,
the data include land intra-EU detections
on exit at the border with Hungary.
For the data concerning detections of illegal stay (FRAN Indicator 3), data on detections at exit are not available for Denmark,
Ireland, Italy, Spain and the UK.
Data on refusals of entry (FRAN Indicator 4) at the external EU borders are not
disaggregated by reason of refusal for Ireland and the UK. Refusals of entry at the
Spanish land borders at Ceuta and Melilla
(without the issuance of a refusal form) are
reported separately and are not included
in the presented FRAN data.
The data on applications for international
protection (FRAN Indicator 5) are not disaggregated by place of application (type

of border on entry or inland applications)
for Austria, the Czech Republic and Slovenia. For these countries, only the total
number of applications is reported. For
France, only asylum applications at the
external borders are reported, not inland
applications. For the UK, data reported for
applications at air BCPs also include applications at sea BCPs.
The data on return decisions issued (FRAN
Indicator 7A) are not available for Ireland,
France, the Netherlands and Sweden. The
data on effective returns (FRAN Indicator 7B) are not available for Ireland. In addition, the data of effective returns are not
disaggregated by return operation (voluntary and forced) for Spain. The data on
voluntary effective returns (FRAN Indicator 7A) are not disaggregated by type of
return operation (IOM-assisted and others) for Belgium, Czech Republic, Finland
and the Netherlands. The data on forced
effective returns (FRAN Indicator 7A) are
not disaggregated by type of return operation (enforced by Member Stated and
by Joint Operations) for Belgium, Finland,
Iceland and the Netherlands.

RESTREINT UE

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union

For Public Release
Risk Analysis Unit
Reference number: 14851/2015

Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01

TT-AF-15-002-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-36-9
ISSN 2363-0566

frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

Warsaw, September 2015

RESTREINT UE

