fundamental
rights training

for border guards

trainers’ manual

fundamental
rights training
for border guards
trainers’ manual

Table of contents
Foreword #7
Acronyms #8
Acknowledgements #10
Common statement #13z
Introduction #14
module 1
Fundamental rights in relation to border guarding #23
1. Learning outcomes #24
2. Lesson plan #24
3. Training material #25
3.1. Introduction to fundamental rights and migration #25
3.1.1. Migration in today’s context #26
3.1.2. The origins of fundamental rights #28
3.1.3. States and fundamental rights #30
3.1.4. Human rights law and who monitors its application? #31
3.1.5. International mechanisms monitoring human rights #32
3.1.6. European human rights mechanisms #39
3.1.7. National human rights mechanisms #42
3.2.	The rights and the entitlements of border guards and the impact
of working in a border control environment #47
3.2.1. The rights and entitlements of border guards #47
3.2.2. The complexity of working in border control areas #48
3.3. Professional standards and the human rights framework #50
European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
Rondo ONZ 1
00-124 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu
© Frontex, 2013
Cover image courtesy of Darrin Zammit Lupi, © Darrin Zammit Lupi, 2011
Printed in Poland

3

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

module 2
Interception at sea, land and air #53

module 4
Interviewing #91

1. Learning outcomes #54
2. Lesson plan #54
3. Training material #55
3.1. Introduction to the right to life #55
3.1.2. At sea #58
3.1.3. The use of force #58
3.1.4. Non-refoulement #61
3.2.	Stages related to interception (planning, preparation, detection,
interception and follow-up) in compliance with fundamental
rights #62
3.2.1. Professional planning and preparation #62
3.2.2. Detection and interception #64
3.2.3. Transfer to the second line #66
3.3.	Fair treatment and non-discrimination, and the prohibition
of collective expulsions #70
3.3.1. Prohibition of collective expulsions #70
3.3.2. Fair treatment and non-discrimination #71

1. Learning outcomes #92
2. Lesson plan #92
3. Training material #93
3.1.	Introduction to fundamental rights issues involved in interviewing
and communication #93
3.1.1. Before the interview #94
3.1.2. Factors that may affect communication #98
3.1.3. Psychological and emotional needs of migrants, including asylum
seekers #102
3.2. The PEACE model #106
3.2.1. Introduction #106
3.2.2. ‘P’ for planning and preparation #106
3.2.3. ‘E’ for engage and explain #110
3.2.4. ‘A’ for account #111
3.2.5. ‘C’ for closure #112
3.2.6. ‘E’ for evaluation #112
3.3. Follow-up #113

module 3
Reception and assistance #73

module 5
Deprivation of liberty #117

1. Learning outcomes #74
2. Lesson plan #74
3. Training material #75
3.1. Introduction to fundamental rights in reception and assistance #75
3.2. Reception and assistance #80
3.2.1. Border guard responsibilities #80
3.2.2. Dublin convention and Dublin II #83
3.2.3. Eurodac #86
3.2.4. Non-Dublin safe third-country cases #87
3.2.5. Minimum standards on the reception of applicants for international
protection in Member States #87
3.2.6. Provisions relating to reception conditions #88

1. Learning outcomes #118
2. Lesson plan #118
3 Training material #119
3.1. Introduction to fundamental rights in the deprivation of liberty #119
3.1.1. The right to liberty and permissible limitations #120
3.1.2. The right to liberty and security #122
3.1.3. The lawfulness of the deprivation of one’s liberty #123
3.1.4. Pertinent rights in relation to the deprivation of liberty #125
3.2.	Deprivation of liberty of some groups and individuals requiring special
attention #128

4

Glossary #134

5

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Dear reader,
Frontex is fully committed to develop and promote a shared understanding of fundamental rights among the entire European Union border-guard community and
integrate this also into the cooperation with third countries (i.e. non-member
countries). This shared understanding, based on the EU acquis (i.e. the rights and
obligations that EU Member States share, including all of the EU’s treaties and
laws), in particular the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and
international law encompassing international protection obligations, shall further reinforce an EU border-guard culture characterised by the spirit of mutual
respect and cooperation. In order to achieve efficient and effective border management, Frontex aims at the highest operational standards, notably in terms
of safeguarding fundamental rights and professional ethics.
The respect for and promotion of fundamental rights in all Frontex activities remains a high priority for the agency. Hence, Frontex has been active in the implementation of the fundamental rights strategy and provisions of the amended
Frontex regulation1. A consultative forum assisting the executive director and the
management board in fundamental rights matters has been established and an
independent fundamental rights officer (reporting directly to the management
board and to the consultative forum) was designated by the management board
to contribute to the mechanism for monitoring fundamental rights.
An important task of Frontex is to support the training and education of national
border guards through the establishment of common training standards at the
European level. Fundamental rights has always been an integral part of Frontex’s
training activities. In 2012, a full palette of new instruments was developed and
this manual for trainers is one of them.

1 Regulation (EU) No
1168/2011 of the European
Parliament and of the
Council of 25 October
2011 amending Council
Regulation (EC) No
2007/2004 establishing
a European agency
for the management
of operational cooperation
at the external borders
of the Member States
of the European Union
(OJ L 304, 22.11.2011, p. 1).

The manual aims to raise awareness and ensure a harmonised training of all EU
border guards in respecting fundamental rights, aspiring to ever-higher standards
of professionalism as part of an EU border-guard culture. It also takes into consideration the complexity of the duties performed by officials at the border and demonstrates how fundamental rights permeate and advance their professional lives. It
shows how important it is for border guards to know their own rights and entitlements, as well as how adhering to fundamental rights enhances their performance.
I congratulate the team of experts from Member States and partner organisations for developing this manual and I hope it will help you in your continued efforts to promote the respect of fundamental rights.
Ilkka Laitinen
Executive Director, Frontex
1

6

Regulation (EU) No 1168/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 amending Council
Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 establishing a European agency for the management of operational cooperation at the
external borders of the Member States of the European Union (OJ L 304, 22.11.2011, p. 1).

7

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Acronyms
CAT	Committee Against Torture
CCC Common Core Curriculum
CED	
Committee on Enforced Disappearances
CEAS Common European Asylum System
CEDAW	
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination
Against Women
CERD	
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
CESCR	
Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
CIRAM	
Common integrated risk analysis model
CJEU	
Court of Justice of the European Union
CMW	
Committee on Migrant Workers
CPT European Commission for Prevention of Torture
CRC	
Committee on the Rights of the Child
CRPD	
Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
EASO	
European Asylum Support Office
ECHR	
European (formally, Convention for the Protection of Human Rights
and Fundamental Freedoms)
ECtHR	
European Court of Human Rights
ECRI European Commission against Racism and Intolerance
EQF European Qualifications Framework
EU	
European Union
FRA	
European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights
Frontex	
European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European
Union
GMG	
Global Migration Group
HRC	
Human Rights Committee
ICCPR	
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
ICESCR	
International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights
ICJ International Commission of Jurists
IGO	
Intergovernmental organisation
ILO	
International Labour Organisation
IMO International Maritime Organisation
IOM	
International Organisation of Migration
NGO	
Non-governmental organisation
NHRIs National Human Rights Institutions
NRM	
National referral mechanism
NQF National Qualifications Framework

8

OECE Organisation for Economic Cooperation in Europe
OHCHR	
United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights
OPCAT Optional Protocol to the UN Convention against Torture
OSCE	
Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe
OSCE/ODIHR	OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights
PTSD	
Post-traumatic stress disorder
SAR International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue
SIS Schengen Information System
SOLAS International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea
SPT	
Subcommittee on Prevention of Torture
SQF Sectoral Qualifications Framework
TEC Treaty establishing the European Community
TEU Treaty on European Union
THB	
Trafficking in human beings
UDHR	
Universal Declaration of Human Rights
UN	
United Nations
UNCLOS UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
UNHCR	
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
Unicef	
United Nations International Children’s Emergency Fund

9

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Acknowledgements

Drafted and compiled by
Cristina Sganga, Human Rights Consultant

The Frontex Training Unit developed the ‘Fundamental rights training for border guards – Trainers’ manual’ with the active participation of a multidisciplinary
team comprising experts from EU Member States (Belgium, Bulgaria, Ireland,
Spain, Italy, Cyprus, Malta, the Netherlands, Slovenia and the United Kingdom)
and experts from the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA),
European Asylum Support Office (EASO), United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees (UNHCR), Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR)
and OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR).

The following experts took part in the reviewing meeting
Dirk Calemyn, Belgium; Julie Norris, Ireland; Maria Almudena Contreras Olmo,
Spain; Marcos Gómez, Spain; Giuseppe Colasanto, Italy; Athena Demetriou, Cyprus; Dr Christopher Soler, Malta; John Timmerhuis, the Netherlands; Ivo Holc,
Slovenia; Robert Sumi, Slovenia; Nicky Taylor, United Kingdom; Ann-Sofie Galjaard, EASO; Aydan Iyigüngör, FRA; Satoko Horii, Frontex; Vera Martins Peres
de Almeida, Frontex; Yordanka Minkova, Frontex; Riccardo Proverbio, Frontex;
Friedrich Scheuermann, Frontex; Magdalena Silska, Frontex; Henrik Warnhjelm,
Frontex; Elena Ippoliti, OHCHR; Mariana Katzarova, OSCE/ODIHR; Michele Simone, UNHCR; John Young, UNCHR; Cristina Sganga, Human Rights Consultant

We would like to thank all the contributors listed below for their involvement
in the development of the manual and for their valuable comments, insight and
support.
Contributors
EU Member States
Dirk Calemyn, Belgium
Dr Boyka Cherneva, Bulgaria
Athena Demetriou, Cyprus
Julie Norris, Ireland
Giuseppe Colasanto, Italy
Dr Christopher Soler, Malta
John Timmerhuis, the Netherlands
Ivo Holc, Slovenia
Robert Sumi, Slovenia
Maria Almudena Contreras Olmo, Spain
Nicky Taylor, United Kingdom
EU agencies
Ann-Sofie Galjaard, EASO
Aydan Iyigüngör, FRA
Isaac de Toro Mezquita, Frontex
Yordanka Minkova, Frontex

Comments on the final draft were provided by
Athena Demetriou, Cyprus; Dr Christopher Soler, Malta; Aydan Iyigüngör, FRA;
Adriano Silvestri, FRA; Inmaculada Arnaez, Frontex; Yordanka Minkova, Frontex;
Magdalena Silska, Frontex; Sakari Vuorensola, Frontex; Elena Ippoliti, OHCHR;
Christel Mobech, OHCHR; Pia Oberoi, OHCHR; John Young, UNHCR
Comments were also provided by
Massimo Frigo, International Commission of Jurists. (The text does not represent the opinion of the organisation, as it only provided comments and did not
play a peer-review function.)
Assessment of the modules was developed by
Dirk Calemyn, Belgium
Project sub-leaders
Dr Christopher Soler, Malta
Nicky Taylor, United Kingdom
Editing
Cristina Sganga, Yordanka Minkova
Project manager
Yordanka Minkova
Published by Frontex Information & Transparency Team

International organisations
Elena Ippoliti, OHCHR
Mariana Katzarova, OSCE/ODIHR
John Young, UNCHR

10

11

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Common statement
The fundamental rights manual for border-guard trainers was written by a working group of border management experts and fundamental rights practitioners.
It was drafted in accordance with the latest international and European human
rights standards.
The manual takes into consideration the complexity of the duties performed
by officials at the border. In this respect, we have taken great care to remain as
close as possible to the everyday reality of officers, endeavouring to use userfriendly language and avoiding jargon when possible.
The goal of the manual is to support trainers in their duty to prepare border
guards on how to conform to their regional and international human rights obligations. The manual demonstrates how fundamental rights permeate and advance their professional lives. It shows how important it is for border guards to
know their own rights and entitlements, as well as how adhering to fundamental rights enhances their performance.
In drafting the manual, we have also taken particular care to ensure that the
content of the manual reflects the latest European educational practice and
that the manual conforms to the European sectorial qualification framework
for border guarding.
In writing the manual, particular attention was paid to groups demanding special protection, such as people fleeing persecution, torture survivors, victims
of trafficking, the elderly, pregnant women and children.
All the members of the working group cooperated with openness and respect
and created this manual with confidence and enthusiasm. This is a testimony
of joint commitment to the respect of fundamental rights and proof of excellent cooperation between national and international experts. There were different approaches, perspectives and domestic realities; nevertheless, the group
coherently put forward a perspective of how to respect and protect fundamental rights, in accordance with EU law and its deeply held norms and values which
call for human rights to be adhered to.
The working group entrusts to the national trainers the dissemination of the
values, skills and knowledge of fundamental rights represented in this manual.

12

13

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Introduction

The common core curriculum (CCC) for basic border-guard training is the first
curriculum including the necessary skills and competencies (as common standards) for the basic training of border guards in the EU. In 2011, the CCC was revised and updated in accordance with the latest developments in fundamental
rights and a new version was published in 2012. Designed to be implemented
within national curricula, students should gain the professional knowledge, relevant skills and appropriate competences required for their border-guard duties.

‘The European Union is founded on the values of respect for human dignity,
freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights,
including the rights of persons belonging to minorities. These values are common to the Member States in a society in which pluralism, non-discrimination,
tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men prevail.’
Article 2, Treaty on European Union

Fundamental rights training has always been an integral part of the CCC. Respect
for fundamental rights is integrated in all the chapters of the CCC. Moreover, there
is a special chapter in the general part specifically focused on fundamental rights2.

Background

The updated specific chapter on fundamental rights includes the following
10 topics: (1) fundamental rights and border-guard work; (2) international human
rights law; (3) Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (often referred to as the European Convention on Human Rights
(ECHR)); (4) UN Convention relating to the Status of Refugees and its Protocol (1951 convention); (5) UN Convention relating to the Status of Stateless Persons; (6) Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU; (7) persons seeking asylum;
(8) identification and referral of victims of trafficking; (9) protection of children;
(10) non-discriminatory ethnic profiling.

Border control officers are placed in a unique position to facilitate the movement of people engaged in legitimate business, travelling for tourism or individuals aiming to cross the border to seek international protection. At the same
time, they have to guard the national territory from the entry of individuals involved in criminal activities (trafficking in human beings, drug trafficking, etc.),
which makes the nature of their duties complex and demanding.
Frontex considers that respect for and the protection of fundamental rights1 is
an unconditional and essential component of effective integrated border management. Frontex is fully committed to developing and promoting a shared
understanding of fundamental rights within the entire European Union (EU)
border-guard community as well as integrating this into its cooperation with
third countries. This shared understanding, based on the EU acquis, in particular
the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and on international
law encompassing international protection and human rights obligations, shall
further reinforce an EU border-guard culture characterised by the spirit of mutual respect and cooperation.

The CCC for border guards is coherent with the aims and priorities of the Copenhagen declaration3 and is focused on the development of an integrated approach to education and training policies at European level. The CCC also meets
the challenges when moving from Copenhagen process-based vocational border-guard basic education to Bologna process-based tertiary mid-level officer
training. The switch from vocational training to the European higher education
area will take place so that after passing CCC-based border-guard basic education, a student is principally competent to continue in Bologna process-based
higher education.

An important task of Frontex is to support the training and education of national border guards through the establishment of common training standards
at the European level. Frontex contributes to improving the professionalism
and interoperability of the Member States’ border-guard agencies, inter alia by
developing harmonised and comprehensive training programmes. One of the
key tasks is to establish and further develop common core curricula for borderguard training and to provide training at the European level for national border-guard instructors.
1

14

In this manual, the terms ‘fundamental rights’ and ‘human rights’ are used interchangeably. Module 1 explains in detail
the origins of human rights and the emergence of the concept of ‘fundamental rights’ within the EU.

The 2012 version of the updated CCC is consistent with the European qualifications framework for lifelong learning (EQF) at levels 4 and 5. The EQF is a common European reference system which links participating countries’ national
qualifications frameworks as well as the sectoral qualifications framework (SQF).
When determining the EQF level of CCC-based national curricula, reference
should primarily be made to the national qualifications framework (NQF). All
2

The CCC consists of a general part and three specialised modules on air, land and sea borders.

3

Declaration of the European Ministers for Vocational Education and Training, and the European Commission, convened
in Copenhagen on 29 and 30 November 2002, on enhanced European cooperation in vocational education and training.

15

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

NQFs are linked to the EQF and, therefore, it is easy and transparent to locate
national training within the European scale.
In 2011, the Frontex Training Unit launched a project aiming to raise awareness
and ensure a harmonised training of all EU border guards in respecting fundamental rights, aspiring to ever-higher standards of professionalism as part of an
EU border-guard culture. The first step is the creation of the current fundamental rights trainers’ manual based on the CCC. The primary target group of the
manual is border-guard instructors in the Member States.
The trainers’ manual was developed with the active participation of a multidisciplinary team comprising experts from EU Member States (Belgium, Bulgaria,
Ireland, Spain, Italy, Cyprus, Malta, the Netherlands, Slovenia and the United Kingdom) as well as experts from international organisations and other EU agencies
(EASO, FRA, OHCHR, OSCE/ODIHR and UNHCR).

Aims of the trainers’ manual
The overall aim is to raise awareness and facilitate the comprehensive training
of all EU border guards in respecting fundamental rights, aspiring to ever-higher
standards of professionalism as part of an EU border-guard culture. Frontex is
committed to the development and implementation of effective training methodologies favouring practical and learner-centred approaches.
The manual is developed for use by professionals who train border guards. As
a next step, Frontex will facilitate the implementation of the training at the national level by providing expert support and training of national trainers.
The content of the manual is based on:
◆◆ the universal human rights system – the UN;
◆◆ the European system – the Council of Europe and the EU;
◆◆ international intergovernmental organisations’ (IGOs) guidelines and
recommendations.
The key human rights documents used to develop the manual were: the UN
Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR); the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR); the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR); the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU;
the ECHR; the European Social Charter; the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees; and case-law. The manual is primarily based on hard law ratified
by governments, but it also uses guidelines and good practice recommendations
prepared by specialised agencies of the UN and the EU and declaratory instruments approved by states in international fora, such as the UN General Assembly.

16

The manual does not cover the specific national laws and has not listed the
many reservations or opting-outs that individual Member States have determined. Thus, it is implicit that the national trainers with their expertise should
add to and adapt the manual according to such national realities. However, the
manual strives and encourages the trainers, in line with the CCC, to present and
support best practices that respect, protect, promote and fulfil human rights as
embodied in the principal UN human rights treaties, the ECHR and the Charter
of Fundamental Rights of the EU.

Course outcomes
On completion of this course, border guards will be able to:
◆◆ recognise the important role and responsibility of the border guard to protect fundamental rights and prevent fundamental rights violations;
◆◆ explain fundamental rights and outline the characteristics of fundamental
rights in general and specifically pertaining to the duties of border guards;
◆◆ demonstrate their ability and competence to respect and protect fundamental rights, and prevent fundamental rights violations in the performance
of their duties;
◆◆ identify individuals or groups in need of special assistance and of international protection.

Structure
This training package is structured on the core functions of the border guards, covering all the topics from the CCC. As Frontex Training Unit has already developed
a manual on anti-trafficking (‘Anti-trafficking training for border guards – Trainers’ manual’, Frontex, 2012), human trafficking is not included in the current manual. Trainers are encouraged to consult this other manual to complement any
training on fundamental rights.
The training material is comprised of five training modules.
Module 1 – Fundamental rights in relation to border guardingIts aim is
to introduce fundamental rights and develop awareness of the importance
of fundamental rights in border guarding.
Module 2 – Interception at sea, land and air
Its aim is to establish awareness among border guards of the importance of fundamental rights in relation to interception at sea, land and air.

17

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Practical approach

Module 3 – Reception and assistance4
Its aim is to establish awareness among border guards of the importance of fundamental rights in the execution of their duties concerning reception and assistance at the border entry point.

Border guards should learn and understand how fundamental rights standards
must be applied in their everyday work. A practical approach and interactive techniques are suggested, as well as the use of creative, interactive teaching methods which help secure the active and committed involvement of participants.

Module 4 – Interviewing
Its aim is to enable border guards to conduct interviews with migrants according to fundamental rights standards and principles.

The manual, following recognised best practice, uses learner-centred approaches
to encourage cooperative and active learning, commitment to the subject and
the learning process, creativity and self-esteem. For this purpose, the manual
proposes the analysis of case-law, international and regional legal instruments,
case studies and scenarios based on real-life border guarding6.

Module 5 – Deprivation of liberty5
Its aim is to enable border guards to ensure that any deprivation of liberty is approached according to fundamental rights standards and principles.

How to use the trainers’ manual

The way the content has been written (in an accessible manner) and the variety of participatory teaching methods presented to the trainer intend to facilitate the acquisition of knowledge, skills and attitudes that help the border guard
deliver his / her duties with confidence and in full respect for fundamental rights.

The trainers’ manual is a modern and easy-to-use training package. The five modules
may be used as a complete programme or selectively, according to needs. Each module has defined specific learning outcomes, training material, references and tools.

Training methodology and training evaluation: an overview7

The modules also include lesson plans provided in a table outlining the content,
the suggested sequence and methods as well as activities and reference material needed. Specific notes for the trainer are provided for all topics.

A human rights training course for professional audiences, such as border guards,
aims at providing knowledge and developing skills and attitudes among the
learners to enable them to carry out their responsibilities effectively and professionally, in accordance with human rights standards. In order to achieve this,
the training methodology must be appropriate.

Training material
While the manual is designed to fully equip the trainer with the necessary key
materials, the national trainers will have to adapt them to the specific national
legislation and conditions, the specific needs of the training programme and the
trainees’ experience.

Training can be seen as a cycle following specific phases, with each phase accompanied by evaluation activities which allow the trainers to measure and
maximise the impact of their training effort and the trainees to assess their development and areas which still need to be covered. A brief description of each
phase and the relevant evaluation methodology follows.

A toolkit with resources is provided in addition to the manual. It contains background material such as video clips as well as ready-made training tools such as
PowerPoint presentations, scenarios and case studies which can be used in the
training. It also contains suggested methods to assess the learning outcomes
for each module.
4

5

18

This manual and all the modules are about the assistance given to everyone at the entry point only. The particular
rights covered are related to this brief moment of contact that the border guard has with the person(s) at the entry
point. Issues related to the right to housing, accommodation, maintenance, subsistence, education, etc. that, in
practice, come into play at the moment the migrant has crossed the border are not the topic of this manual. This
manual does not deal with the asylum application process nor the rights involved in it, but only with those related to
the functions of the border guards at the moment of entry.
The trainer may want to consider including some components of Module 2 when teaching Module 5 or vice versa;
for example teaching about the use of force in compliance with fundamental rights may be a relevant skill also when
teaching about the deprivation of liberty.

1. Planning phase
As a first step in the preparation of a training course, it is fundamental to carry
out a thorough assessment of the training needs of the trainees. The needs assessment exercise involves both the learners (to assess their overall profile and
6

Guidelines on human rights education for law enforcement officials, OSCE/ODIHR, Warsaw, 2012
(http://www.osce.org/odihr/93968 ).

7

For more details concerning the human rights training methodology and evaluation, see ‘Human rights training’ and
‘Evaluating human rights training activities: A handbook for human rights educators’, published by the Office of the
United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights. They are available on line through the office’s website
(http://www.ohchr.org/EN/PublicationsResources/Pages/TrainingEducation.aspx) and can also be requested in hard copy.

19

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

in particular their current human rights knowledge, skills and attitudes) as well
as the institution to which the learners belong and the human rights challenges
it faces (to assess the elements of the context which need to be taken into consideration in designing the course). Tools for the preliminary needs assessment
include questionnaires, consultations with experts, review of related documentation and interviews with learners. A sample needs assessment questionnaire
is provided in the toolkit.
2. Design phase

Resource materials
The manual, through the toolkit, includes a list of further reading and training
materials to further support the border-guard instructor to continue his or her
professional development and to enrich the courses they are developing.
Some of the materials suggested may be used with high-ranking officers, but in
general the resources are aimed at the trainers or the officers attending a basic
training course at the beginning of their career.

Training design, based on the results of the training needs assessment, includes
the development of overall learning outcomes and an agenda for the course as
well as specific session plans (containing for each session: learning outcomes,
content, methodology, resource persons, equipment and materials). In this phase,
it is important to validate the designed training course in order to assess its potential effectiveness before delivery. This is called ‘formative evaluation’; tools to
conduct it include review by subject-matter experts and by training methodology experts, informal discussions with representative learners and pilot testing.
3. Delivery phase
During the training course, which should make maximum use of interactive methods as mentioned above, training can continue to be fine-tuned through, for instance, observation and debriefings and learners’ feedback at the end of each
day (‘real-time formative evaluation’). At the end of the training, the final evaluation (‘end-of-training summative evaluation’) is carried out to assess whether
the learning outcomes have been achieved and if the training has been effective. Tools to do so include questionnaires, a review of products generated during the training (action plans, lesson plans, etc.), final exercises/tests, role-plays,
self-assessments and informal discussions with all those involved in the training
(learners, trainers and other resource persons).
4. Follow-up phase
After the training, in the medium (‘transfer evaluation’) and long (‘impact evaluation’) term, training evaluation should continue to take place to assess if learners have put into practice what they have learnt, and whether the training course
has had an impact on their work and on their institution. Tools to do so include
follow-up questionnaires, on-the-job observation, review of products developed
by the learners, follow-up interviews with all those involved in the training as
well as review of organisational performance records, media news and reports
by governmental and civil society organisations.

20

21

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

© Frontex, 2012

Module 1

Fundamental rights in
relation to border guarding
22

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

The aim of this module is to introduce fundamental rights and develop awareness of the importance of fundamental rights in border guarding.

1. Learning outcomes
At the end of this module, participants should be able to:
◆◆ recognise the important role and responsibility of the border guard to prevent fundamental rights violations and protect victims;
◆◆ describe the legal nature and scope of fundamental rights, their characteristics and the consequences of their violations;
◆◆ describe causes, trends and current events in international migration and
how these affect border guarding;
◆◆ outline the entitlements and rights of border guards and the potential personal impact of border-guarding activities;
◆◆ recognise the relationship between fundamental rights, border guards’ ethical codes of conduct and the function of border guarding.

2. Lesson plan8
Method

Toolkit

1.	Introduction

◆◆ Presentation

◆◆ Quiz on myths (handout)

◆◆ Discussion

◆◆ Introduction to fundamental rights and migration
(PowerPoint presentation)

24

This part of the training material seeks to explain why border guards should be aware
of fundamental rights and their frontline responsibility to safeguard the human rights
of all people crossing borders and ensure access to protection to those fleeing persecution or risking serious harm upon return. It also presents the complexity surrounding the reasons why people migrate and the diverse contexts migrants come from.

References
◆◆ Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (1948)
◆◆ UN Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees (1951) and its 1967
protocol
◆◆ UN International Convention on the
Elimination of All Forms of Racial
Discrimination (1965)

◆◆ International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (1966)
◆◆ UN Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials (1979)

◆◆ Q
 uestions to encourage discussion on fundamental
rights and migration

◆◆ UN Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment (1984)

◆◆ Video clip “A path to dignity”8

8

Notes to the trainer

◆◆ Introduction to right to life, non-refoulment,
movement, prohibition of torture and international
protection (PowerPoint Presentation)

◆◆ Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU

4.	Assessment

3.1. Introduction to fundamental rights and migration

◆◆ UN Convention on the Elimination
of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women (1979)

◆◆ Universal Declaration Of Human Rights

◆◆ Discussion

◆◆ Video clip instructions
◆◆ Questions to encourage discussion on human
rights and entitlements of border guards

◆◆ Pre-course reading

◆◆ Pre-course reading and discussion on ethics

◆◆ Discussion

◆◆ The ethical slippery slope (exercise)

◆◆ Case study
◆◆ Multiple-choice
questions

◆◆ The ethical issues of tragic cases (case study)
◆◆ Multiple-choice questions

◆◆ Presentation

3. Training material

◆◆ International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (1966) and its 1989
Protocol No 2 on the death penalty

Content

2.	The rights of border
guards and the complexity
of working in a border area
3. Professional standards
and the human rights
framework

Module 1

“A path to dignity: the power of human rights education”© “Human Rights Education Associates (HREA), Gakkai
International (SGI), Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR), 2012

◆◆ UN Declaration of Basic Principles
of Justice for Victims of Crime and
Abuse of Power (1985)
◆◆ UN Convention on the Rights of the
Child (1989) and its 2000 Protocols
Nos 1 and 2

◆◆ International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Member
of Their Families (1990)
◆◆ UN Basic Principles on the Use
of Force and Firearms by Law
Enforcement Officials (1990)
◆◆ Optional protocol to the UN
convention against torture (2002)
◆◆ International Convention for the
Protection of All Persons against
Enforced Disappearance (2006)
◆◆ UN Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities (2006)
◆◆ European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms (1950)
◆◆ European Social Charter (1961)
◆◆ Declaration on the Police, Council
of Europe (1979)
◆◆ European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (1987)
◆◆ Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
EU (2000)
◆◆ European Code of Police Ethics,
Council of Europe (2001)

Relevant IGOs and NGOs
◆◆ Office of the High Commissioner for
Human Rights

◆◆ International Organisation for
Migration

◆◆ UN High Commissioner for Refugees

◆◆ International Commission of Jurists

◆◆ The Global Migration Group

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

25

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

3.1.1. Migration in today’s context9

Sustained low fertility in developed countries produces a rapidly ageing population. The ‘smaller and older’ population projected for developed countries over
the next 50 years may enhance possibilities for greater mobility of people, in part
as the demand for care workers increases.

Migration is a human phenomenon; it is not a problem, nor is it a criminal activity. It is as old as humanity. Our ancestors moved in search of food and water,
hunting and grazing lands and also out of sheer curiosity. Population movements
in history have been both forced and voluntary as people moved in search of opportunity and also in search of protection. Wars and environmental disasters
compelled people to move, as did poverty, lack of economic prospects, settlement in colonial territories, and the desire to unite with family members abroad.10
Migration is considered to be one of the defining global issues of the early 21st
century, as more and more people are on the move today than at any other
point in human history.
Migrants constituted 3.1% of the world’s population in 201211. In other words, one
out of every 33 persons in the world today is a migrant (whereas in 2000, one out
of every 35 persons was a migrant). The percentage of migrants has remained
relatively stable as a share of the total population, increasing by only 0.2% (from
2.9% to 3.1%) over the last decade. However, the percentage of migrants varies
greatly from country to country. Countries with a high percentage of migrants
include Qatar (87%), the United Arab Emirates (70%), Jordan (46%), Singapore
(41%) and Saudi Arabia (28%)12.
Migration is now more widely distributed across more countries. Today, the top
10 countries of destination receive a smaller share of all migrants than in 2000.
Global population growth differs between developed and developing countries.
In the developed countries, the current annual rate of growth is less than 0.3%,
while in the rest of the world the population is increasing almost six times as
fast. Demographic changes affect international migration in two ways: rapid
population growth combined with economic difficulties push people to move
out of their habitat, and a declining and ageing population pressures countries
to accept migrants.

9

The text in this section has been partially reproduced from the IOM’s website (http://www.iom.int/cms/en/sites/iom/
home/about-migration/facts--figures-1.html) and the information displayed on this webpage includes excerpts from
the 2004 publication ‘Essentials of migration management: A guide for policy makers and practitioners, Volume One:
Migration management foundations’, a training manual for practitioners, students and others interested in the topic
of migration management.

10

Excerpt from the OHCHR’s training modules on migration and human rights (forthcoming).

11

See footnote 9.

12

See footnote 9.

26

For example, the population of Italy is projected to decline from the current
57 million to 41 million by 2050. Similarly, the population of Japan is projected
to decline to 105 million by 2080 from the current 127 million. While not a solution on its own, one way to address this reality might be to facilitate migration.
Nevertheless, few countries have a defined and articulated migration policy.
Migration is difficult to manage without a policy structure established to guide
managers. Yet even countries that do have a coherent migration policy backed
by legislation often experience serious difficulties in managing migration.
Some critics of public policy, particularly in the developed countries, have characterised the period from the mid-1970s to the present time as a quarter-century of migration mismanagement. Moreover, the large-scale movements have
not ceased, and irregular migration has become one of the major issues of our
time. Migrant smuggling now matches drug trafficking as a major source of income for organised crime. Trafficking in human beings is a significant worldwide
concern. Migration has moved up the scale of important issues facing the countries of the developed world to the top of the policy agenda of the G8 countries.
With today’s transportation and telecommunications, more people are able to
move. The poor and disadvantaged can now watch live the wide disparity between their standard of living and that of the richer people in the world. They
need to provide for their families and understandably seek work to escape poverty. The demand for lower skilled labour is high in many developed countries,
which creates pull factors for migrants. At the other end of the skills scale, with
economic globalisation and the proliferation of international business, there is
also increasing demand for the mobility of professionals. The financial crisis in
Europe has also meant an increase in the number of Europeans seeking work beyond the EU. For example, according to the Office for National Statistics (United
Kingdom), approximately, 350 000 emigrants left the United Kingdom in 2012.
The challenge for all countries is how to regulate and manage these large-scale
migratory movements.

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

27

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

3.1.2. The origins of fundamental rights13

All human rights are indivisible, whether they are civil and political rights (such
as the right to life, equality before the law and freedom of expression) or economic, social and cultural rights (such as the rights to work, social security and
education). Likewise, the deprivation of one right adversely affects the others.15

Human rights or fundamental rights14 are universal legal guarantees belonging
to all human beings – protecting individuals and groups of individuals against actions which interfere with fundamental freedoms and human dignity. They originate from the duty of the state to protect and respect human dignity. Human
rights in the 20th century emerged from the desire of world leaders to avert the
horrors that took place during World War I and World War II.

Non-discrimination is a cross-cutting principle in international human rights
law, and is present in all the major human rights treaties, constituting the central theme of the international human rights conventions, including the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination and
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.

What is the difference between human rights and fundamental rights?
◆◆ Traditionally, the term ‘fundamental rights’ is used in a constitutional context
whereas the term ‘human rights’ is used in international law.
◆◆ The two terms refer to the same content and substance as can be seen by
the similarities between the content in the Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the EU, the ECHR and the UDHR.

The principle applies to everyone in relation to all human rights and freedoms
and it prohibits discrimination on the basis of a list of non-exhaustive categories
such as nationality, place of residence, sex, national or ethnic or social origin, genetic features or skin colour, religion, language, belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual
orientation or any other status. The principle of non-discrimination is complemented by the principle of equality, as stated in Article 1 of the UDHR: ‘All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.’

Some of the most important characteristics of human rights are the following:
◆◆ they are internationally guaranteed;
◆◆ they are legally protected;
◆◆ they focus on the dignity of the human being;

The principle of universality of human rights is the cornerstone of international human rights law. This principle, as first emphasised in the 1948 UDHR,
has been reiterated in numerous international human rights conventions, declarations and resolutions. The 1993 Vienna World Conference on Human Rights,
for example, noted that it is the duty of states to promote and protect all human rights and fundamental freedoms, regardless of their political, economic
and cultural systems16.

◆◆ they protect all individuals and groups;
◆◆ they obligate states and state actors to protect, respect and fulfil them;
◆◆ they are universal, interrelated, interdependent and indivisible.

Rights are integral to all human beings, whatever the nationality, place of residence, sex, national or ethnic or social origin, genetic features or skin colour, religion, language, belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national
minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual orientation or any other status.
We are all equally entitled to all human rights without discrimination.

The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU17 sets out the civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights of European citizens and all persons in the EU.
The charter was drawn up by a convention consisting of a representative from
each EU Member State and the European Commission, as well as members of the
European Parliament and national parliaments. It was formally proclaimed in Nice
in December 2000 by the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission. In December 2009, with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty, the charter was given binding legal effect equal to the Treaties. To this end, the charter
was amended and proclaimed for a second time in December 200718.

Human rights are all interrelated, interdependent and indivisible. This means
that they are all important.

13

Adapted from http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Pages/WhatareHumanRights.aspx and ‘Professional training series
No. 6: Human rights training – A manual on human rights training methodology’, UN, New York and Geneva, 2000, p. 10.

14

According to the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights, the ‘fundamental rights, or human rights,
express values that entitle individuals to expect a certain level of freedom and treatment… Human dignity, freedom,
democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights are the values on which the European Union is
founded. Embedded in the Treaty on European Union, they have been reinforced by the Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the EU. Countries seeking to join the EU must respect human rights, and so must countries which have concluded
trade and other agreements with it’. See http://fra.europa.eu/en/about-fundamental-rights/frequently-askedquestions. The terms refer to the same content and will be used interchangeably.

28

15

Adapted from http://www.ohchr.org/EN/Issues/Pages/WhatareHumanRights.aspx

16

The ICCPR, the ICESCR and the ECHR also state this duty of the state.

17

http://www.europarl.europa.eu/charter/pdf/text_en.pdf

18

See http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/justice_freedom_security/combating_discrimination/l33501_en.htm;
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/charter/default_en.htm and http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/human_rights/
index_en.htm

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

29

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

3.1.3. States and fundamental rights

3.1.4. Human rights law and who monitors its application?20

It is the states themselves, individually and working in cooperation, ‘who make
the rules, through the development of custom, through the development of treaties and through the development of declarations, bodies of principles and other
similar instruments. States agree on the content of these sources and agree to
be bound by them. In the case of human rights law, while it is individuals and
groups which are protected, it is the conduct of states (and state actors) which
is regulated’19.

Nowadays, there is an impressive collection of international, regional and national human rights instruments setting out human rights standards applicable to all areas of life. This development has taken place at the level of the UN
as well as at the regional and the national levels.
International treaties, referred to variously as covenants, protocols or conventions, are legally binding for those states that ratify or accede to them. Through
ratification of human rights treaties, governments undertake to put into place
domestic measures and legislation compatible with their treaty obligations and
duties. Where domestic legal proceedings fail to address human rights abuses,
mechanisms and procedures for individual complaints or communications are
available at the regional and international levels to help ensure that international human rights standards are indeed respected, implemented and enforced
at the local level.

International law recognises that the state has primary responsibility for ensuring the respect, protection, promotion and fulfilment of human rights. The
state has both the authority and the responsibility to put rights into practice
on a day-to-day basis. For example, local and national public authorities are responsible for ensuring public safety and order which safeguard the protection
of people’s rights, for ensuring that no one is expelled in a country where he or
she is at risk of torture or cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment, and for fulfilling the rights to housing, water and health.

Other documents, such as declarations, principles, codes of conduct, guidelines,
resolutions and recommendations, do not have a binding legal effect for states.
Nevertheless, they have an undeniable moral force and provide practical guidance
to states in their conduct. The value of such instruments rests on their recognition and acceptance by a large number of states, and even without binding legal effect they may be seen as declaratory of broadly accepted principles within
the international community.

The obligation of the state and its agents
The obligation to respect means that states must refrain from interfering with
or curtailing the enjoyment of human rights. The obligation to protect requires
states to protect individuals and groups against human rights abuses, including
non-state actors such as business enterprises. The obligation to promote involves the states having to ensure that everyone has opportunity to learn about
their rights. The obligation to fulfil means that states must take positive action
to facilitate or provide for the enjoyment of human rights, for example ensuring
that border guards are trained in order to uphold human rights.

Relevant international and regional human rights instruments are listed in the
references in Section 1, Module 1.
The complementary nature of UN and European instruments
UN and European human rights treaties are equally applicable to EU Member States
which have ratified these treaties. The different treaties coexist with each other. According to a well-established principle of international law, in case of several norms
being applicable to the same situation, those norms shall be applied which are most
favourable to the individual.

State representatives or agents, such as border guards, are responsible for upholding
the state’s obligations. The state and its agents have the duty to prevent violations by
private persons against people subject to its jurisdiction, for example human trafficking.

All persons physically within the jurisdiction of the EU, even if they are not EU citizens – including migrants and asylum seekers – enjoy the human rights protection
of the national legal system, the European system and European human rights law
as well as the UN system and international human rights law.

19

30

‘Professional training series No 6: Human rights training – A manual on human rights training methodology’, UN,
New York and Geneva, 2000, p. 12.

20

This section has been adapted from training materials elaborated by the European Union Agency for Fundamental
Rights and the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights.

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

31

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

3.1.5. International mechanisms monitoring human rights21

	The advisory committee provides expertise in the manner and form requested
by the council, focusing mainly on studies and research-based advice. Such
expertise shall be rendered only upon the latter’s request, in compliance with
its resolutions and under its guidance. It should be implementation-oriented.
The scope of its advice should be limited to thematic issues pertaining to the
mandate of the council; namely promotion and protection of all human rights.
The committee shall not adopt resolutions or decisions, but may propose to
the council, within the scope of its work as set out by the council, suggestions for further enhancing its procedural efficiency, as well as further research proposals within the scope of the work set out by the council.

At the UN level, there are two main types of human rights monitoring mechanisms: UN charter-based bodies, including the Human Rights Council, and bodies
created under the international human rights treaties and made up of independent experts mandated to monitor state parties’ compliance with their treaty
obligations. Most of these bodies receive secretariat support from the OHCHR.
Charter-based body
The Human Rights Council is an intergovernmental body within the UN system responsible for strengthening the promotion and protection of human rights
around the globe and for addressing situations of human rights violations and
making recommendations on them. It has the mandate to discuss all thematic
human rights issues and situations that require its attention throughout the year.
It meets at the UN office in Geneva.
The council is made up of 47 UN Member States which are elected by the UN
General Assembly. The Human Rights Council replaced the former UN Commission on Human Rights.
The council was created by the UN General Assembly on 15 March 2006 by Resolution 60/251. Its first session took place from 19 to 30 June 2006.
One year later, the council adopted its ‘institution-building package’ to guide its
work and set up its procedures and mechanisms. Among them are the following:
◆◆ The Universal Periodic Review mechanism serves to assess the human rights
situations in all UN Member States. It is a unique process which involves
a review of the human rights records of all UN Member States. The UPR is
a state-driven process, under the auspices of the Human Rights Council,
which provides the opportunity for each state to declare what actions they
have taken to improve the human rights situations in their countries and to
fulfil their human rights obligations. As one of the main features of the council, the UPR is designed to ensure equal treatment for every country when
their human rights situations are assessed.
◆◆ The advisory committee serves as the council’s ‘think-tank’, providing it with
expertise and advice on thematic human rights issues.

21

32

This section on international mechanisms monitoring human rights is adapted from http://www.ohchr.org/EN/
HRBodies/Pages/HumanRightsBodies.aspx and its supplementary pages.

	In the performance of its mandate, the advisory committee is urged to establish interaction with states, national human rights institutions, NGOs and
other civil society entities.
◆◆ The human rights complaint procedure allows individuals and organisations
to bring human rights violations to the attention of the council.
	Pursuant to Council Resolution 5/1, the complaint procedure was established
to address consistent patterns of gross and reliably attested violations of all
human rights and all fundamental freedoms occurring in any part of the world
and under any circumstances.
	It retains its confidential nature, with a view to enhancing cooperation with
the state concerned. The procedure, inter alia, is to be victims-oriented and
conducted in a timely manner.
	Two distinct working groups – the Working Group on Communications and
the Working Group on Situations – are established with the mandate to examine the communications and to bring to the attention of the council consistent patterns of gross and reliably attested violations of human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
	A communication related to a violation of human rights and fundamental
freedoms is admissible, unless:
–– it has manifestly political motivations and its objective is not consistent
with the UN charter, the UDHR and other applicable instruments in the
field of human rights law; or
–– it does not contain a factual description of the alleged violations, including the rights which are alleged to be violated; or
–– its language is abusive; however, such communication may be considered if it meets the other criteria for admissibility after deletion of the
abusive language; or

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

33

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

Country and territory mandates include the Special Rapporteur on Violence against
Women, its Causes and Consequences.
Thematic mandates include:

–– it is not submitted by a person or a group of persons claiming to be the
victim of violations of human rights and fundamental freedoms or by
any person or group of persons, including NGOs acting in good faith in
accordance with the principles of human rights, not resorting to politically motivated stands contrary to the provisions of the UN charter and
claiming to have direct and reliable knowledge of those violations; nonetheless, reliably attested communications shall not be inadmissible solely
because the knowledge of the individual author is second hand, provided
they are accompanied by clear evidence; or
–– it is exclusively based on reports disseminated by mass media; or
–– it refers to a case that appears to reveal a consistent pattern of gross and
reliably attested violations of human rights already being dealt with by
a special procedure, a treaty body or another UN or similar regional complaints procedure in the field of human rights; or
–– the domestic remedies have not been exhausted, unless it appears that
such remedies would be ineffective or unreasonably prolonged.

1.	
Working Group on Arbitrary Detention;
2.	Special Rapporteur on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child
Pornography;
3.	Working Group on Enforced or Involuntary Disappearances;
4.	Special Rapporteur on Extreme Poverty and Human Rights;
5.	Special Rapporteur on the Right of Everyone to the Enjoyment of the Highest
Attainable Standard of Physical and Mental Health;
6.	Special Rapporteur on the Situation of Human Rights Defenders;
7.	Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants;
8.	Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Racism, Racial Discrimination,
Xenophobia and Related Intolerance;
9.	Special Rapporteur on Contemporary Forms of Slavery, including its Causes and
its Consequences;
10.	Special Rapporteur on Torture and other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment;
11.	Special Rapporteur on Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children;
12.	Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women, its Causes and Consequences.

	Communications intended for handling under the council complaint procedure may be addressed to the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR).

Treaty-based bodies
Human Rights Committee

◆◆ The UN special procedures were established by the former Commission on Human Rights and are now assumed by the council. These are made up of special rapporteurs, special representatives, independent experts and working
groups that monitor, examine, advise and publicly report on thematic issues
or human rights situations in specific countries.

The Human Rights Committee (HRC) is a UN body of independent experts with
the task of monitoring the implementation of the ICCPR. Its main tasks are as
follows. (1) to examine reports that states parties are obliged to submit on a regular basis on how rights are being implemented. The Committee examines each
report and addresses its concerns and recommendations to the state party in
the form of ‘concluding observations’. (2) to examine individual complaints with
regard to alleged violations of the ICCPR by states and to issue (non-binding)
decisions. As is the case with the European Court of Human Rights for the European level, the practice of the Human Rights Committee is a main source for
knowing what human rights provisions formulated at UN level mean in concrete
terms. In addition to concrete cases, the committee issues general comments.
General comments analyse a specific article or general issue in the covenant in
an extended and comprehensive fashion. While most general comments are detailed interpretations of a specific covenant right, some address the covenant
rights of specific groups, such as migrants, while others address procedural issues, such as the preparation of reports, or miscellaneous issues, such as reservations to the covenant. The general comments are available in the treaty bodies’
database of the OHCHR (http://www.unhchr.ch/tbs/doc.nsf)22.

	The system of special procedures is a central element of the UN human rights
machinery and covers all human rights: civil, cultural, economic, political and
social. As of 1 January 2013, there are 36 thematic and 12 country mandates.
	With the support of the OHCHR, special procedures undertake country visits; act on individual cases and concerns of a broader, structural nature by
sending communications to states and others in which they bring alleged violations or abuses to their attention; conduct thematic studies and convene
expert consultations; contribute to the development of international human rights standards; engage in advocacy; raise public awareness; and provide advice for technical cooperation. Special procedures report annually to
the Human Rights Council; the majority of the mandates also report to the
general assembly.

22

34

‘Human rights – Civil and political rights: The Human Rights Committee, Fact Sheet No 15’ (Rev. 1), UN, Geneva, 2005.

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

35

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights

task as the SPT. In the concrete field of law enforcement, the NPMs will be the
most relevant institution for monitoring24.

The Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (CESCR) is the body
of independent experts that monitors the implementation of the ICESCR by
its states parties. All states parties are obliged to submit regular reports to the
committee on how the rights are being implemented. The committee examines
each report and addresses its concerns and recommendations to the state party
in the form of ‘concluding observations’.

Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
The Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination is the UN body of independent experts with the task of monitoring the implementation of the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
Its functions are similar to those of the HRC25.

With regard to individual complaints, on 10 December 2008, the general assembly unanimously adopted an optional protocol (GA Resolution A/RES/63/117) to
the ICESCR which provides the committee with the competence to receive and
consider communications. The optional protocol was opened for signature at
a signing ceremony in 2009. In addition to the CESCR, other competent committees can consider individual communications involving issues related to economic, social and cultural rights in the context of its treaty. The committee also
publishes its interpretation of the provisions of the covenant, known as general comments.

Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women
The Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women is the UN
body of independent experts with the task of monitoring the implementation
of the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against
Women. Its functions are similar to those of the HRC. In addition, it has the mandate of examining country situations in more depth, within its inquiry procedure26.
Committee on the Rights of the Child

Committee against Torture
The Committee on the Rights of the Child (CRC) is the body of independent experts that monitors the implementation of the Convention on the Rights of the
Child by its states parties. It also monitors the implementation of two optional
protocols to the convention, on the involvement of children in armed conflicts
and on the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. On 19 December 2011, the UN General Assembly approved a third optional protocol on
a communications procedure, which will allow individual children to submit complaints regarding specific violations of their rights under the convention and its
first two optional protocols. The protocol opens for signature in 2012 and will
enter into force upon ratification by 10 UN Member States. The committee also
publishes its interpretation of the content of human rights provisions, known
as general comments.

The Committee against Torture is the UN body of independent experts with the
task of monitoring the implementation of the UN Convention against Torture
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment. Its functions are similar to those of the HRC. In addition, it has the mandate of examining country situations in more depth, within its inquiry procedure. Its practice,
including case-law, is important for understanding what exactly torture and
other ill-treatments mean23.
Subcommittee for the Prevention of Torture and National Preventive
Mechanisms
The Subcommittee for the Prevention of Torture (SPT) was set up by the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention against Torture (OPCAT). Its tasks are similar to those of the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture: to visit
places of detention in order to assess how persons deprived of their liberty are
treated, to draw up reports and to make recommendations to the states on how
to improve protection against torture.
Moreover, it obliges states to establish national preventive mechanisms (NPMs).
As the name suggests, they are set up at the national level and have the same
23

36

For more information, see http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cat/index.htm

24

For more information regarding the OPCAT: http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cat/opcat/index.htm
Regarding NPMs:
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cat/opcat and http://www.apt.ch/en/history-of-the-opcat-1
Also: ‘National human rights institutions in the EU Member States: Strengthening the fundamental rights architecture
in Europe’, FRA, 2010 (http://fra.europa.eu/fraWebsite/attachments/NHRI_en.pdf).

25

For more information, see http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cerd/index.htm

26

For more information, see http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/cedaw
Further reading: ‘Human rights and law enforcement, A manual on human rights training for the police’, UN, 2002,
pp. 25–35 (http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/training5Add2en.pdf).

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

37

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

Committee on Migrant Workers (CMW)

tion of this convention or at any time afterwards declare that it recognises the
competence of the committee to receive and consider communications from or
on behalf of individuals subject to its jurisdiction claiming to be victims of a violation by this state party of provisions of this convention.

The Committee on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (CMW) is the body of independent experts that monitors
the implementation of the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families27 by its states parties. It held its first session in March 2004. All states parties are obliged to submit regular reports to the committee on how the rights are being implemented.
States must report initially 1 year after acceding to the convention and then every
5 years. The committee will examine each report and address its concerns and
recommendations to the state party in the form of ‘concluding observations’.
The committee will also, under certain circumstances, be able to consider individual complaints or communications from individuals claiming that their rights
under the convention have been violated once 10 states parties have accepted
this procedure in accordance with Article 77 of the convention. At the moment,
two states have accepted this procedure. The committee also publishes statements on themes related to its work and interpretations of the content of the
provisions in the convention (general comments).

3.1.6. European human rights mechanisms
Court of Justice of the European Union
The status of the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) has changed considerably when it comes to the further incorporation of fundamental rights in the
EU since the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon. The Charter of Fundamental
Rights of the EU became legally binding when implementing EU law. The CJEU, as
it is responsible for judgments on compliance with EU law, can now also look at
compliance with the charter after domestic legal remedies have been exhausted.
As part of its mission, the Court28:
◆◆ reviews the legality of the acts of the institutions of the EU;
◆◆ ensures that the Member States comply with obligations under the Treaties; and
◆◆ interprets EU law at the request of the national courts and tribunals.

Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
The Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) is the body
of independent experts which monitors the implementation of the convention
by the states parties. All states parties are obliged to submit regular reports to
the committee on how the rights are being implemented. The committee examines each report and shall make such suggestions and general recommendations on the report as it may consider appropriate and shall forward these to the
state party concerned. The optional protocol to the convention gives the committee competence to examine individual complaints with regard to alleged violations of the convention by states parties to the protocol.

Three of the most common types of cases brought to the CJEU are as follows.
◆◆ Direct actions
	Any person or company which has suffered damage as a result of the action or
inaction can bring an action seeking compensation before the General Court.
◆◆ Action for failure to fulfil an obligation

Committee on Enforced Disappearances

	The Court of Justice determines whether a Member State has fulfilled its obligations under EU law. Before bringing the case before the Court of Justice,
the European Commission conducts a preliminary procedure in which the
Member State concerned is given the opportunity to reply to the complaints
addressed to it. If that procedure does not result in the Member State terminating the failure, an action for infringement of EU law may be brought before the Court of Justice.

The Committee on Enforced Disappearances (CED) is the body of independent
experts which monitors the implementation of the convention by the states parties. All states parties are obliged to submit regular reports to the committee on
how the rights are being implemented. The committee examines each report
and shall make such suggestions and general recommendations on the report
as it may consider appropriate and shall forward these to the state party concerned. In accordance with Article 31, a state party may at the time of ratifica27

38

International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families,
adopted by the UN General Assembly, Resolution 45/158 of 18 December 1990. (http://www.un.org/documents/ga/
res/45/a45r158.htm).

28

http://curia.europa.eu/jcms/jcms/Jo2_6999

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

39

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

	The action may be brought by the Commission – as, in practice, is usually
the case – or by a Member State. If the Court finds that an obligation has
not been fulfilled, the state must bring the failure to an end without delay.

homes. The CPT delegations have unlimited access to places of detention and
the right to move around inside such places freely without restriction. They interview persons deprived of their liberty in private, and communicate freely with
anyone who can provide information. After the visit, the CPT draws up a report
on its findings and issues recommendations to the authorities with a view to
strengthening the protection of detainees against torture and other forms of illtreatment. Its reports are published (with the consent of the state concerned).
The CPT has greatly contributed to increasing awareness of human rights problems in places of detention and has led reforms in many countries30.

	The Court investigates the allegations and gives its judgment. If the country is found to be at fault, it must put things right at once. If the Court finds
that the country has not followed its ruling, it can issue a fine.
◆◆ Actions for failure to act

European Commission against Racism and Intolerance

	These actions enable the lawfulness of the failure of the institutions, bodies, offices or agencies of the EU to act to be reviewed. However, such an action may be brought only after the institution concerned has been called on
to act. Where the failure to act is held to be unlawful, it is for the institution
concerned to put an end to the failure by appropriate measures.

The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) is a human
rights body of the Council of Europe, established by a decision in 1993 and composed of independent experts. The ECRI monitors problems of racism, discrimination on grounds of ethnic origin, citizenship, colour, religion and language, as
well as xenophobia, anti-Semitism and intolerance, from the perspective of the
protection of human rights. Its statutory activities are threefold: (1) countryby-country monitoring; (2) general policy recommendations; and (3) information and communication activities with civil society. The ECRI prepares reports
and issues recommendations to Member States. The field of law enforcement
has been treated by the ECRI in the context of country monitoring and in General Policy Recommendations No 1131.

European Court of Human Rights
The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) is tasked with supervising the
implementation of the ECHR. It was set up in 1959 (and since 1998 operates on
a full-time basis) and is located in Strasbourg. It is the oldest and most influential international human rights mechanism in the European context. Any person
who thinks that his / her human rights have been violated by a state party to the
convention can lodge a complaint with the Court. Furthermore, states can bring
cases against other states. Its decisions are binding on the state, and its caselaw has influenced the law and practice in EU Member States to a great extent.
The Court has made a significant contribution to a contemporary understanding of human rights; in other words, if you want to know how a particular human rights provision is interpreted in the European context, the first step is to
look at what the Court says29.

The European Commissioner for Human Rights
The European Commissioner for Human Rights is an independent institution
within the Council of Europe, mandated to promote the awareness of and respect for human rights in 47 Council of Europe Member States. The initiative for
setting up the institution was taken by the Council of Europe’s Heads of State
or Government at their second summit in Strasbourg on 10–11 October 1997. On
7 May 1999, the Committee of Ministers adopted a resolution which instituted
the Office of the Commissioner and elaborated the Commissioner’s mandate.
The current Commissioner, Mr Nils Muižnieks, succeeded Thomas Hammarberg
(2006–12) and Álvaro Gil-Robles (1999–2006).

European Committee for the Prevention of Torture of the Council
of Europe
The European Committee for the Prevention of Torture (CPT) was set up by the
European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. The task of the CPT is to visit places of detention in
EU Member States in order to assess how persons deprived of their liberty are
treated. These places include prisons, juvenile detention centres, police stations,
holding centres for immigration detainees, psychiatric hospitals and social care
29

40

For further information, see http://www.echr.coe.int/echr/homepage_EN
Court cases can be found at: http://www.echr.coe.int/ECHR/EN/hudoc

The Commissioner is mandated to:
◆◆ foster the effective observance of human rights, and assist Member States in
the implementation of Council of Europe human rights standards;

30

For more information, including its reports, see http://www.cpt.coe.int/en

31

For more information, see http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/monitoring/ecri/default_en.asp

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

41

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

◆◆ promote education in and awareness of human rights in Council of Europe
Member States;
◆◆ identify possible shortcomings in the law and practice concerning human
rights;
◆◆ facilitate the activities of national ombudsperson institutions and other human rights structures; and
◆◆ provide advice and information regarding the protection of human rights
across the region.

Border guards are actors in human rights protection in that they represent
the state in all effects, also in engaging its responsibility for its human rights
obligations.
‘National human rights institutions (NHRIs) play an important role in the human rights architecture at the national level, by monitoring compliance, conducting research, initiating preventive measures and awareness-raising’32.
‘NHRIs also operate as hubs within countries, by linking actors, such as government agencies with civil society. By making these connections, NHRIs
contribute to narrowing the “implementation gap” between international
standards and concrete measures. NHRIs also help to ensure that the indivisibility and interdependence of the full spectrum of human rights is given’33.

The Commissioner’s work thus focuses on encouraging reform measures to
achieve tangible improvement in the area of human rights promotion and protection. Being a non-judicial institution, the Commissioner’s Office cannot act
upon individual complaints, but the Commissioner can draw conclusions and take
wider initiatives on the basis of reliable information regarding human rights violations suffered by individuals.

Civil society organisations and in particular international, regional and national
human rights NGOs such as Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch, the
International Commission of Jurists, the International Rehabilitation Council
of Torture Victims, etc. play a fundamental role in protecting and promoting human rights, in particular by monitoring and reporting human rights violations,
by contributing to awareness and reform processes and providing assistance to
victims of human rights violations.

The Commissioner cooperates with a broad range of international and national
institutions as well as human rights monitoring mechanisms. The Office’s most
important intergovernmental partners include the UN and its specialised offices, the EU and the OSCE. The Office also cooperates closely with leading human rights NGOs, universities and think-tanks.

The consequences of human rights violations in the European human rights system

3.1.7. National human rights mechanisms

According to the ECtHR34:
Human rights must be protected primarily at the national level, through the
whole state apparatus. It is a fundamental state function to respect, protect,
promote and fulfil human rights, and all governmental agencies are thus tasked
with the protection of human rights.
Institutions for the protection of human rights at the national level may include:
◆◆ courts, including constitutional courts;
◆◆ ombudspersons or national human rights commissions;
◆◆ parliament, including parliamentary bodies specifically tasked to monitoring human rights;
◆◆ monitoring mechanisms of places of detention, including national preventive
mechanisms under the optional protocol to the convention against torture;
◆◆ national equality and non-discrimination bodies;
◆◆ NGOs;
◆◆ media;
◆◆ trade unions;
◆◆ professional groups.

42

‘In the event of a violation being found, the state concerned must be careful to ensure that no such violations occur again in the future, otherwise the
European Court of Human Rights may deliver new judgments against them.
In some cases the state will have to amend its legislation to bring it into line
with the ECHR’35.
‘When the Court finds against a state and observes that the applicant has
sustained damage, it awards the applicant just satisfaction, that is to say
a sum of money by way of compensation for that damage. The Committee
of Ministers ensures that any sum awarded by the Court is actually paid to
the applicant’36.

32

‘National human rights institutions in the EU Member States (Strengthening the fundamental rights architecture in
the EU I)’, FRA, 2010, p. 7.

33

Ibid, p. 8.

34

Taken from court’s website: http://www.echr.coe.int/echr

35

http://www.echr.coe.int/NR/rdonlyres/5C53ADA4-80F8-42CB-B8BD-CBBB781F42C8/0/FAQ_ENG_A4.pdf, point 41.

36

http://www.echr.coe.int/NR/rdonlyres/5C53ADA4-80F8-42CB-B8BD-CBBB781F42C8/0/FAQ_ENG_A4.pdf, point 42.

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

43

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

The proceedings not only come with a high financial cost to the state (the tax
payer), but they also have a moral and reputational cost which prejudices the
standing of the said state in the regional and international arenas.

of undocumented migrants, whose vulnerability to exploitation and abuse
is acute39. There are therefore essential interests at stake for both the individual and the State.’

It is also important to underline that the ECHR, the ICCPR and, less commonly,
the ICESCR may have direct effect in the national system through the constitution and the stated obligations recognised by it (see for example Article 117 of the
Italian Constitution: ‘Legislative powers shall be vested in the state and the regions in compliance with the constitution and with the constraints deriving from
EU-legislation and international obligations’).

It is in this contested political climate that the Global Migration Group (GMG)40
affirms the following.
‘The Universal Declaration of Human Rights begins with a recognition
of the “inherent dignity and of the equal and inalienable rights of all members of the human family.” Human rights law thus provides that in general,
all persons, without discrimination, must have access to all fundamental
human rights with narrow limitations related to political rights and freedom of movement. States are further obliged to ensure that any differential
treatment, between citizens and non-citizens or among different groups
of non-citizens, is undertaken in a non-discriminatory manner that is, for
a legitimate objective, and that the course of action taken to achieve this
objective is proportionate and reasonable. A human rights approach to migration places the migrant at the centre of migration policies and management, and pays particular attention to the situation of marginalised and
disadvantaged groups of migrants’41.

Whatever the reasons may be for an individual, a family or group of people
to migrate, they all share to a lesser or greater extent the same experience
of embarking in an unfamiliar and at times dangerous journey. Migration with
appropriate papers entails a complex, often long and uncertain maze of bureaucratic procedures at times landing the person(s) in legal limbo. Undocumented migrants have limited access to their rights and are vulnerable to
abuse and slavery, and are constantly on the move for fear of detection37. In
many cases, migrants can be so reluctant to be sent back because of a wellfounded fear of persecution or risk of harm in returning to their place of origin that they will risk their lives and undergo severe adversity rather than face
return to their country of origin. Motivations can change as migratory journeys progress, and migrants can fall in and out of a range of legal categories
as they move from their country of origin through one or more transit countries, on to the country of destination and even as they return once more to
their own country.

The GMG, in accordance with internationally accepted human rights standards,
further states that regardless of their migration status, migrants’ rights include:
◆◆ ‘the right to life, liberty and security of the person and to be free from arbitrary
arrest or detention, and the right to seek and enjoy asylum from persecution;
◆◆ the right to be free from discrimination based on race, sex, language, religion, national or social origin, or other status;
◆◆ the right to be protected from abuse and exploitation, to be free from slavery, and from involuntary servitude, and to be free from torture and from
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment;
◆◆ the right to a fair trial and to legal redress;
◆◆ the right to protection of economic, social and cultural rights, including the
right to health, an adequate standard of living, social security, adequate housing, education, and just and favourable conditions of work; and

States, on the other hand, have a vested interest in controlling migration. According to the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ)38:
‘Migration is a highly charged and contested political issue in most destination States. Control of national borders is seen as an essential aspect of the
sovereign State. National political debates on migration or migrants can be
a flashpoint for political and social anxieties about security, national identity, social change and economic uncertainty. These political battles are also
manifested in national law, which sets the framework within which migrants’
human rights are threatened. States adopt increasingly restrictive rules, often fuelled by popular hostility to immigrants. Such policies and laws, restricting legal migration, often have the effect of increasing the proportion
37

‘Migration and international human rights law, Practitioners guide No 6’, International Commission of Jurists, Geneva,
2011, Introduction.

38

‘Migration and international human rights law, Practitioners guide No 6’, International Commission of Jurists, Geneva, 2011.

44

39

‘Second report of the special rapporteurship on migrant workers and their families in the hemisphere’, OAS Doc. OEA/
Ser.L/V/II.111, Doc. 20 rev., IACHR, 2001, para. 56.

40

The GMG was established by the UN Secretary-General in early 2006 in response to a recommendation of the Global
Commission on International Migration for the establishment of a high-level interinstitutional group of agencies
involved in migration-related activities. The GMG is an inter-agency group bringing together heads of agencies to
promote the wider application of all relevant international and regional instruments and norms relating to migration,
and to encourage the adoption of more coherent, comprehensive and better coordinated approaches to the issue
of international migration.

41

http://www.globalmigrationgroup.org/en/addressing-vulnerabilities-associated-with-migration/
human-rights-of-migrants

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

45

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

◆◆ other human rights as guaranteed by the international human rights instruments to which the state is party and by customary international law’42.

3.2. The rights and the entitlements of border guards and the impact
of working in a border control environment

‘All these rights are human rights to which all persons, without exception, are
entitled. Persons do not acquire them because they are citizens, workers, or
on the basis of a particular status. No one may be deprived of their human
rights because they have entered or remained in a country in contravention
of the domestic immigration rules, just as no-one may be deprived of them
because they look like or are “foreigners”, children, women, or do not speak
the local language’43.

Notes to the trainer
This section seeks to equip the trainee with the background knowledge about the
rights and entitlements of border guards and the potential personal impact that border-guarding activities may bring, such as the psychological consequences, and the
coping mechanisms which may form the basis of a common organisational culture.
Trainees should be aware that the border guards and their institutions should take
every possible step to ensure a healthy approach to their work.

References
◆◆ Resolution 690 on the Declaration on
the Police, Council of Europe (1979)

◆◆ UNHCR protection training manual
for European border and entry
officials (2011)

3.2.1. The rights and entitlements of border guards
Border guards enjoy the same rights as everyone else. Restrictions to these
rights may only be made where necessary for the exercise of their functions,
in accordance with the law, and they must be proportional and necessary in
a democratic society.
Any citizen may join the border guard or police service if he or she satisfies the
relevant conditions. They shall receive thorough training throughout their career, as well as appropriate instruction on social issues, fundamental freedoms,
human rights and in particular the ECHR and the Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the EU.
Border guards also have rights related to their employment. These should protect
the ability of border guards to perform their duties and ensure their colleagues do
theirs in accordance with the law (human rights) and binding professional standards. The professional, psychological and material conditions under which border guards perform their duties protect their integrity, impartiality and dignity.

42

Statement of the Global Migration Group on the human rights of migrants in irregular situations
(http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=10396&LangID=E) and as reproduced in ‘Migration
and international human rights law, Practitioners guide No 6’, International Commission of Jurists, Geneva, 2011, p. 30.

43

‘Migration and international human rights law, Practitioners guide No 6’, International Commission of Jurists, Geneva, 2011.

46

Border guards are entitled to a fair remuneration, and special factors are to be
taken into account, such as greater risks and responsibilities and more irregular working schedules. Thus, they should have the choice of whether to set up
professional organisations, join them and play an active part therein. They may
also play an active part in other organisations.

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

47

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

A professional organisation, provided it is representative, may take part in negotiations concerning the professional status of officers.

Extensive research on the work of institutions dealing with victims of trauma or
human rights violations as well as more generally with people in need has shown
the kind of psychological strain that such kind of work may place on staff, particularly those working on the ground in daily or regular contact with people in
need. Individuals working for border control agencies are probably no exception.

Sometimes, in the course of their duties, the physical and mental well-being
of border-guard personnel may be endangered. In particular, border guards may
be at serious risk of physical attack when carrying out border surveillance at unauthorised crossing points. For example, they may be heavily outnumbered by
people attempting to cross illegally; people may be armed and may forcibly resist being conveyed to a particular border point. In such cases, border guards
should not be required to confront such persons until assistance is provided. At
the same time, border guards should be permitted to use force to defend themselves as necessary, with necessary and proportionate force and equipment44.
Border guards should also have access to make substantiated complaints about
the behaviour of colleagues to the proper authorities without fear of this prejudicing their career prospects.
Border guards are entitled to work in an environment that enables them to respect and enjoy the human rights and the professional standards associated
with their position.
Border guards have the right to a fair hearing if complaints against them are
made either by colleagues or members of the public.

3.2.2. The complexity of working in border control areas45
As with anyone working in complex environments, including with persons in
distress, the challenges that surround the work of border officials can have an
impact on their own psychological well-being. In turn, this can affect the effectiveness and quality of their work.
In the discharge of their duties, border officials can experience varied emotions,
ranging from compassion, through indifference, to rejection of the individuals
they deal with on a daily basis. At the end of the day, this will also have an impact on their ability to respond objectively and empathetically to the different
situations at the border and take appropriate action.
44

For more detailed information on the use of force and fundamental rights, see Module 2.

45

This presentation is taken from the ‘UNHCR protection manual for European border and entry officials’, which greatly
based it on two articles on the psychological effects on humanitarian workers of working with refugees and in
conflict situations. The facilitator may offer interested participants a copy (they are included as background reading
for facilitators). The articles are Mark Walkup, ‘Policy dysfunction in humanitarian organisations: The role of coping
strategies, institutions and organisational culture’, Journal of Refugee Studies, 1997, Oxford University Press, and the
article by Barbara Harrell-Bond, ‘Can humanitarian work with refugees be humane?’, Human Rights Quarterly, Vol. 24,
2002, pp. 51–85, The John Hopkins University Press.

48

What is secondary trauma?
The demanding complexity of the work and the frequent encounter with people who are traumatised, are scared or exhibit mental or physical distress plus
hearing their stories can lead to developing vicarious or secondary trauma. It is
important to be able to identify the symptoms of secondary trauma that one
may develop, so as to act upon them.
Some of the symptoms of secondary trauma are:
◆◆ intrusive thoughts;
◆◆ chronic fatigue;
◆◆ sadness;
◆◆ anger;
◆◆ poor concentration;
◆◆ detachment;
◆◆ emotional exhaustion;
◆◆ fearfulness;
◆◆ shame;
◆◆ physical illness;
◆◆ absenteeism.
Professionals studying and working with secondary traumas concur that it is essential that individuals working with victims of trauma are able to acknowledge
the existence of symptoms associated with secondary trauma and that they do
not need to deal with them alone. Secondary trauma is relatively common and
employers and colleagues can assist in overcoming the symptoms. Access to
counselling should be easily available, protected by confidentiality and accessible.

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

49

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 1

3.3. Professional standards and the human rights framework 46 47 48 49

The nature of the work of border guards and police requires them to come in
close contact with the public, and the efficacy and efficiency of their tasks are
dependent on public support.

50
Notes to the trainer

Public confidence in the work of those agencies managing the borders is intrinsically linked to the attitudes and behaviour that officers display towards the public, in particular their respect for human dignity, fundamental rights and freedoms
of any individual or group crossing the border, be it at sea, land or air. Violating
human rights and behaving unethically does not contribute to the maintenance
of law and order. Violations of fundamental or human rights occur both due to
action or omission (not acting to protect or prevent a violation).

This part of the training material seeks to explain how ethical and human rights issues pertain to all aspects of the functions of a border guard.

References
◆◆ Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (1948)
◆◆ UN Code of Conduct for Law
Enforcement Officials (1979)
◆◆ Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 of the
European Parliament and of the
Council of 15 March 2006 establishing
a community code on the rules
governing the movement of persons
across borders (Schengen borders
code)46
◆◆ Schengen border guards’ handbook
(2006)
◆◆ Updated Schengen catalogue (2008)
◆◆ Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
EU (2000)
◆◆ Council Decision 2010/252/EU
of 26 April 2010 supplementing
the Schengen borders code as
regards the surveillance of the sea
external borders in the context
of the operational cooperation
coordinated by the European Agency
for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders
of the Member States of the
European Union47
◆◆ Directive 95/46/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 24
October 1995 on the protection
of individuals with regard to the

processing of personal data and on
the free movement of such data48
◆◆ Council Decision 2007/533/JHA of 12
June 2007 on the establishment,
operation and use of the second
generation Schengen information
system (SIS II)49

The complexity and difficulties encountered by border guards demand that they
are not only familiar with the law (including human rights) but also with ethical
issues; each border guard integrates ethical concerns and practices in all of his
or her functions, including own values and conduct.

◆◆ Directive 2008/115/EC of the
European Parliament and of the
Council of 16 December 2008 on
common standards and procedures in
Member States for returning illegally
staying third-country nationals50

The effects of violations perpetrated by border guards are multifold51:
◆◆ erosion of public trust;
◆◆ aggravation of unrest;
◆◆ hindering successful prosecution in courts (i.e. in instances of human trafficking);
◆◆ making the state liable to pay reparations to victims;
◆◆ leaving vulnerable individuals in need of protection without justice;
◆◆ causing national, international public and media criticism and condemnation.

◆◆ Twenty guidelines on forced returns,
Council of Europe Committee
of Ministers (2005)
◆◆ European Code of Police Ethics,
Council of Europe (2001)
◆◆ Frontex/64/2010, Ethics of Border
Security, Centre for the Study
of Global Ethics, University
of Birmingham (2011)

To dispel old myths that law enforcement is weakened by human rights and the
ethical issues that emerge from them, the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials52, the European Code of Police Ethics of the Council of Europe53
and the Ethics of Border Security54 commissioned by Frontex, amongst other
related codes of conduct, have been written to provide a framework for border
officials to act in an ethical manner, in full conformity with fundamental rights.

◆◆ Code of conduct for all persons
participating in Frontex activities
adopted by the decision
of the Frontex Executive Director
on 21 March 2011, Executive Director
Decision No 2011/24, Frontex

The Frontex code of conduct for all persons participating in Frontex
activities – ethical code of conduct for border guards

◆◆ Your national code of conduct if it
exists

In general, a code of conduct ensures high professional and personal standards
through the identification and understanding of ethical questions and the appro46

OJ L 105, 13.4.2006, p. 1.

47

OJ L 111, 4.5.2010, p. 20.

48

OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31.

49
50

50

51

‘Professional training series No 5 – Human rights and law enforcement’, UN, New York, Geneva, 1997.

52

http://www.un.org/disarmament/convarms/ATTPrepCom/Background%20documents/
CodeofConductforlawEnfOfficials-E.pdf

OJ L 205, 7.8.2007, p. 63.

53

http://polis.osce.org/library/details?doc_id=2687&_ru=/library/details%3Fdoc_id%3D2658

OJ L 348, 24.12.2008, p. 98.

54

http://www.frontex.europa.eu/assets/Publications/Research/Ethics_of_Border_Security_Report.pdf

fundamental rights in relation to border guarding

51

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

priate way to address those questions. In this regard, the Frontex code of conduct
for all participants in Frontex activities (hereinafter ‘Frontex code of conduct’)
makes clear the values and standards that are required from all participants in
an activity coordinated or led by Frontex, thus creating the framework under
which their duties are performed. It should be emphasised that with this document Frontex fills an existing gap in the legal system: a comparative study
commissioned by Frontex on existing law enforcement ethical codes of the EU
Member States shows that, while many EU Member States have codes of conduct that are used by border guards (23 of the EU and Schengen-associated
countries), only three were written specifically for border guards. The vast majority were those used by police or other services performing border management functions in the Member States concerned.
The Frontex code of conduct aims to promote professional values based on the
principles of the rule of law and the respect of fundamental rights and to establish the ethical behaviour standards that guide all persons participating in
Frontex activities.
As regards its content, the code lists the principles and values which guide the
performance of their duties and personal behaviour, recommends the best practice and defines which conducts are forbidden. Recognising the need to uphold
a proper balance between the efficiency of the border control and the respect
for fundamental rights, the code establishes, alongside with lawfulness, the respect but foremost the promotion of fundamental rights as one of its main principles. According to this provision, under no circumstances can it be admissible
for the participants to inflict, instigate or tolerate any form of violation of those
rights. It implies that they have an obligation to do their utmost to hinder any
serious offence against human dignity.
A final set of rules envisages that law enforcement officers, due to their particular functions, focus on the human conduct in ways that may touch the fundamental rights of citizens. The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU was
the basic framework for the drafting of the code. Moreover, other international
texts which are particularly applicable to law enforcement officials in the international context, such as the UN Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials
and Resolution 690 (1979) of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on the Declaration on the Police, have not only been considered in depth,
but have also been influential sources for the drafting of the code. Furthermore,
and as mentioned above, the comparison of national codes of conduct was prepared and the results of the study have been taken into account in the course
of drafting the code.

52

© Frontex, 2010

Module 2

Interception
at sea, land and air

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

The aim of this module is to establish awareness among border guards of the
importance of fundamental rights in relation to interception at sea, land
and air.

1. Learning outcomes

Method

Toolkit

1.	Introduction to the right to life

◆◆ Presentation

◆◆ The right to life (PowerPoint presentation)
◆◆ Questions to encourage discussion on the
right to life
◆◆ Video clip from ‘Borderlands’
◆◆ Video clip instructions
◆◆ Interception step by step (PowerPoint
presentation)

3.	Fair treatment and nondiscrimination, and the
prohibition of collective
expulsions

◆◆ Presentation

4.	Assessment

◆◆ Questions and
answers

54

◆◆ Brainstorming
◆◆ Reflection
◆◆ Case study

◆◆ Reflection based
on a case study

This part of the training material seeks to present: (1) why during interception, whether
at sea, land or air, the right to life is fundamental, and (2) the legal obligations governing the actions taken by border guards.
The protection of the right to life and to non-refoulement are located in this module, as it is particularly relevant and most at stake during an interception. However,
they remain paramount at all stages of the contact a border guard has with any individual crossing a border.

References

◆◆ International Covenant on Civil
and Political Rights (1966) and 1989
Protocol No 2 on the death penalty

Content

◆◆ Presentation

3.1. Introduction to the right to life

◆◆ Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (1948)

2. Lesson plan

2.	Stages related to interception
(planning, preparation,
detection, interception and
transportation to reception
location) in compliance with
fundamental rights

3. Training material

Notes to the trainer

At the end of this module, participants will be able to:
◆◆ prioritise and account for actions taken during an interception in the context of the right to life;
◆◆ recognise fundamental rights implications / considerations at every stage
of the interception process, in particular the right to life and physical, psychological or mental integrity;
◆◆ outline the principles of the prohibition of arbitrary collective expulsions and
any form of discrimination.

◆◆ Discussion

Module 2

◆◆ Brainstorm prompts for how to carry out an
interception
◆◆ Case studies exercise on interception and
reception

◆◆ International Convention for
the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS
convention) (1974)
◆◆ International Convention on
Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR)
(1979)
◆◆ UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
(Unclos convention) (1982)
◆◆ UN Convention against Torture and
Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment (1984)
◆◆ International Convention on the
Protection of the Rights of All
Migrant Workers and Member
of Their Families (1990)

◆◆ UN Convention on the Rights of the
Child (1989) and Protocols Nos 1
and 2 (2000)
◆◆ Optional Protocol to the Convention
against Torture and Other Cruel,
Inhuman or Degrading Treatment
or Punishment (2002)
◆◆ European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR) (1950)
◆◆ European Convention for the
Prevention of Torture and Inhuman
or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (1987)
◆◆ Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
EU (2000)
◆◆ FRA report ‘Fundamental rights at
Europe’s southern sea borders’ (2013):
Please include appropriate national
references.

◆◆ Case study on fair treatment and
non-discrimination

◆◆ Questions
◆◆ Answer sheet

Interception at sea, land and air

55

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 2

3.1.1. The right to life in human rights treaties

‘Migrant workers and members of their families shall have the right to receive
any medical care that is urgently required for the preservation of their life
or the avoidance of irreparable harm to their health on the basis of equality
of treatment with nationals of the state concerned. Such emergency medical care shall not be refused them by reason of any irregularity with regard
to stay or employment.’

The right to life is the most basic fundamental right of all. Though the wording
varies, it is set out in all major human rights treaties. The differences in formulation do not detract from the fact that all of these standards aim to provide the
same protection. The right to life is a fundamental right because, without it, the
enjoyment of other rights is not possible.

Article 2 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU reads:
The right to life is enshrined in:
◆◆ Article 3 of the UDHR;
◆◆ Article 6 of the ICCPR;
◆◆ Article 6 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child;
◆◆ Articles 9 and 28 of the International Convention on the Protection of the
Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families;
◆◆ Article 2 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU; and
◆◆ Article 2 of the ECHR.

‘1. Everyone has the right to life.
2. No one shall be condemned to the death penalty, or executed.’
When an individual or a group not possessing the necessary papers or with an
entry ban enters a country, it may be perceived as an abuse of the system; however, his / her fundamental right to life supersedes any migratory considerations56.
His or her right to life requires that they be offered all the necessary care to safeguard their life.

Principle 9 of the basic principles on the use of force and firearms by law enforcement officials55 reads:

The European Court of Human Rights deems that Article 2 of the ECHR establishes a ‘positive obligation’ on states to investigate deaths that may have occurred in violation of this article57.

‘Law enforcement officials shall not use firearms against persons except in
self-defence or defence of others against the imminent threat of death or
serious injury, to prevent the perpetration of a particularly serious crime involving grave threat to life, to arrest a person presenting such a danger and
resisting their authority, or to prevent his or her escape, and only when less
extreme means are insufficient to achieve these objectives. In any event, intentional lethal use of firearms may only be made when strictly unavoidable in order to protect life.’

‘The Court confines itself to noting, like the Commission, that a general legal prohibition of arbitrary killing by the agents of the state would be ineffective, in practice, if there existed no procedure for reviewing the lawfulness
of the use of lethal force by state authorities. The obligation to protect the
right to life under this provision, read in conjunction with the State’s general
duty under Article 1 of the convention to “secure to everyone within their jurisdiction the rights and freedoms defined in [the] convention”, requires by
implication that there should be some form of effective official investigation
when individuals have been killed as a result of the use of force by, inter alios, agents of the State’58.

The International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant
Workers and Members of their Families clearly enshrines the protection to the
right of life of all migrants and members of their families, regardless of their status and in the jurisdiction they find themselves in. The relevant articles read:
‘The right to life of migrant workers and members of their families shall be
protected by law.’
(Article 9)
Article 28 stipulates how the right to health is inherently linked with the preservation of life.
55

56

Adopted by the Eighth United Nations Congress on the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana,
Cuba, 27 August to 7 September 1990.

56

UNHCR protection training manual for European border and entry officials, Session 4.

57

For more information on case-law on how investigations should be carried out read Jordan v UK and McKerr v UK
(http://hudoc.echr.coe.int/sites/eng-press/pages/search.aspx?i=003-68397-68865).

58

McCann GC judgment, § 161 in ‘The right to life: A guide to the implementation of Article 2 of the ECHR’, Douwe Korff,
Human rights handbooks No 8, Council of Europe, 2006.

Interception at sea, land and air

57

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 2

3.1.2. At sea

sions in the ICCPR61,62. Article 4 of the ICCPR63 and Article 15 of the ECHR64 reinforce this legal principle.

The 1974 International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS convention) and the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (Unclos convention)
provide that:
1. ‘All shipmasters, state and merchant, are bound to render assistance;
2.	The responsibilities of governments require parties, either individually or in
cooperation with other states, to establish basic elements of a search and
rescue service, to include:
◆◆ legal framework;
◆◆ assignment of a responsible authority;
◆◆ organisation of available resources;
◆◆ communication facilities;
◆◆ coordination and operational functions; and
◆◆ processes to improve the service including planning, domestic and international cooperative relationships and training.
3.	Any ships have to proceed instantly to the rescue of all persons at distress at
sea without regard to circumstances in which they are found. No time may
be wasted, even while the ship master is waiting for instructions.
4.	Unless the rescue operation may endanger the lives of crew members or the
ship itself, the fact that the cargo ship is not intended to carry a large crew
is irrelevant. The top priority is to save lives’59.

Nevertheless, there is not an absolute prohibition of taking of life by state officers, as in some circumstances the deprivation of life may be justified (see the
list below under Article 2 of the ECHR).
Article 2 of the ECHR covers the right to life.
‘1. Everyone’s right to life shall be protected by law. No one shall be deprived
of his life intentionally save in the execution of a sentence of a court following his conviction of a crime for which this penalty is provided by law.

61

Annex to UN Doc. E/CN.4/1985/4, 1985.

62

Non-derogable rights:
‘58.	No state party shall, even in time of emergency threatening the life of the nation, derogate from the covenant’s
guarantees of the right to life; freedom from torture, cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and
from medical or scientific experimentation without free consent; freedom from slavery or involuntary servitude;
the right not to be imprisoned for contractual debt; the right not to be convicted or sentenced to a heavier penalty
by virtue of retroactive criminal legislation; the right to recognition as a person before the law; and freedom
of thought, conscience and religion. These rights are not derogable under any conditions even for the asserted
purpose of preserving the life of the nation.
59.	State parties to the covenant, as part of their obligation to ensure the enjoyment of these rights to all persons
within their jurisdiction (Art. 2(1)) and to adopt measures to secure an effective remedy for violations (Art. 2(3)),
shall take special precautions in time of public emergency to ensure that neither official nor semi-official groups
engage in a practice of arbitrary and extra-judicial killings or involuntary disappearances, that persons in detention
are protected against torture and other forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, and that
no persons are convicted or punished under laws or decrees with retroactive effect.
60.	T he ordinary courts shall maintain their jurisdiction, even in a time of public emergency, to adjudicate any
complaint that a non-derogable right has been violated.’

63

‘Article 4
1.	In time of public emergency which threatens the life of the nation and the existence of which is officially
proclaimed, the states parties to the present covenant may take measures derogating from their obligations under
the present covenant to the extent strictly required by the exigencies of the situation, provided that such measures
are not inconsistent with their other obligations under international law and do not involve discrimination solely on
the ground of race, colour, sex, language, religion or social origin.
2. No derogation from Articles 6, 7, 8 (paragraphs 1 and 2), 11, 15, 16 and 18 may be made under this provision.
3.	Any state party to the present covenant availing itself of the right of derogation shall immediately inform the
other states parties to the present covenant, through the intermediary of the Secretary-General of the United
Nations, of the provisions from which it has derogated and of the reasons by which it was actuated. A further
communication shall be made, through the same intermediary, on the date on which it terminates such derogation.’

64

‘Article 15 Derogation in time of emergency
1.	In time of war or other public emergency threatening the life of the nation any High Contracting Party may take
measures derogating from its obligations under this convention to the extent strictly required by the exigencies
of the situation, provided that such measures are not inconsistent with its other obligations under international
law.
2.	No derogation from Article 2, except in respect of deaths resulting from lawful acts of war, or from Articles 3, 4
(paragraph 1) and 7 shall be made under this provision.
3.	Any High Contracting Party availing itself of this right of derogation shall keep the Secretary-General of the Council
of Europe fully informed of the measures which it has taken and the reasons therefor. It shall also inform the
Secretary-General of the Council of Europe when such measures have ceased to operate and the provisions of the
convention are again being fully executed.’

Under the International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue, state vessels may carry additional obligations60.

3.1.3. The use of force
The right to life as well as the right to the prohibition of torture and other
forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment is ‘non-derogable’, meaning that they may not be denied even in ‘time of war or other public emergency threatening the life of the nation’, as defined in the UN Economic
and Social Council, Siracusa Principles on the Limitation and Derogation Provi-

59

UNHCR protection training manual for European border and entry officials, Session 6.

60

http://www.imo.org/about/conventions/listofconventions/pages/international-convention-on-maritime-search-andrescue-(sar).aspx

58

Interception at sea, land and air

59

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 2

3.1.4. Non-refoulement

2. Deprivation of life shall not be regarded as inflicted in contravention of this
article when it results from the use of force which is no more than absolutely necessary:
(a) in defence of any person from unlawful violence;
(b) in order to carry out a lawful arrest or to prevent the escape of a person
lawfully detained;
(c) in action lawfully taken for the purpose of quelling a riot or insurrection.’

Non-refoulement is the total prohibition of returning anyone, regardless of nationality, status or other groups, who may be at risk of torture68.
The principle of non-refoulement is applicable to all places where the state intercepts the migrant(s) in question and where it exercises jurisdiction, including the high seas. The leading case on this is Hirsi v Italy69. Any attempt to push
back irregular migration does not absolve the state from its human rights responsibilities to uphold the absolute nature of the non-refoulement principle.

In all circumstances, the use of force will have to be necessary, proportional to
the threat faced and hold up to evidence in which the burden of proof shows
its use being justified.
Moreover, the tendency in Europe and reflected in the ECHR is that the death
penalty is not accepted65. This is clearly stated in Protocols 6 and 13.
Protocol No 6 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms concerning the abolition of the death penalty66
‘Article 1, Abolition of the death penalty
The death penalty shall be abolished. No one shall be condemned to such
penalty or executed.’
Protocol No 13 to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and
Fundamental Freedoms concerning the abolition of the death penalty in all
circumstances67
‘The Member States of the Council of Europe, signatory hereto,
Convinced that everyone’s right to life is a basic value in a democratic society
and that the abolition of the death penalty is essential for the protection of this
right and for the full recognition of the inherent dignity of all human beings;
Wishing to strengthen the protection of the right to life guaranteed by the
Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms signed at Rome on 4 November 1950 (hereinafter referred to as “the
Convention”);
Noting that Protocol No 6 to the convention, concerning the abolition of the
death penalty, signed at Strasbourg on 28 April 1983, does not exclude the
death penalty in respect of acts committed in time of war or of imminent
threat of war;
Being resolved to take the final step in order to abolish the death penalty in
all circumstances.’
65

For more information on case-law view case of Al-Saadoon and Mufdhi v the United Kingdom (http://hudoc.echr.coe.
int/sites/eng/pages/search.aspx?i=001-97575).

66

Strasbourg, 28.4.1983.

67

Vilnius, 3.5.2002.

60

68

Article 19.2 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU; Article 3 of the convention against torture; in the case
of refugees, Article 33 of the 1951 Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.

69

Hirsi Jamaa and Others v Italy, Application No 27765/09, Council of Europe: European Court of Human Rights, 23
February 2012 (http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4f4507942.html).

Interception at sea, land and air

61

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 2

3.2. Stages related to interception (planning, preparation, detection,
interception and follow-up) in compliance with fundamental rights

Any operation’s order should contain the necessary provisions for fundamental rights issues71:
◆◆ The safety and well-being of all concerned could necessitate contracting
partners and, for example, having medical personnel or an interpreter present or standing by.
◆◆ Foresee protection at all stages. Provisions could include surgical or rubber
gloves, masks for the face for conducting searches, equipment to film the
operation and allowing for internal / external oversight. These measures will
not solely benefit the targeted public, but will also protect the border guard.
◆◆ Prevention will prevail. Methods will aim at de-stressing and de-escalation.
◆◆ The element of time should be calculated in order to allow due attention to
people in need or potential victims. Overly long waiting times and / or not
enough time for proper execution may place unnecessary stress on border
guards.
◆◆ During the identification procedure and searches, women, people with disabilities and children always have priority over all others and are entitled to
specific treatment.
◆◆ Any use of force or constraint should be legitimate (justifiable), i.e. the last
resort (meaning the objectives cannot be reached in any other way or using
any lesser force), in proportion to the desired effect and according to legal
provisions; border guards should be competent with the knowledge, welltrained skills and attitude for the particular operation72. The need for improvisation should be minimised through further detailed instructions73.
◆◆ Planning should be flexible and be adapted to specific, situational details on
migrants that might, will or could be intercepted (numbers, origin, motives,
communication, needs, etc.).
◆◆ Men and women should be kept separate, with the exception of families, unless otherwise requested by the family member74.
◆◆ When possible, organise the distribution of food and drinking water, taking
into account the religious differences (e.g. no pork for Muslims, Jews, etc.).
◆◆ Generally plan and be ready for the unexpected. What if? More people could
be involved, more (expert) capacity or support might be needed, cars may
break down and things will go wrong.
◆◆ Include provisions for an efficient transfer and humane transport for the intake.
◆◆ Foresee possible contacts with the press and how to safeguard the privacy
of intercepted persons.

Notes to the trainer
This part of the training material seeks to highlight the key moments when fundamental
rights need to be considered and applied during the different stages when intercepting
migrants.

References
◆◆ Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (1948)

◆◆ UN Convention on the Rights of the
Child (1989)

◆◆ International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (1966)

◆◆ International Convention on
the Protection of the Rights
of All Migrant Workers and Member
of Their Families (1990)

◆◆ International Convention for
the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS
convention) (1974)
◆◆ International Convention on
Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR)
(1979)
◆◆ UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
(Unclos convention) (1982)

◆◆ The European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR) (1950)
◆◆ Frontex common core curriculum.
Please use appropriate local references.

3.2.1. Professional planning and preparation
Professional planning and preparation prevents poor performance!
Of course, not every interception of a person will be covered by standard operating procedures or specific planning. However, every operation, activity, procedure or even routine should be based on, or take into account, a risk analysis.
The interests of victims, suspects, other persons present as well as the concern
for the safety and security of the border guard(s) should be at the centre of this
analysis – in other words, fundamental rights should be considered at all times70.
From a fundamental rights view, a minor operational plan should also handle
questions on officers using methods and means the right way; thus, the need
to secure the use of proportionality, particularly in relation to ensuring that the
minimum force and restraint necessary are applied.
71

70

62

Frontex common core curriculum.

The 1974 SOLAS convention, the 1982 Unclos convention, the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU and the ECHR.
However, when teaching this it would be important to also make reference to national law.

72

For more information on the use of force and human rights, see the section in this module on the use of force.

73

International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families.

74

Article 17 and Article 23(1) of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.

Interception at sea, land and air

63

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 2

The border guard should be prepared for emotional reactions – he or she may be confronted with persons who may be from countries or cultures where invasive or brutal
policing methods are commonly used. After travelling in difficult or even inhumane
conditions, the intercepted person may see his or her dream of a better life shattered
and may think he or she has nothing to lose anymore. In general, there may be signs
of fear, but reactions may also be aggressive or even (self-)destructive. The border
guard needs to always aim at de-escalating the situation.

The preparation of any operation should include a proper briefing explaining at
least the situation, the mission (i.e. the objectives of the operation), the execution (i.e. the use of force), the administration and communication (also with the
press). The content should reflect the fundamental rights based approach. If, for
example, potentially harmful technical means or dogs would be used, the briefing should mention the necessity of providing warnings raising the awareness
that exposure to dogs, in some cultures, may have very negative connotations,
thus provoking fear or distress and rejection that may be wrongly interpreted
as aggression or flight.

If two or more persons have been apprehended, parties should be separated where
necessary; where children are concerned, they should be kept with their family
or confirmed guardian. As in all phases of the process, also this step should be
based on an active and continuing risk analysis by the border guard. In case of any
doubt, the border guard should go for the choice giving the best protection for
all concerned parties; in the case of children, act in the best interest of the child.

3.2.2. Detection and interception
The reaction upon the detection of one or more (potentially) undocumented
persons should be prompt. If people are detected by third parties – lorry-drivers, a ship’s crew, private security personnel – the border guards’ response times
should be organised in such a way that it does not endanger the public, the detected persons or the border guards themselves.

The border guard should be looking for signs that would indicate any need for
medical care76. Keeping in mind that the undocumented person may be a victim, the border guard should also be very alert for indicators of any other criminal activity.

The border guards shall ensure that the persons are not photographed by journalists, both for respect of their privacy, but mostly because asylum seekers,
trafficked persons and other vulnerable groups could encounter serious repercussions in their country of origin, as well as their family members still residing
in the country of origin75.

The fact of not being able to produce a valid travel or residence document should
in itself not be a valid motivation for the use of handcuffs77. The use of handcuffs depends on the legislation of each country. However, if the use of handcuffs
proves to be necessary – safe and non-harmful materials should be at hand. The
responsible border guard should at regular intervals check if handcuffs are not
cutting into the skin or blocking the blood circulation.

Persons who are detected hiding in cars, lorries, boats or ships, in containers, or
in between the cargo or goods should be clearly notified of the presence of law
enforcement and should be urged to come out of their hiding place.
It is a general rule that the safety of the officer comes first – if he or she is rendered unable to perform his or her duties, most chances for assistance are also
lost. General standard operating procedures should provide the necessary safeguards for the border guard’s well-being (e.g. communication, backup support).
Intercepted persons should be searched as soon as possible for the presence of potential weapons and other harmful objects in their possession. Rubber gloves
should be at hand for conducting these searches – they will protect the border
guard as well as the material evidence that the border guard might come upon.

75

64

Article 12 of the UDHR and Article 8 of the ECHR; also see Module 4 for more information on the right to privacy.

No person should be handcuffed to fixed points or solid infrastructure such as
walls, ceilings, floors, central heating radiators, etc. Individuals who are deprived
of their liberty for any reason (e.g. for immigration issues or criminal purposes
or for aggressive behaviour) should not be subjected to practices that are unnecessary and / or painful, and amount to inhuman and degrading treatment78.
Any interception should be the subject of a formal report that will make detailed
mention of any use of force and modes of restraints (searches, handcuffs, etc.)79.
76

Article 28 of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their
Families.

77

Address by Bacre Ndiaye, Director, Human Rights Council and Special Procedures Division, Global Forum on Migration
and Development, OHCHR, Geneva, December 2011 (http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Issues/MHR/StatementBN_
HRBA_Irregular_Migration.pdf).

78

‘The prohibition of torture: A guide to the implementation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights’,
Aisling Reidy, Human rights handbooks No 8, Council of Europe, 2002, p. 27.

79

‘The CPT Standards’, European Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
Punishment (CPT), CPT/Inf/E(2002) 1 – Rev. 2010, pp. 67 and 83.

Interception at sea, land and air

65

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 2

Communication and language, including body language, should be de-stressing and de-escalating.

in place for contacts with the press or third parties, including legal representatives and relevant NGOs.

Communication with the apprehended person(s) is of the utmost importance.
The right information on the ‘here and now’ should, on the one hand, give the
person a de-stressing ‘sense of control’ over the situation and, on the other hand,
where possible, prevent complications for the border guard80.

Escape attempts should be dissuaded, prevented and acted upon. The border
guard should be aware of – and even expect – such attempts that could have
a hopeless and self-destructive character.

As far as this does not endanger its desired outcome and / or the safety or security of any person concerned, any use of force should be preceded by a warning.
As much as possible, agents should be able to seek out and understand key sentences in the most prevalent languages of the people more regularly intercepted.
Ensure that all persons rescued or intercepted, including on the high seas, are
provided with adequate information about the possibility of requesting international protection. As highlighted by the court in the Hirsi Jamaa and Others v
Italy case81, access to asylum procedures may be severely jeopardised by a lack
of information. Thus, access to information should be ensured prior to the adoption of any decision regarding expulsions or other forms of return; each case having being examined and dealt with individually.

3.2.3. Transfer to the second line82
The border guard will take necessary precautions to ensure that the person’s
luggage is recuperated and safeguarded during the next steps in the procedure83.
In the course of procedures for identifying and other follow-up steps, border
guards should always try to keep family groups together, making sure that they
are not dispersed84.
The border guard should be aware of the need for discretion. Any apprehended
person should be kept away from public attention as much as possible – even in
the first line. As a minimum, general standard operating procedures should be
80

For more information on communication, see Module 4 of this manual.

81

Hirsi Jamaa and Others v Italy, Application No 27765/09, Council of Europe: European Court of Human Rights, 23 February
2012 (http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4f4507942.html).

82

For the purpose of this manual second line is when an individual or group are referred to other officers for further
examination of the case or circumstances.

83

Article 1 of the Protocol to the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (Paris,
20.3.1952), Protection of property: ‘Every natural or legal person is entitled to the peaceful enjoyment of his possessions.
No one shall be deprived of his possessions except in the public interest and subject to the conditions provided for by
law and by the general principles of international law.’

84

Articles 17, 23(1), 23(4) and 24 (1) of the ICCPR; Article 10(1) of the ICESCR.

66

The first-line border guard will make sure that the apprehended person will be
taken care of at the moment of transfer to the second line.
Another excellent summary of tasks is provided by the Council of Europe Resolution 1821 (2011) on the interception and rescue at sea of asylum seekers, refugees and irregular migrants:
‘… the Assembly calls on Member States, when conducting maritime border
surveillance operations, whether in the context of preventing smuggling and
trafficking in human beings or in connection with border management, be it
in the exercise of de jure or de facto jurisdiction, to:
9.1. fulfil without exception and without delay their obligation to save people in distress at sea;
9.2. ensure that their border management policies and activities, including
interception measures, recognise the mixed make-up of flows of individuals
attempting to cross maritime borders;
9.3. guarantee for all intercepted persons humane treatment and systematic respect for their human rights, including the principle of non-refoulement, regardless of whether interception measures are implemented within
their own territorial waters, those of another state on the basis of an ad hoc
bilateral agreement, or on the high seas;
9.4. refrain from any practices that might be tantamount to direct or indirect refoulement, including on the high seas, in keeping with the UNHCR’s
interpretation of the extraterritorial application of that principle and with
the relevant judgments of the European Court of Human Rights;
9.5. carry out as a priority action the swift disembarkation of rescued persons to a “place of safety” and interpret a “place of safety” as meaning a place
which can meet the immediate needs of those disembarked and in no way
jeopardises their fundamental rights, since the notion of “safety” extends beyond mere protection from physical danger and must also take into account
the fundamental rights dimension of the proposed place of disembarkation;
9.6. guarantee access to a fair and effective asylum procedure for those intercepted who are in need of international protection;
9.7. guarantee access to protection and assistance, including to asylum procedures, for those intercepted who are victims of human trafficking or at
risk of being trafficked;

Interception at sea, land and air

67

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 2

9.8. ensure that the placement in a detention facility of those intercepted– always excluding minors and vulnerable categories – regardless of their status,
is authorised by the judicial authorities and occurs only where necessary and
on grounds prescribed by law, that there is no other suitable alternative and
that such placement conforms to the minimum standards and principles set
forth in Assembly Resolution 1707 (2010)85 on the detention of asylum seekers and irregular migrants in Europe;
9.9. suspend any bilateral agreements they may have concluded with third
states if the human rights of those intercepted are not appropriately guaranteed therein, particularly the right of access to an asylum procedure, and
wherever these might be tantamount to a violation of the principle of nonrefoulement, and conclude new bilateral agreements specifically containing
such human rights guarantees and measures for their regular and effective
monitoring;
9.10. sign and ratify, if they have not already done so, the aforementioned relevant international instruments and take account of the International Maritime
Organisation (IMO) Guidelines on the Treatment of Persons Rescued at Sea;
9.11. sign and ratify, if they have not already done so, the Council of Europe
Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings (CETS No 197) and
the so-called ‘Palermo Protocols’ to the United Nations Convention against
Transnational Organised Crime (2000);
9.12. ensure that maritime border surveillance operations and border control
measures do not affect the specific protection afforded under international
law to vulnerable categories such as refugees, Stateless persons, women and
unaccompanied children, migrants, victims of trafficking or at risk of being
trafficked, or victims of torture and trauma.’

◆◆ coordinating resources for the purposes of prevention of tragedy;
◆◆ using de-escalating gestures and language.
Emergency health care86:
◆◆ first-aid;
◆◆ identifying and paying special attention to pregnant women, children, the
elderly.
Other considerations:
◆◆ access to and provision of water and food;
◆◆ gender and child-sensitive measures;
◆◆ provision of information on rights and the upcoming process / procedures.

Summary of key elements of interception
Contact with migrants:
◆◆ risk analysis of entire situation;
◆◆ in the case of sea interceptions, asking about the situation on the vessel
(people on the brink of death or probably dead, pregnant women, children,
elderly, people with disabilities);
◆◆ prioritisation of victim protection over criminal investigation; the former
overrides and prevails over the latter;
◆◆ notifying approach by competent authorities;
◆◆ assessing the method for a safe rescue and coordinating efforts for this
purpose.
Rescue:
◆◆ assessing the risk involved as a result of climatic conditions;
85

68

http://assembly.coe.int/ASP/Doc/XrefViewHTML.asp?FileId=17813&Language=EN

86

Article 28 of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families: ‘Migrant workers and members of their families shall have the right to receive any medical care that
is urgently required for the preservation of their life or the avoidance of irreparable harm to their health on the basis
of equality of treatment with nationals of the state concerned. Such emergency medical care shall not be refused them
by reason of any irregularity with regard to stay or employment.’

Interception at sea, land and air

69

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 2

3.3. Fair treatment and non-discrimination, and the prohibition
of collective expulsions

‘Hirsi Jamaa and Others v Italy is the first case in which the European Court
of Human Rights delivers a judgment on interception-at-sea. In the present
context the latter term is a short-hand for referring to the enforced return
of irregular migrants to the point of departure of their attempted Mediterranean crossing, without any individual processing, let alone examination
of asylum claims. Unanimously, the Grand Chamber found a violation of Article 3 ECHR prohibiting inhuman and degrading treatment on a double count
(risk of ill-treatment in Libya and risk of repatriation from Libya to countries
where ill-treatment is rife), a violation of Article 4 of Protocol No 4 prohibiting
collective expulsion and a violation of Article 13 ECHR guaranteeing a domestic remedy for any arguable complaint of a violation of the convention. These
verdicts, reached by the Grand Chamber unanimously on 23 February 2012,
undoubtedly put into question the kind of bilateral and multilateral agreements which have been signed by European states in the last decade or so
in order to fight clandestine immigration, not to mention the fact that they
indirectly require major aspects of European migration policy to be revised’89.

Notes to the trainer
This part of the training material focuses on how the fair treatment and non-discrimination of migrants is fundamental for a border guard to carry out his / her duties
in a professional and legal manner. Similarly, it emphasises the prohibition of collective expulsions.

References
◆◆ Universal Declaration of Human
Rights (1948)

◆◆ European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR) (1950)

◆◆ UN Durban declaration (2001) and
outcome document of the Durban
Review Conference (2009)

◆◆ FRA annual report 2012 –
Fundamental rights: challenges and
achievements in 2012 (p.50 CJEU case
law on return directive)

In view of these precedents, it is safe to affirm the following:

3.3.1. Prohibition of collective expulsions87

Judgements of the European Court of Human Rights hold that collective expulsions are unlawful under international and European regional human rights law.

Collective expulsions at interception would prevent the proper identification
of people entitled to special protection such as asylum seekers, people who might
be subject to torture if returned, children, victims of trafficking, etc.

While the methods of expulsion are not specifically mentioned in any relevant
international instrument, the general provisions on cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment apply: no one should be expelled in a manner that would put his
life or physical integrity at risk.

Article 19(1) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU reads: ‘Collective expulsions are prohibited.’ In addition, Article 4 of Protocol No 4 of the ECHR reads:
‘Collective expulsion of aliens is prohibited.’

3.3.2. Fair treatment and non-discrimination
‘Discrimination lies at the root of many of the world’s most pressing human
rights problems. No country is immune from this scourge. Eliminating discrimination is a duty of the highest order.’
Navi Pillay
UN High Commissioner for Human Rights

The provision was first defined by the European Commission of Human Rights
in 1975 in Henning Becker v Denmark (No 7011/75, decision of 3 October 1975). The
Commission defined the ‘collective expulsion of aliens’ as being ‘any measure of the
competent authority compelling aliens as a group to leave the country, except
where such a measure is taken after and on the basis of a reasonable and objective examination of the particular cases of each individual alien of the group’88.

The UN Durban declaration90 pointed out that xenophobia against non-nationals, and in particular migrants, constitutes one of the main sources of contemporary racism.

In February 2012, in the Hirsi v Italy case, the European Court of Human Rights
decided that the prohibition of collective expulsions to a third state also applied
in cases involving the removal of foreigners carried out outside territorial waters.
87

It is important to combine the prohibition of collective expulsions with knowledge on the principle of non-refoulement.
The principle of non-refoulement is covered in Module 6.

88

http://migrantsatsea.wordpress.com/2012/02/27/hirsi-v-italy-prohibition-of-collective-expulsion-extends-to-extraterritorial-actions

70

‘All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights.’
89

http://strasbourgobservers.com/2012/03/01/interception-at-sea-illegal-as-currently-practiced-hirsi-and-others-v-italy

90

https://www.un.org/en/ga/durbanmeeting2011/pdf/DDPA_full_text.pdf

Interception at sea, land and air

71

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

These first few famous words of the UDHR clearly illustrate that the grounds on
which beliefs and practices that attempt to diminish the worth of those who appear different is totally unacceptable and moreover in violation of the most basic principles enshrined in modern European thinking.
Grounds for discrimination are91: sex, ‘race’92, skin colour, ethnic or social origin,
nationality, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, legal status93, membership of a national minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual orientation and other status.
Discriminatory profiling is: treating an individual less favourably than another in
a same situation (e.g. border checks), when certain border control related action
is based only or mainly on ethnicity, etc. (ECHR case-law on this: Rosalind Williams
v Spain). A generalisation based on looks will lead to putting people of a particular group under a general suspicion, shifting the focus away from real suspects,
and is therefore ineffective.
◆◆ Are like situations treated in an unlike manner? Are unlike situations treated
alike?
◆◆ Does the differential treatment pursue a legitimate aim?
◆◆ Is it suitable, proportionate and necessary? Is it the least intrusive measure?
Are there alternatives?
◆◆ You can give other ‘absurd’ examples of differential treatment (e.g. all those
chewing a chewing gum cannot use the subways) to make the differential
treatment more visible and to potentially create empathy.
◆◆ Professional profiling is based on intelligence, specific characteristics and
types of behaviour.

© Frontex, 2013

Module 3
91

https://www.un.org/en/ga/durbanmeeting2011/pdf/DDPA_full_text.pdf

92

The word ‘race’ is in quotation marks to signify that ‘races’ are social constructs, rather than any reflection of genetic
differences between peoples from different continents or with different skin pigmentation. This underpins the
contemporary belief of equality irrespective of place of origin and skin colour.

93

CESCR General Comment No 20 on non-discrimination.

72

Reception and assistance

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

The aim of this module is to establish awareness among border guards of the
importance of fundamental rights in the execution of their duties concerning reception and assistance at the border entry point94.

Module 3

3. Training material 95 96 97
3.1. Introduction to fundamental rights in reception and assistance

1. Learning outcomes

Notes to the trainer
This part of the training material aims to build the capacity of border guards to ensure respect for fundamental rights throughout their interactions with all persons
encountered during the reception process, and to meet their needs and provide any
assistance required.

At the end of this module, participants will be able to:
◆◆ recognise the responsibilities related to fundamental rights during the reception and assistance phase at the border entry point;
◆◆ apply the key provisions of the EU directive on asylum procedures and the
EU directive on reception conditions to the reception process;
◆◆ proactively identify different groups of persons at the border including those
with special needs.

References
◆◆ Geneva conventions (1949) and
international humanitarian
customary law

2. Lesson plan
Content

Method

Toolkit

1.	Introduction to
fundamental rights in
reception and assistance

◆◆ Presentation

◆◆ Rights at the border point (PowerPoint
presentation)

◆◆ In-course reading
exercise

◆◆ Presentation
◆◆ Exercise
◆◆ Practice

◆◆ Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union (2012)

◆◆ European Social Charter (1961)

◆◆ Further developing asylum quality in
the EU, UNHCR

◆◆ Council Directive 2003/9/EC of 27
January 2003 laying down minimum
standards for the reception of asylum
seekers96 (‘reception conditions
directive’)
◆◆ Council Directive 2005/85/EC
of 1 December 2005 on minimum
standards on procedures in Member

◆◆ Instructions for in-course reading exercise on
reception
2.	Reception and assistance

◆◆ International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (1966)
◆◆ Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
EU (2000)95

◆◆ Reception in accordance with human rights
(PowerPoint presentation)

◆◆ Individual with special needs (PowerPoint
presentation)

States for granting and withdrawing
refugee status97 (‘asylum procedures
directive’)

◆◆ UNHCR protection training manual
for European border and entry
officials, Session 4
◆◆ UNHCR manual on building a highquality asylum system
◆◆ FRA and Council of Europe
‘Handbook on European law relating
to asylum, borders and immigration’

◆◆ Instructions for non-discrimination activity
(exercise)
◆◆ Power walk exercise
◆◆ Practice on reception and assistance of migrants
◆◆ Video clip from ‘Borderlands’, Frontex
◆◆ Video clip instructions

3.	Assessment

◆◆ Multiple-choice
questions
94

74

◆◆ Multiple-choice questions

Communication and interviewing, two key skills for reception and assistance, are covered in Module 2 and in more
detail in Module 4.
As mentioned in footnote 5, this manual and all the modules are about the interaction with everyone at the entry point
only. The particular rights covered are related to this brief moment of contact the border guard has with the person(s)
at the entry point. Issues related to the right to housing, accommodation, maintenance, subsistence, education, etc.
that come into play at the moment the migrant has crossed the border are not the topic of this manual. This manual
does not deal with the asylum application process nor the rights involved in it, but only with those at the entry point
(see Introduction).

95

The charter brings together in a single document rights previously found in a variety of legislative instruments,
such as in national and EU laws, as well as in international conventions from the Council of Europe, the UN and
the International Labour Organisation (ILO). By making fundamental rights clearer and more visible, it creates legal
certainty within the EU.

96

OJ L 31, 6.2.2003, p. 18.

97

OJ L 326, 13.12.2005, p. 13.

Reception and assistance

75

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 3

The right to freedom of movement, in human rights law, is captured in Article
13 of the UDHR which provides that ‘everyone has the right to leave any country,
including his own, and to return to his country’. Article 12(2) of the ICCPR contains a similar provision, reaffirming this right in international law98. In addition,
Article 2(2) and (3) of Protocol No 4 to the ECHR also upholds the same right99.

The Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council of Europe (1 April 2006 to
31 March 2012), Thomas Hammerberg, stated102:
‘I have observed with increasing concern a trend to criminalise the irregular entry
and presence of migrants as part of a policy of “migration management”. Such
a method of controlling international movement corrodes established international law principles. It also causes many human tragedies without achieving its
purpose of genuine control.’

Therefore, according to international and European human rights law, attempting
to cross or crossing a border without the appropriate papers should not be considered a criminal offence. This analysis is brought forward by, amongst others,
the Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants in his address to the
66th session of the UN General Assembly, Third Committee – item 69 stated that:

It is in this context that it is required of border guards not to view the migrant,
regardless of his or her legal status, as a criminal engaging in illicit activities.

‘… irregular migration is not a crime. State authorities have increasingly had
recourse to the language of crime when they speak of irregular migration,
with some states resorting to criminalisation of irregular migration and / or
of helping migrants in an irregular situation. Crossing borders may be in violation of the law, but it is an abstract violation of the law, since moving
from one country to another does not per se endanger any person, nor affect any property.’

Border checkpoints are one of the primary locations where individuals in need
of protection may declare their circumstances (e.g. claim international protection, ask for help as being a victim of trafficking), thus the processing of new
arrivals has to take place in an atmosphere that permits and facilitates the identification of vulnerable individuals and of people with special needs. This will be
done most effectively if there is not a view that the movement of people into
the country is in itself a negative or a criminal act.

Moreover, Article 5 of the 2000 UN Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants
by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the 2004 UN Convention against Transational Organised Crime, expressly proscribes the criminal liability of migrants who
have been the object of conduct relating to their being smuggled into a country.

Any migrant, including an undocumented one, should be treated with respect.
A primary concern of the border guard is to uphold the human rights and dignity of all individuals under their jurisdiction. Discriminatory profiling with any
other discriminatory practices should be avoided as contrary to the fundamental rights of dignity, equality and justice, as enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU103.

It is also the opinion of the UN Working Group on Arbitrary Detention100, which
has pronounced that criminalising irregular entry into a country leads to unnecessary detention that does not serve the interests of states101.

98

99

Article 12 of the ICESCR: ‘(2) Everyone shall be free to leave any country, including his own. (3) The above-mentioned
rights shall not be subject to any restrictions except those which are provided by law, are necessary to protect national
security, public order (ordre public), public health or morals or the rights and freedoms of others, and are consistent
with the other rights recognised in the present covenant.’

76

In this regard, as the charter applies to all EU institutions, it also applies to EU
Member States when they implement EU law. Thus, it is important to be familiar
with the content and the spirit of the charter; below you find a summary presenting the most relevant aspects.

Article 2 of the ECHR, Freedom of movement: ‘2. Everyone shall be free to leave any country, including his own. 3.
No restrictions shall be placed on the exercise of these rights other than such as are in accordance with law and are
necessary in a democratic society in the interests of national security or public safety, for the maintenance of public
order, for the prevention of crime, for the protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and
freedoms of others.’

100 The Working Group on Arbitrary Detention comprises Member State representatives and its mandate includes
to investigate cases of deprivation of liberty imposed arbitrarily or otherwise inconsistently with the relevant
international standards set forth in the UDHR or in the relevant international legal instruments accepted by the states
concerned.
101

To apply fundamental rights in practice, it is necessary to communicate in a language that is understood by the migrant, and this requires gender sensitivity,
when relevant child-friendly approaches, in an appropriate room / space with the
required attendant. The overall aim must be to facilitate access to information in
order to ensure the person feels safe and confident to disclose his or her needs104.

The OHCHR in cooperation with the Global Alliance Against Traffic in Women, ‘Expert consultation on human rights at
international borders: exploring gaps in policy and practice’, March 2012.

102 http://www.coe.int/t/commissioner/Viewpoints/080929_en.asp
103

For more information on discriminatory profiling, see Module 2 and view the text of the charter (http://eur-lex.europa.
eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2010:083:0389:0403:EN:PDF).

104 See Module 4 for more details on communication and how to carry out an interview respecting fundamental rights.

Reception and assistance

77

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Relevant extracts from the of Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU
The rights mentioned in the charter are to be enjoyed by and respected for all
people, regardless of whether they are or not citizens of the EU.

TITLE I: DIGNITY

Module 3

Article 21: Non-discrimination
1.	Any discrimination based on any ground such as sex, ‘race’, colour, ethnic or social
origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion,
membership of a national minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual
orientation shall be prohibited.

Article 2: Right to life

2.	W ithin the scope of application of the Treaty establishing the European
Community and of the Treaty on European Union, and without prejudice to the
special provisions of those Treaties, any discrimination on grounds of nationality
shall be prohibited.

Article 3: Right to the integrity of the person

Article 22: Cultural, religious and linguistic diversity

1. Everyone has the right to respect for his or her physical and mental integrity.

The Union shall respect cultural, religious and linguistic diversity.

Article 4: Prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment
or punishment
Article 5: Prohibition of slavery and forced labour

Article 24: The rights of the child
1.	Children shall have the right to such protection and care as is necessary for their

Article 1 Human dignity

Human dignity is inviolable. It must be respected and protected.

Article 6: Right to liberty and security
Article 7: Respect for private and family life
Article 8: Protection of personal data
1. Everyone has the right to the protection of personal data concerning him or her.
2. S
 uch data must be processed fairly for specified purposes and on the basis
of the consent of the person concerned or some other legitimate basis laid
down by law. Everyone has the right of access to data which has been collected
concerning him or her, and the right to have it rectified.
 ompliance with these rules shall be subject to control by an independent
3. C
authority.

Article 10: Freedom of thought, conscience and religion
Article 18: Right to asylum

well-being. They may express their views freely. Such views shall be taken into
consideration on matters which concern them in accordance with their age and
maturity.

2.	In all actions relating to children, whether taken by public authorities or private
institutions, the child’s best interests must be a primary consideration.
3.	Every child shall have the right to maintain on a regular basis a personal
relationship and direct contact with, both, his or her parents, unless that is
contrary to his or her interests.

Article 25: The rights of the elderly

The Union recognises and respects the rights of the elderly to lead a life of dignity
and independence and to participate in social and cultural life.

Article 26: Integration of persons with disabilities

The Union recognises and respects the right of persons with disabilities to benefit
from measures designed to ensure their independence, social and occupational
integration and participation in the life of the community.

The right to asylum shall be guaranteed with due respect for the rules of the
Geneva convention of 28 July 1951 and the protocol of 31 January 1967 relating to the
status of refugees and in accordance with the Treaty on European Union and the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (hereinafter referred to as ‘the
Treaties’).

Article 19: Protection in the event of removal, expulsion or extradition
1. Collective expulsions are prohibited.
2.	No one may be removed, expelled or extradited to a state where there is
a serious risk that he or she would be subjected to the death penalty, torture or
other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.

TITLE III: EQUALITY
Article 20: Equality before the law
Everyone is equal before the law.

78

Reception and assistance

79

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 3

3.2. Reception and assistance 105

persons with other protection needs (i.e. trafficked persons) and take immediate action in that regard. To this end, it is essential that they build links with national referral institutions, that they know their mandates well and that they
have their coordinates at hand.

Notes to the trainer
This part of the training material presents the legal framework and the role border
guards play during the reception of migrants and in providing assistance in full respect of fundamental rights.

At the border, to assure that the person accesses the necessary assistance, they
should be informed immediately, in a language which they can understand, of the
procedure to be followed and of their rights and obligations during the procedure and the possible consequences of not complying with their obligations.

References
◆◆ International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (1966)
◆◆ European Social Charter (1961)
◆◆ Unicef reference guide on
protecting the rights of child victims
of trafficking in Europe (2006)
◆◆ NGOs and UN agencies assisting
persons with disabilities, UN High
Commissioner for Refugees (2008)105
◆◆ Conclusion on refugees with
disabilities and other persons with

disabilities protected and assisted by
UNHCR, UN High Commissioner for
Refugees, No 110 (LXI) – 2010

The information should be given with enough time to enable them to exercise
their rights and in any case to avoid any irreversible limitation of their rights. Accessible information should also be available with regard to their situation and
their rights, including protection mechanisms, other available services, NGOs providing support and the processes of family reunification and / or repatriation110.

◆◆ Working with persons with
disabilities in forced displacement,
UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(2011)
◆◆ Anti-trafficking training for border
guards – Trainers’ manual, Frontex
(2012)

Ideally, there should be brochures at border posts with basic information in
a language they understand. These brochures should be available to the public in general passing through that border point. However, people with poor or
no literacy skills should also be provided with appropriate opportunities to access this information.

3.2.1. Border guard responsibilities

After having assured safety, the border guard in the process of reception and assistance has to keep in mind two concerns: (1) care because of the individuals’
conditions, and / or (2) information to access international protection.

Border officials have the positive responsibility to process every migrant going
through a crossing or entry point. This task requires the border guard to be able
to communicate effectively with a wide variety of people106, to be familiar with
the legal framework involved in this task, and to know the type of assistance
people may require and be entitled to and how to proceed107.

Whatever assistance is required, it should be given free of any discrimination or
negative profiling and free of charge111.
Care because of the individuals’ condition:
◆◆ emergency health care112;
◆◆ first-aid;
◆◆ identification and special attention to pregnant women;
◆◆ concern for the elderly;
◆◆ access to and provision of water and food;
◆◆ gender-sensitive processes and facilities;

Under international law108, border guards have the duty to recognise and respond
in a protection-sensitive and rights-based approach to persons who present
themselves at the border and who may wish and / or need to seek109 international protection. In addition, border officials have the responsibility to identify
105 http://www.unhcr.org/4ec3c78c6.pdf
106 Communication includes verbal and body language as well as the setting of the location where the communication
takes place. In Module 4, interviewing and communication skills are covered in great detail; Module 2 also covers the
function of communication in de-escalation.
107 Elements of this section have been adapted from the ‘UNHCR protection training manual for European border and
entry officials’, Session 4.7, pp.17–19 (http://www.unhcr.org/4d944f229.html).
108 See Hirsi v Italy case of the European Court of Human Rights.
109 The person(s) may not be aware that such an avenue is open to them, even though they are survivors of torture or
fleeing persecution. Under international law, the border guard has the duty in identify such individuals.

80

110

Article 10(1)(a) of the asylum procedures directive: Applicants for asylum ‘shall be informed… of the procedure to be
followed and of their rights and obligations… ’; also mentioned in Article 5 of the reception conditions directive.

111

To view the definitions of discrimination and negative profiling, see Module 2.

112

Article 28 of the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members
of Their Families: ‘Migrant workers and members of their families shall have the right to receive any medical care that
is urgently required for the preservation of their life or the avoidance of irreparable harm to their health on the basis
of equality of treatment with nationals of the state concerned. Such emergency medical care shall not be refused them
by reason of any irregularity with regard to stay or employment.’

Reception and assistance

81

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 3

◆◆
◆◆
◆◆
◆◆

3.2.2. Dublin convention and Dublin II

child-sensitive measures;
concern for individuals suspected of being torture survivors;
measures and infrastructure for people with disabilities;
individuals and their families shall have the right to have recourse to the protection and assistance of the consular or diplomatic authorities of their state
of origin or of a state representing the interests of that state, only following the migrant’s or family member’s request and in respect of the need for
confidentiality for asylum seekers113.

The Dublin convention114 was replaced in February 2003 by the Dublin II regulation115.
On 15 June 1990, the European Community Member States agreed upon a convention determining the state responsible for examining applications for international protection lodged in the Member State. As the agreement was concluded
in Dublin, the convention became known as the Dublin convention.

Information to access international protection

The provisions of the convention entered into force on 1 September 1997 between
the 12 original signatory states. It entered into force one month later (on 1 October 1997) for Austria and Sweden and on 1 January 1998 for the last state, Finland.

All persons needing or seeking protection should be afforded information on organisations or groups of persons that provide specific legal assistance and migrants and organisations that may be able to help or inform them about the
available reception conditions, including health care. This includes information
on how to contact the UNHCR and national actors working for the protection
and assistance of asylum seekers and refugees.

The Dublin convention
The convention laid down a set of criteria for determining Member States’ consideration of international protection applications. The hierarchical approach
was based on the basic principle that the Member State most responsible for
the applicant’s presence in the territory of the EU should be responsible for dealing with the international protection claim.
◆◆ Article 4 provided that the state where the refugee’s family was legally resident should be responsible for examining the international protection application, providing that the persons concerned gave their consent.
◆◆ Article 5 determined responsibility on the basis of the previous issue of a residence permit or a visa to the individual applicant.
◆◆ Article 6 provided that where an applicant for international protection entered the territories of the EU illegally across the external border, the Member State in which this happened would be responsible, unless the person had
been living in the Member State where the application had been lodged for
at least 6 months, in which case the latter would be responsible.
◆◆ Article 7 provided that the Member State responsible for controlling the lawful entry of the international protection applicant into the EU territory would
be responsible, unless the individual concerned was not a visa national for
that particular Member State. However, if the individual then moved on to
another Member State where he or she did not require a visa and lodged an
international protection claim, then the latter state would be responsible.
Article 7 also provided that where an application for international protec-

Seekers of international protection should have an interpreter present, translating into a language they can understand. Lack of communication on grounds
of language or cultural barriers may result in being unable to explain the circumstances surrounding their cases and to express their wishes to seek international protection.
Seekers of international protection should be granted access to legal assistance,
free of charge. Legal assistance and representation can be provided by migrant
or refugee associations, bar associations, the UNHCR in some cases and other
organisations.
Seekers of international protection should never be interviewed by police or
border officials on the substance of their claim. This is the role of other officials
(from different ministries or authorities, depending on the country) mandated
to take decisions on refugee claims. Among other reasons for such a division
of responsibilities is the need to ensure that the seeker of international protection has adequate information about her / his rights before a substantive interview takes place.

113

82

Vienna Convention on Consular Relations.

114

Convention 97/C 254/01 determining the state responsible for examining applications for asylum lodged in one of the
Member States of the European Communities, 19.8.1997.

115

Council Regulation (EC) No 343/2003 of 18 February 2003 establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the
Member State responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country
national (OJ L 50, 25.2.2003, p. 1).

Reception and assistance

83

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

tion was lodged in transit in an airport of a Member State, then that Member State would be responsible.
◆◆ Where no Member State could be identified as being responsible on the basis of the preceding criteria, Article 8 provided that the responsible Member
State should be the first one with which the application had been lodged.
◆◆ Finally, Article 9 permitted any Member State, even where not responsible
under the criteria, to exercise discretion to take responsibility for an applicant for humanitarian reasons.
The Dublin II regulation
The Treaty of Amsterdam called for a replacement mechanism to determine responsibility for international protection applicants within the EU. As a result,
Council Regulation (EC) No 343/2003 (known as ‘Dublin II’) was adopted on
18 February 2003.
This instrument established criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member
State responsible for examining an international protection application lodged
in one of the Member States by a third-country national.
Subject to certain transitional arrangements, the provisions of the Dublin II regulation entered into force 1 September 2003 for all EU Member States except
Denmark (see Dublin states below).
The Dublin regulation applied to all new Member States when they acceded to
the EU on 1 May 2004. Additional rules on practical implementation are set out
in Commission Regulation (EC) No 1560/2003 of 2 September 2003 laying down
detailed rules for the application of Council Regulation (EC) No 343/2003 establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in one of the Member States by
a third-country national116 (known as the ‘Dublin II implementation regulation’).
Basic criteria of Dublin II in descending order of priority are as follows.
◆◆ Article 6:
–– provides that where an applicant for international protection is an unaccompanied minor, the responsible Member State will be that where
a member of his or her family is legally present, provided that this is in
the best interest of the minor; the definition of ‘family members’ is provided in Article 2(i) of Dublin II;
–– is limited to the nuclear family insofar as this existed in the country of origin, it refers to the spouse or the unmarried partner in a stable relation116

84

Module 3

ship, the minor children of the couple on condition that they are unmarried
and dependant (without distinction to whether they were born in or out
of wedlock or adopted) or the parents or guardian of an unmarried minor.
		In the absence of such a family member, the responsible state is the one
where the minor had lodged his or her application for international protection. This means that the provisions of Article 16 of Dublin II may where
otherwise appropriate, be applied and that it is possible to request the
Member State where an earlier application for international protection
had been lodged to take back the unaccompanied child.
◆◆ The state which is responsible for examining the application for asylum is as
follows.
–– The state in which a family member of the applicant has been allowed to
reside as a refugee (Article 7) provided that the persons concerned so desire. This provision (unlike the other on family unity) applies whether or
not the family was previously formed in the country of origin.
–– The state in which a family member of the applicant has an international
protection application which is not the subject of a first decision (Article 8).
–– The state that granted the applicant a visa or residence permit (Article 9).
(This article contains detailed clarification for situations where there is
more than one visa or residence permit and / or where such documents
may no longer be valid.)
–– The state where the applicant first entered the EU illegally, responsibility ceasing after 12 months (Article 10(1)).
–– The state where the applicant has been previously living (‘illegally present’) for a continuous period of at least 5 months (Article 10(2)).
–– The state the applicant entered without the need to hold a visa (Article 11).
–– The state in which the application for international protection was made
when in an international transit zone of an airport (Article 12).
–– The first state where the applicant made an application for international
protection (Article 13).
In addition to the criteria within the ‘responsibility hierarchy’ set out above, the
Dublin II regulation also specifically includes a provision allowing Member States
to accept responsibility for cases in the wider family reunion or for other humanitarian reasons, provided the persons concerned agree (Article 15). The humanitarian provision in Article 15 is discretionary, but evidence put forward should be
taken into account along with relevant human rights case-law.

OJ L 222, 5.9.2003, p. 3.

Reception and assistance

85

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 3

Eurodac allows for the computerised exchange of fingerprints solely in order to
support the application of the Dublin arrangements by identifying those applicants already known to other participating States. The Eurodac database cannot be accessed for the purposes of law enforcement reasons nor can its data
be used to support prosecutions.

Dublin states
The current Member States of the EU are: Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Ireland, Greece, Spain, France, Italy, Cyprus, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Hungary, Malta, the Netherlands, Austria, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Finland, Sweden and the United Kingdom.

3.2.4. Non-Dublin safe third-country cases
The Dublin II and Eurodac regulations (see below Eurodac regulations) could not
immediately apply to Denmark due to the terms of a protocol on the position
of Denmark annexed to the Treaty establishing the European Community (TEC)
and the Treaty on European Union (TEU) by the Treaty of Amsterdam. Denmark’s
protocol meant that separate legal steps were needed to secure Denmark’s participation. As a result, Denmark’s participation is with effect from 1 April 2006.
Between 1 September 2003 and 31 March 2006, the transfer of seekers of international protection to and from Denmark continued to be subject to the Dublin convention.

Outside of the Dublin arrangements, applicants are generally returned either to
a safe third country of embarkation or, more rarely, to another safe third country
if evidence exists that the applicant would be admitted to that state.
Examples of countries to which such returns have taken place are Canada, Switzerland and the United States.
There are no binding agreements so these should be considered on a case-bycase basis. However, the principle of non-refoulement must be respected (including its corollary of duty of individual examination of the case), including when
dealing with migrants / asylum seekers from so-called ‘safe third countries’ or
‘safe European countries’.

The United Kingdom (like Ireland) was not bound to participate in the Dublin II
and Eurodac regulations, due to the terms of a protocol on the position of the
United Kingdom and Ireland, also annexed to the TEC and TEU by the Treaty
of Amsterdam. However both the United Kingdom and Ireland decided to participate (‘opt-in’) as provided by the terms of the protocol.

The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU clearly illustrates the rights that
have been agreed to be protected, respected and fulfilled within Europe, as illustrated in Module 1. However, to operationalise these rights during the process
of receiving migrants, the EU has recognised minimum standards on reception119.

Since 1 April 2001, Iceland and Norway have also operated under the terms of the
Dublin arrangements by virtue of a separate agreement between those countries and the Member States of the EU. The need to conclude this ‘parallel agreement’ was linked to the removal of internal frontier controls between Iceland,
Norway and the Schengen states.

3.2.5. Minimum standards on the reception of applicants for
international protection in Member States

3.2.3. Eurodac

Council Directive 2003/9/EC, in principle, applies only to applicants for international protection. This directive does not relate to family reunification. Family members include spouses and unmarried partners if the provisions of the
host state treat unmarried couples in the same way as married couples. Children of a married or unmarried couple or adopted children and other members
of the family are considered part of the family if they are dependent on an international protection applicant or if they have undergone particularly traumatic
experiences or require special medical treatment.

On 15 January 2003, the EU–wide fingerprint database of international protection applicants and certain other third-country nationals, established by Council
Regulation EC No 2725/2000 of 11 December 2000 concerning the establishment
of ‘Eurodac’ for the comparison of fingerprints for the effective application of the
Dublin convention117 went live. Additional rules on Eurodac implementation are
set out in Council Regulation (EC) No 407/2002 of 28 February 2002 laying down
certain rules to implement Regulation (EC) No 2725/2000 concerning the establishment of ‘Eurodac’ for the comparison of fingerprints for the effective application of the Dublin convention118 (known as the ‘Eurodac implementing rules’).
117

OJ L 316, 15.12.2000, p. 1.

118

OJ L 62, 5.3.2002, p. 1.

86

The directive applies to all nationals of third countries as well as to stateless persons who have requested international protection at the border or on the terri119

http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/justice_freedom_security/free_movement_of_persons_asylum_immigration/
l33150_en.htm

Reception and assistance

87

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 3

tory of a Member State. In addition, the directive will apply to family members
accompanying the applicant. The directive does not apply to third-country nationals or stateless persons who submit their requests for diplomatic or territorial asylum to the representations of Member States.

the possibility of communicating with legal advisers, NGOs and the United Nations Refugee Agency (UNHCR).

Member States are free to apply more favourable conditions of reception and
they may apply the same conditions to applicants for forms of protection other
than those provided for by the Geneva convention.

3.2.6. Provisions relating to reception conditions
Applicants for international protection must be informed of their rights and the
benefits they may claim, as well as the obligations they have to comply with.
They will receive a document certifying their status as applicants for international protection, which will be renewable until they are notified of the decision
on their application for international protection. Moreover, the Member State
may provide a travel document when serious humanitarian reasons arise that
require their presence in another state.
Member States must guarantee:
◆◆ certain material reception conditions, in particular accommodation, food and
clothing, in kind or in the form of a financial allowance; allowances must be
such that they prevent the applicant from becoming destitute;
◆◆ family unity;
◆◆ medical and psychological care;
◆◆ access to the education system for minors and language courses to enable
them to attend ordinary school.
Material reception conditions and medical and psychological care are to be guaranteed during all types of procedures (regular, admissibility, accelerated and appeal procedures), in order to ensure a standard of living adequate for the health
and well-being of the applicants and their families. If his / her economic situation permits it, the Member State could decide that the applicant should contribute partially or totally to the cost of the material reception conditions and
the medical and psychological care.
Moreover, special medical and psychological care must be given to pregnant
women, minors, the mentally ill, the disabled, and victims of rape and other
forms of violence.
Member States must provide lodgings in a house, accommodation centre or hotel, in order to protect family life and privacy. In all cases, applicants must have

88

Member States must pay special attention to the situation of children, disabled
people, elderly people and victims of violence, discrimination or exploitation.
As soon as possible, a guardian will be appointed for each unaccompanied minor (i.e. social services). In addition, the Member States will endeavour to trace
the members of his / her family.
Victims of torture or violence will have access to rehabilitation programmes and
post-traumatic counselling.

Following is a summary of key elements to guarantee a fair reception process:
◆◆ the person has to be treated with respect, and his or her dignity guaranteed;
◆◆ the principle of family unity has to be safeguarded at all moments;
◆◆ communicate in a language that is understood;
◆◆ take on board considerations of gender and age and the situation of persons
with special needs when allocating housing facilities;
◆◆ make appropriate gender considerations when communicating with individuals;
◆◆ facilitate access to information;
◆◆ reception does not mean detention;
◆◆ reception should be respectful of the communication / social skills of the migrant;
◆◆ access to international protection procedures is a primary safeguard
of protective border-control mechanisms;
◆◆ access to legal assistance;
◆◆ referral to relevant outside agencies that could provide support;
◆◆ respect diversity.

People with special needs should be given specific attention
Special attention should be given to children and other vulnerable groups such as victims of torture and sexual violence, elderly and disabled persons. Procedures should
be established to identify people with special needs. The detention of unaccompanied children should be prohibited, in order to ensure that children benefit from protection and care as early as possible.

It is important to be aware of the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council of 1 June 2011 laying down minimum standards for the

Reception and assistance

89

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

reception of asylum seekers120 (recast), and check if it has been approved to update the training. This proposal aims to replace Council Directive 2003/9/EC in
order to address the deficiencies in the national reception conditions, as identified in the evaluation report below and in the consultation launched by the Green
Paper on the common European asylum system121 (CEAS). The approval of the
directive should take place during 2013.
The new directive will guarantee higher standards of reception conditions that
will be in line with international law and harmonise national reception policies
so that the secondary movements of applicants for international protection are
further limited. In particular, the proposal concerns the following:
◆◆ The scope of the directive, extending it to also include applicants for subsidiary protection. The directive will apply to all types of international protection procedures, notwithstanding the geographic areas or facilities hosting
the applicants.
◆◆ Access to the labour market, which is facilitated by allowing applicants to
access employment after a maximum period of 6 months from lodging an
international protection application and by obliging Member States to not
restrict this access through national labour market conditions.
◆◆ Access to material reception conditions, which must provide an adequate
standard of living for applicants for international protection. Member States
will need to take into account the level of social assistance allocated to nationals when providing financial support to applicants for international protection and the gender, age and special needs of the applicants when assigning
housing facilities. At the same time, the situations in which the reception conditions could be withdrawn entirely will be restricted.
◆◆ Persons with special needs: Member States will need to put in place measures to identify these needs and to design reception conditions accordingly.
Particular attention needs to be placed on access to health care, housing facilities and the education of minors.
◆◆ Implementation and improvements of national systems, which must be ensured via monitoring and controlling the national reception systems and
through continued reporting at both the Community and national levels.

© iStockphoto, 2013

Module 4

Interviewing
120 http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2011:0320:FIN:EN:PDF
121

90

http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/justice_freedom_security/free_movement_of_persons_asylum_immigration/
l14561_en.htm

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

The aim of this module is to enable border guards to interact and conduct
interviews with migrants according to fundamental rights standards and
principles.

1. Learning outcomes

Module 4

3. Training material
3.1. Introduction to fundamental rights issues involved in
interviewing and communication

Notes to the trainer
At the end of this module, participants will be able to:
◆◆ adopt communication and interviewing styles that reflect fundamental rights;
◆◆ collect relevant information in a way that is compliant with fundamental rights;
◆◆ protect the confidentiality of personal data and balance this with the obligation to disclose information as required by law.

This section introduces the border guards to the important aspects of communication and interviews at the border, the preparation and the follow-up needed to ensure the respect of fundamental rights of migrants as part of the EU border culture.

References
◆◆ Geneva conventions (1949) and
international humanitarian
customary law

2. Lesson plan

◆◆ Dublin II (2003)

Content

Method

Toolkit

1. Introduction

◆◆ Presentation

◆◆ Examples of body language

◆◆ Exercise

◆◆ Body language photo gallery
◆◆ Scenarios exercise to practice interviewing

2. The PEACE model

◆◆ Presentation

3. Follow-up

◆◆ Presentation

4. Assessment

◆◆ Role-play

92

◆◆ Sirene, Eurodac and SIS
◆◆ Unicef guidelines for interviewing
children
◆◆ Separated, asylum-seeking children
in European Union Member States,
FRA (2010)

◆◆ Notes for PEACE PowerPoint presentation

◆◆ UNHCR protection training manual
for European border and entry
officials, Session 5

◆◆ Interview role-play instructions

◆◆ Building in quality: A manual on
building a high-quality asylum system,
UNHCR, September 2011, p. 79

◆◆ PEACE PowerPoint presentation

Interviewing

◆◆ Interpreting in a refugee context –
Self-study Module 3, UNHCR (2009)
◆◆ More on children at: http://fra.
europa.eu/en/publications-andresources/publications?title=childre
n&=Apply
◆◆ Further developing asylum quality in
the EU, UNHCR
◆◆ Anti-trafficking training for border
guards – Trainers’ manual, Frontex
(2012), Module 3: Interviewing
◆◆ The duty to inform applicants about
asylum procedures: The asylum
seeker perspective, FRA (2010)

93

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 4

An initial interview is part of the duties a border guard at the entry post will undertake. The interview should be carried out in full respect of fundamental rights;
the communication should be as fluid as possible, open and non-threatening.
Border guards have to show high standards of professionalism as part of the EU
border-guard culture as they are in most cases the first contact migrants have
with EU authorities.

The presence of a legal representative or other counsel, who is familiar with asylum and migration legislation and local jurisprudence, is helpful not only to the
applicant but also to the border officials, as they will help explain the relevant
and applicable laws and procedures, including their rights under national and international human rights law.
Communication and interviewing

The objective of an interview is to gather information to identify the migrant
and be able to refer them through the appropriate channels. For these purposes,
border guards need to have knowledge of the diversity of people involved (places
of origin, beliefs, language, etc.); the vast range of potential reactions during the
first encounter and during a more formal interview; and the possibility that the
migrant may be a bona fide traveller, a victim of trafficking, someone needing
international protection, a trafficker, a smuggler, etc.

3.1.1. Before the interview
Ensuring fluid and fair communication
If needed, the border guard should secure the services of an interpreter. Any
communication should take place in a language that the migrant is able to understand and to express himself or herself in without difficulties.
Before initiating communication with the migrant, the border official should ensure the following.
◆◆ That the individual and the interpreter understand one other. Ask them to
talk a little. If the interpreting arrangement is not satisfactory, then the interview should not proceed.
◆◆ That the interpreter is unprejudiced and impartial, not closely related to the
applicant through family or other ties and from the examining authority. Be
aware of any factors that may influence the migrant’s ability or willingness
to communicate, such as gender, culture or religious elements or belonging
to an ethnic group in conflict with that of the interpreter.
◆◆ That the interpreter is trustworthy and that his intervention will not endanger or potentially harm the migrant.
Access to legal counsel
Where national legislation provides for the participation of legal or other counsel to assist an applicant in presenting his / her claim, it is essential to allow such
counsel to participate in the interview.

94

Communication cannot be established if there exists a fear of being overheard
by others. Border guards should therefore ensure that the area where they carry
out the interview is private and that the area and the procedure assure confidentiality. Then, border guards should build a rapport and maintain a two-way
communication.
Asking the right questions
When communicating with people at the border / entry point, border guards
should be prepared to follow up with questions on all relevant issues that can
indicate the possibility of a protection concern. No effort should be spared in
trying to identify the persons’ immediate needs and utilising the relevant referral mechanism. Priority should be given to medical and any other urgent assistance that may be needed. This requires that border officials maintain an open
attitude and remain alert and intellectually active during the interview process. The border guards should explain clearly and in a language accessible to
the migrant or person requesting international protection the procedure they
are going to follow.
Questions should be specific and in accordance with the purpose of the interview; border officials should be able to alternate between open and closed questions, on the basis of their effectiveness, to improve communication at each
stage of the interview.
◆◆ Open-ended questions are questions that are worded in a way that allows
the interviewee to provide an unrestricted response and to control the flow
of information. This type of questioning minimises the risk that interviewers will impose their view of what happened. Such questions usually specify
a general topic which allows the person considerable freedom in determining what to reply.
◆◆ Closed questions are questions that provide the interviewee with a limited
number of alternative responses, the simplest ones being ‘yes’ or ‘no’. As
long as the question provides a number of sensible and equally likely alternatives, it would not be considered suggestive. Some vulnerable witnesses
may find closed questions particularly helpful. However, at the beginning
of the use of closed questions, try to avoid using ones that contain only two

Interviewing

95

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 4

alternatives (especially yes / no questions) unless these two alternatives contain all possibilities (e.g. ‘Was it day time or night time?’).

of receiving the assistance of the border guard and international protection
from the state.

Awareness of barriers for effective communication

Recognising that we might hold or be the victim of biases is the first and most crucial step in combating prejudice.

In any type of discussion or conversation between different persons, there
are a number of potential barriers for effective communication. This is particularly true in the context of communications between border authorities
and people wanting to cross a country’s border. Such barriers may include
the following.
◆◆ Stereotypical assumptions on both sides: stereotypes are generalisations,
or assumptions, which people make about the characteristics of all members of a group, based on an image (often wrong) about what people in that
group are like.
◆◆ More subtle forms of biases: such as those based on people's ethnic origin,
socioeconomic background (class), legal status or occupation. Such biases
are more difficult to recognise, yet are a fact of life. These biases can affect
how border guards see undocumented migrants or asylum seekers, smuggled people or trafficked individuals. They can also affect how migrants see
themselves, and so lead to self-defeating expectations. Migrants may expect to be the object of others’ prejudices, and so may expect to be ignored
or dismissed.

It is essential to focus on the particular individual, rather than on their ethnic or national background. It is important to remember that there are often greater differences within a group than between groups.
It is also important to remind oneself that border control will not bring the solution for
migratory pressure or abuse of asylum procedures, nor will it save all victims of torture, smuggling or trafficking. Border officials should try to avoid putting too much
pressure on themselves and remain realistic about their own self-expectations and
focus on the concrete situation at hand.

Active listening
The goal is to understand the person in front of you as well as you understand
yourself. Pay close attention to what they are saying: ask them to clarify or repeat anything that is unclear or seems unreasonable (maybe it isn’t, but you are
interpreting it wrongly).
Attempt to repeat their narrative, as they have presented it, back to them. This
shows that you are listening (suggesting that you care about what they have to
say) and that you understand what they have said. It does not indicate that you
agree with what they said – nor do you have to. You just need to indicate that
you do understand what they are trying to convey to you.

These prejudices and biases can be dangerous when interacting with irregular
migrants at the border. If border officials are not fully aware of such assumptions, they can view migrants in general as a problem, to the detriment of their
fundamental rights.

Avoid developing a ‘selective ear’ that listens but does not ‘hear’ indications of the
need for international protection. For example, when there are clear indications
that the person may be a survivor of torture, don’t avoid asking the question:
‘have you been tortured?’ to avoid having to hear a terrible story of suffering
and then having to refer the individual or family to further assistance services122.

Stereotypes are especially likely to be wrong in tense or complex situations,
such as in the midst of larger group arrivals or dangerous sea operations.
When people are under pressure and confronted with problems beyond
their capacities, their image of the people they have to deal with tends to
become more and more hostile. Where communication is minimal, people
make generalisations and assumptions based on very sketchy and often erroneous information.

Retaining a respectful and professional attitude
In accordance with the principles of non-discrimination and human dignity, respectful treatment should be the norm in all circumstances, being sensitive to
gender, age and other diversity components.

In this context, it is easy to ‘project’ the perceived faults of the border control system’s capacity to help onto the migrants, preferring to believe that
they are aggressive, self-serving or deceitful. They may worsen with reduced
communication and heightened emotions and tension. This is a formula for
disaster, mistakes and unfair treatment of people who may be in great need
122

96

When covering this topic, it is important that the trainers make reference to the session of taking care of oneself due to
the stresses of the duties carried out by border guards.

Interviewing

97

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

To respect and not infringe the ‘do no harm’ principle, border guards should treat
each woman, man or child as if the potential for harm is obvious until there is evidence to the contrary.

To maintain a professional attitude, there are two major pitfalls to avoid:
◆◆ appearing judgemental or mistrustful: the border guard is there to hear about
the migrants’ situation in a neutral way;
◆◆ being overly sympathetic: border guards work within a legal framework that
imposes certain specific conditions when it comes to border control and assistance of migrants and asylum seekers.
No matter what they think of the migrant, if they are treated with respect and
dignity, communication will be much more successful, and it will be easier to
understand the possible protection or other needs of the persons involved. This
means that personal attacks and insults should be avoided, as should verbal or
non-verbal signs of disdain.
Body language
◆◆ Maintaining a steady and friendly visual expression and keeping eye contact
with the migrant suggests that you are paying careful attention to what is
being said.
◆◆ The eye contact and overall communication in general should be with the
applicant, not with the interpreter or the legal counsel. However, be aware
of cultural and gender differences in communication, especially regarding nonverbal communication. This is particularly important in the context of crosscultural communication.
◆◆ Avoid reading papers while the migrant is speaking. If you need to check on
a document, wait until there is a pause.

3.1.2. Factors that may affect communication
Culture
Generally speaking, communication with another involves predicting or anticipating their responses.
◆◆ As a first step in developing cross-cultural awareness, border guards should
recall that many of the arriving migrants and asylum seekers have limited
knowledge of their new environment, including its norms and values.
◆◆ In the same way, they need to bear in mind when communicating with them
that they, as border guards, may not have much knowledge of the culture,
beliefs or habits of the person who has just arrived. Therefore, in cross-cultural exchanges, it is essential to maintain self-awareness of possible cultural

98

Module 4

differences (misunderstandings) and make every effort not to predict possible behaviours or responses.
◆◆ Border officials should react slowly and carefully to statements by persons at
the border, not jumping to the conclusion that they understand the speaker’s words or intentions.
◆◆ Active listening can sometimes be used to check this: by repeating what one
thinks he or she heard, one can confirm that one understands the communication accurately.
Gender
Very much related to cross-cultural communication, gender issues are likely to
arise during border control. Issues such as women’s physical distance from others and dress code differ across cultures. Again, it is very important that border officials develop as much self-awareness as possible, particularly regarding
their own possible stereotypes or biases.
Women should not always be labelled as vulnerable or especially fragile. In many
situations of displacement, they have proven extraordinary levels of strength and
resilience, including the capacity to sustain the whole family. Yet, they do have
specific needs related to the fact that they are migrant women, particularly if
they are undocumented.
It is therefore vital to identify possible protection concerns that female asylum
seekers or migrants may have, even prior to going into issues related to their
migratory status. To do this, when family units arrive at a border, and border
guards identify issues that require a closer examination, it is important to communicate separately with all members of the family. In particular, it is important
to ensure that the female members of the family are given an opportunity to be
interviewed separately. This will greatly facilitate the identification of possible
protection concerns related to them.
Women should not be pushed to talk about problems related to sexual violence
nor to provide any details on the substance of their claim for international protection. If border officials suspect that a woman has been a victim of sexual violence, or if she is unable or unwilling to discuss certain events relating to such
an incident, they should ask discreet and indirect questions that could enable
them to identify what appropriate protection measures could be taken and to
what specialised agency they should be referred to.
It is important to ensure the presence of female border guards in field control
operations and in the course of routine border tasks. Research has shown that
increasing the presence of female officers improves the law enforcement re-

Interviewing

99

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 4

sponse to violence against women. It also reduces problems related to sex discrimination and harassment.

Unaccompanied and separated124 children should always be ensured access to
a procedure including the referral to a specialised centre where more in-depth
child-friendly interviews can be conducted and other appropriate steps taken.

Women migrants should be provided with information directly – there is a risk
that information is provided to the male relatives due to cultural assumptions.
This may deprive her of vital information when needed and the ability to take
independent decisions, and to request protection or assistance.

Unaccompanied and separated children must be provided with information, in
a language that they fully understand, on their rights and entitlements, support
and services available to them, including international protection mechanisms.
Information should be provided promptly, taking into account the age of the child.

Border guards should also make every effort to ensure that migrants can have
an interviewer and an interpreter of the same sex. People may feel more at ease
if they can speak to persons of the same gender; however, border guards should
check in case they prefer to speak to a person of the opposite sex. Also in this
context, the interviewer should always check that there are no barriers, as illustrated above, related to ethnic, religious or other conflicts.

The views and wishes of unaccompanied and separated children must be sought
and taken into account whenever decisions affecting them are being made, and
in relation to their age and maturity. Children should have the opportunity to be
heard in all proceedings affecting them.125
Article 24 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU:

Age123

The rights of the child
2.	In all actions relating to children, whether taken by public authorities or private institutions, the child‘s best interests must be a primary consideration.

If a young person claims to be a child (under 18), border guards should always
give them the benefit of the doubt and treat them as such, whatever their personal opinion on the age the person appears to be (it should be recalled that
some children of different backgrounds and children who have gone through
traumatic experiences will sometimes look older).

3.	Every child shall have the right to maintain on a regular basis a personal relationship and direct contact with both his or her parents, unless that is contrary to his
or her interests.
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Article 3(1): In all actions concerning children, whether undertaken by public or private social welfare institutions, courts of law, administrative authorities or legislative
bodies, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.

The child should be entitled to be heard in a child-friendly language. However the
border guard should specifically remain aware of the needs / fatigue of the child,
and where possible limit the duration and depth of the interview. After careful
examination that there is no conflict of interests or any potential threat to the
child, it is usually to his / her benefit that he / she is interviewed in the presence
of a trusted adult, preferably a parent or legal guardian.

Article 9(1): …a child shall not be separated from his or her parents against their will,
except when competent authorities subject to judicial review determine, in accordance with applicable law and procedures, that such separation is necessary for the
best interests of the child…

Issues to clarify to ensure the safety of the child:
◆◆ number of children and number of documents (passports, visas, supporting documents);
◆◆ in case of several children in one single family, compare the dates of birth
and the age of the adult(s);
◆◆ verify legal relationships between the child and accompanying person;
◆◆ query questions on flight itinerary / reasons for travel;
◆◆ check the Schengen information system (SIS) database (if non-EU, or if both
parents are not present).
123

100

For further information refer to:
– Unicef guidelines for interviewing children (http://www.unicef.org/esaro/5440_guidelines_interview.html)
– ‘Separated, asylum-seeking children in European Union Member States’, FRA, December 2010
– More on children at: http://fra.europa.eu/en/publications-and-resources/publications?title=children&=Apply

There are some basic rules to be followed in the case of children, including unaccompanied and separated children.
◆◆ Border guards should be aware of standard referral procedures and immediately liaise with the national and / or local childcare institution to ensure the
assignment of a legal representative and a guardian.
◆◆ Principles: best interest of the child, non-discrimination and participation.

124

Unaccompanied is a child who is travelling alone; separated is a child who started his or her travel with an adult, but
due to circumstances has lost contact with said adult and is now alone (Convention on the Rights of the Child, General
Comment 6).

125

Article 12 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.

Interviewing

101

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 4

◆◆ No separation from families as a rule, except in the case of conflicting interests where it is in the best interest of the child not to stay with the parent
(e.g. the parent has an infectious illness).
◆◆ Prior to interviewing children, or anyone for that matter, access should be
provided to any medical aid or assistance needed by the child and the interviewer should check if the child is hungry or thirsty, needs the toilet or wants
to sleep. In all such cases, the needs of the child should be met before any
interview commences.
◆◆ The assigned legal representative / advocate / guardian should be given access
to, and be able to be present at, all interviews with the child, which need to
be conducted by specialists with training and expertise in interviewing separated children.
◆◆ Special, child-friendly environments should be created as ‘safe’ locations for
children during the interview process.

◆◆ they may fear speaking honestly about their situation to state officials, particularly those in uniform, and other symbols of authority as a result of the
persecution suffered in their country of origin; they may lack confidence in the
ability of state officials to help them and even fear that they will do them harm;
◆◆ a traumatised individual may feel and become helpless because he / she experiences the world as unpredictable, threatening and assaulting, which
fundamentally threatens the individual’s sense of self; in this context, traumatised asylum seekers and migrants may refuse to talk about experiences
of distress and trauma;
◆◆ this may be a result of a denial mechanism to protect their own psychological balance, a lack of awareness of their right to be treated with respect and
dignity, or the fear of reprisals by smugglers or traffickers;
◆◆ incoherence may occur because of fatigue or strong feelings, or because
of poor command of language; in serious cases, there can be total confusion
in relation to reality and alterations of identity – disassociation126 from the
present reality may occur;
◆◆ individuals suffering severe post-traumatic stress disorder127 may have serious memory gaps, to the point that questions may arise on the credibility
of their claims for international protection; there have been cases where asylum seekers have not been able to remember their children’s names, ages,
nor even face when questioned about especially traumatic events;
◆◆ such psychological effects, instead of being used against them, should be
seen as a sign for urgent need of rest, support, counselling and potentially
specialised treatment.

Older persons and persons with disabilities
Generally there should be a friendly and non-threatening environment at the
border for everyone, including for older persons and persons with disabilities,
who should not be discriminated against in any way due to potential physical
and mental vulnerabilities.
Border guards should be mindful of identifying older persons who may need specialist support, facilities or health care.
Border guards should also take care to proactively identify persons arriving at the
border with disabilities and ensure any specific needs are communicated and met.

3.1.3. Psychological and emotional needs of migrants, including
asylum seekers
Migrants can experience many different stresses but, again, it is important not
to stereotype them. Experiences and reactions differ. Most cope, some are vulnerable and a few may display disturbed behaviour.
They may have lost family, friends, home, belongings, familiar surroundings and
lifestyle. They may also have experienced war, separation, a shortage of necessities and fear of discovery, as well as hostility, violence, exploitation and material deprivation on their journey. Changes that affect them include language,
lifestyle, living standards, status and relationships with parents and children.
Border officials should be aware of the effects that traumatic experiences may
have on communication during border controls. For instance:

102

126

Dissociation is a psychological term used to describe a mental departure from reality, especially when experiencing
times of frustration, fear, uncertainty, hardship or / and grief (http://outofthefog.net/CommonBehaviors/Dissociation.
html). See the glossary for more information.

127

Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD): a psychological reaction occurring after experiencing a highly stressing event
(such as wartime combat, physical violence, or a natural disaster) that is usually characterised by depression, anxiety,
flashbacks, recurrent nightmares and avoidance of reminders of the event. Also called post-traumatic stress syndrome
(http://www.merriam-webster.com). See the glossary for more information.

Interviewing

103

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 4

Trauma

Ensuring protection

It is very difficult to provide precise advice on how to interview or communicate with
victims of trauma. Persons experience trauma and react to interviewing in very different ways.

When first encountering a border guard, or even during subsequent interviews,
some persons that are eligible for international protection do not explicitly express a formal application for it. They may not know it is possible, or may choose
not to because of their specific situation, e.g. victims of torture, crime or trafficking, that render disclosure of their needs difficult. Therefore, to safeguard
the principle of non-refoulement129, border officials need to make every effort
to identify persons who may need protection and ensure access to the necessary procedures.

A trauma survivor should only be interviewed at a border point if there is an absolute need to do so. In this case, a few basic tips drawn from experience with asylum
seekers and victims of trauma are as follows.
Persons who experience torture or other human rights abuses should be treated as
survivors, rather than victims. Looking at their past should be done with the help
of professional counsellors; otherwise, it can contribute to increasing their trauma
(the ‘do no harm’ principle of not producing any traumatisation).
The interviewer should actively encourage the interviewee to participate in the interview.
In this context, the interviewer should develop a rapport with the interviewee by personalising the interview, expressing empathy and listening actively. When creating a personal
bond in this way, the interviewer may give some personal and biographical information
about him- or herself (without compromising privacy) to which the interviewee can relate.

The border official should make every effort to provide information about relevant procedures to any undocumented person or irregular migrant they may
have stopped or apprehended, including on international protection.

The interviewee should be assured that anxiety is natural, and that retelling their experiences does not mean that the event will occur again.

Referral

A border guard is often the first state official a traumatised survivor meets. Officials
are, therefore, in a unique position to set in train a healing process. Specialised counselling should take place as soon as possible after the traumatising event has occurred,
and in ensuing weeks subsequent counselling sessions should follow.

During the interview, the person should be informed about what is going to happen next and what is expected of him / her. If there are reasons to consider that
the person may be a victim of trafficking, an unaccompanied or separated minor,
or a person in need of international protection or further (medical) assistance,
they should be referred to the relevant professionals within the government
agencies and civil society organisations which will provide them with assistance and support and direct them through the procedures applicable to them.

Border authorities should designate a liaison officer for such counselling institutions,
who can ensure quick access and early referral.

Interviewing (potential) victims of human trafficking

The trainer should be aware of the national referral mechanism if available in
her / his country.

As part of the anti-trafficking trainers’ manual (see references), Frontex has developed a training module on interviewing (potential) victims of trafficking in human beings and a follow-up reference mechanism. It is based on the so-called
Pegasus model and the new Directive 2011/36/EU of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 5 April 2011 on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims, and replacing Council Framework Decision
2002/629/JHA128. The directive states that Member States, with the basic principles of their legal systems, should take the necessary measures to ‘ensure that
competent national authorities are entitled not to prosecute or impose penalties on victims of trafficking in human beings for their involvement in criminal
activities which they have been compelled to commit’. If anyone should be involved in the smuggling of persons and travelling on a forged passport, the fact
that the border guard identifies her or him as a victim of trafficking in human
beings (THB) will have a decisive impact on the approach to the rest of the case.
128

104

OJ L 101, 15.4.2011, p. 1.

129

For detailed information on non-refoulement, see Module 2.

Interviewing

105

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 4

3.2. The PEACE model

The second line will in general bring out the specific strengths of a model more
effectively. You cannot plan for an interview if you know nothing about the circumstances of the case. Your first step must be to find out as much as you can
about the case or the situation before you start to plan the interview.

Notes to the trainer
It is essential that border guards take account of the individual circumstances and
expressed needs and wishes of each interviewed person. Therefore, the following
should not be regarded as a checklist to be rigidly worked through, but rather a helpful tool in planning and conducting interviews. Out of the many possible interviewing
models, we will highlight the PEACE model as it is not only a model used in a number
of countries around the world, but it is also applicable to interviewing suspects, witnesses and victims. Furthermore, in the context of this manual, it will be clear that
our comments will concisely focus on a fundamental rights based approach and process. The combination of the Ungift (for victims) and Interpol (for suspects) manuals
that comprehensively cover the phenomenon of trafficking in human beings provides
a solid basis for this approach.

Written plans do not have to be complex. It is important to be flexible once the
interview starts as you may be told things that change the plan completely.
A suggested structure of a plan is to list the stages of the interview (planning
and preparation, engage and explain, account, closure and evaluation). At each
stage of the plan, you can then record points to remind you to do certain things,
tell the interviewee something or ask particular questions. Listing the key points
to be covered in an interview help maintain the focus of the interview which
can be particularly helpful if the interviewee gives a very wide-ranging account
that contains a lot of detail not relevant to the investigation. A list prevents the
interviewer(s) becoming lost in the details.

References
◆◆ Anti-human trafficking manual for
criminal justice practitioners, Ungift,
Module 8

◆◆ Trafficking in Human Beings,
best practice guiding manual for
investigators, Interpol, second edition
(2008)

3.2.1. Introduction
The PEACE model is a model used in a number of countries around the world
and is applicable to interviewing suspects, witnesses and victims. It is easy to
use, and it will in many cases and ways facilitate the work of the border guard
and optimise his / her results. PEACE is an acronym that stands for:
◆◆ Planning and preparation
◆◆ Engage and explain
◆◆ Account
◆◆ Closure
◆◆ Evaluate

3.2.2. ‘P’ for planning and preparation
The techniques explored here can be used in any environment regardless of the
technical equipment you have access to. An honest assessment of what you
can achieve with the resources available, followed by planning to use what you
actually have (not what you might wish to have) will help produce interviews
of high quality.

It should be remembered that the interviewer’s task is to establish the facts through
skilled questioning – not to establish guilt or innocence, which is the task of the judicial process.

Venue and equipment
As part of the preparation phase, the venue(s) for the interview should have been
identified and checked to ensure that:
◆◆ the room is clean and tidy and represents a professional approach (i.e. the
need for privacy) to the task;
◆◆ privacy is an essential condition for effective confidentiality; communication
cannot be established if there is a fear of being overheard by others;
◆◆ any necessary equipment is in full working order if the interview is to be audio- and / or video-recorded;
◆◆ an ample supply of tapes has been placed in the interview room;
◆◆ if the interview is to be recorded in writing, the interviewers should ensure
that they have adequate supplies of forms and pens.
To have to break off from questioning to obtain additional supplies of items is
unprofessional and, where this does happen, the problem always seems to occur at absolutely critical junctures in the interview.
How is the interview going to be recorded?
Interviews can be recorded in three basic ways: video, audiotape and a written
record. Whatever method is used, depending on the case and the local policy, the

106

Interviewing

107

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 4

person that is going to be interviewed should fully understand what is going to
happen and how the record will be used, and must consent to it, in accordance
with privacy rights (Article 8 of the ECHR and of the EU charter).

Gender of interviewers

The use of video for the interview of (potential) victims.
◆◆ For video recording, the guiding principle is to conduct the video interview in the
best interest of the victim and in accordance with domestic legal requirements.
◆◆ Video is the preferred choice for interviewing vulnerable victims where the
facilities are available. It has the advantage of showing the condition of the
witness, revealing non-verbal signs and, in many cases, helps obtain a freeflowing, natural account from a victim while reducing the number of interviews.
This helps reduce the ‘secondary victimisation’ of the investigation process.

Video interviewing does have some disadvantages even where it is
available.
◆◆ Victims of trafficking or torture may react in unpredictable ways; some
investigators have reported that this can involve inappropriate ‘humour’ that
victims use as an emotional release. If used very shortly after recovery from
a sexually exploitive situation, a victim may relate to interviewers in ways their
experience has taught them to. Examples include hostility and aggression to the
interviewer or sexually inappropriate comments.
◆◆ Victims may not be happy to be videoed for a number of reasons. A common fear
is that the traffickers or their associates or the authorities who tortured them in
the country of origin will obtain the tape and identify them.
◆◆ Some objections may stem from religious or other beliefs held by victims.
◆◆ It is possible to electronically disguise the person being interviewed, but this may
be both expensive and time consuming.

The gender of an interviewer does not guarantee particular qualities. Both men
and women may be compassionate, motivated and professional; equally, both
may be disinterested, rude and incompetent. The rule should for the interviewer
to be of the same sex as the interviewee. However, the question should be posed
in case the interviewee prefers to be interviewed by someone of the opposite sex.
Social support / use of intermediaries at interviews
The role of a ‘social supporter’ or intermediary is likely to be determined by your
legislation. Intermediaries in some jurisdictions are there to assist the migrant in
understanding the interviewer, and the interviewer to understand the migrant.
This is not a translation role but one of assisting communications where a person may not be capable of understanding due to mental or physical impairment
or because he or she is young. In other jurisdictions, intermediaries may be restricted in the support they can give. Whatever the precise role, intermediaries
should not interfere in the interview, change what is being said or persuade interviewees to change their story.
If possible, you should find out if the person wants someone present prior to the
interview and, if so, who this person should be. The interviewer must explain to
the interview supporter that he or she should not prompt or speak for the migrant, especially on any matters relevant to the case.
Decisions based on (risk) assessments

Who should do the interview?
Many jurisdictions have legislation and established practice that will determine
who should interview victims or children. In case the chosen interviewer is not
able to establish rapport with the person, it is preferable to change the interviewer immediately. 130
Victims of trafficking and persons in need of international protection
If at all possible, interviewers trained in working with vulnerable witnesses should
be used to interview victims of trafficking130 and persons in need of international
protection.

130

108

There may be circumstances where an examiner concludes a person is either
not fit to interview or the interview would cause significant further traumatisation. The rule in these circumstances is that the interests of the person concerned should come first, otherwise the person may be at risk of having their
human rights to physical and mental integrity violated. Under no circumstances
should space for violations of the prohibition of torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment (Article 3 of the ECHR) be allowed. It should
be stressed that any trauma that could amount to cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment, taking into account the vulnerability of the person, must always be
avoided, regardless of the situation.

For more details on how to interview victims of trafficking, refer to the ‘Anti-trafficking training for border guards –
Trainers’ manual’, Frontex, 2012.

Interviewing

109

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 4

3.2.3. ‘E’ for engage and explain

3.2.4. ‘A’ for account

Interviewer behaviour

Free narrative

When you meet people you do not know, you may behave differently from how
you usually would. Vulnerable people can often sense the unusual behaviour
and may identify the behaviour as a sign of discomfort. Monitor your behaviour throughout the interview, and to try to keep it as normal as circumstances
allow. Interviewers should particularly think about how they will manage the
opening minutes of the interview.

If you have been unable to establish rapport with the person, there is little point
in continuing and you should consider terminating the interview. Other reasons
for terminating the interview include the health (physical and mental) of the person, risks you have identified to the person and others, that the person is either
unable or reluctant to provide you with any useful information, or you have realised that the person is a minor and a guardian should be present. After closing
the interview, you should evaluate what has happened, identify any action that
needs to be taken and review how the case should proceed.

Starting an interview
◆◆ Say who you are and what your position is.
◆◆ Explain the ‘here and now’ situation. Explain the purpose of the interview,
the legal powers under which it is conducted and the role of others who may
be present in the interview, e.g. the interpreter, other police officers, etc.
◆◆ Explain the person’s legal rights in relation to the process.
◆◆ An explanation should be given about how the interview will be recorded.
This may be as simple as saying, ‘I will speak to you and my colleague will
note what we say,’ or it could be explaining the use of technical equipment
used such as video, in this case seek the consent of the migrant.
◆◆ In cases where you have very limited information, you may decide to run an
initial interview with the objective of finding out enough information in order to develop a plan for further interviews.
If a person has been stopped or apprehended at the border:
◆◆ go over the evidence;
◆◆ repeat the reasons for which he has been stopped / apprehended / arrested
and is to be interviewed about;
◆◆ read the contents of the notes and search records to the interviewee;
◆◆ record the person’s agreement or disagreement with the contents of them.
Not only is this fair to the person because it allows him / her a second opportunity to raise any issues on what he / she is being informed about, but this also
provides the interviewer with an opportunity to assess the interviewee’s demeanour and responsiveness.
The interviewer should keep his / her speed of speaking at a proper pace, adapted
to the individual, the case and its circumstances. The interviewee should be allowed the time to take in what has just been said and to prepare his / her answer. The interviewer should be patient and allow breaks where necessary or
indicated by the person in front of him/her. Breaks should be allowed for religious observance.

110

On the other hand, if you have been able to establish rapport with the person,
he / she should be asked, wherever possible, to provide in his / her own words
an account of the relevant event(s). In the free narrative phase, the interviewer
should encourage witnesses to provide an account in their own ‘words’ by the
use of non-specific prompts such as ‘Did anything else happen,’ ‘Is there more
you can tell me?’ ‘Can you put it another way to help me understand better?’
Verbs such as ‘tell’ and ‘explain’ are likely to be useful.
Vulnerable people
Research has found that improper questioning of vulnerable people is a greater source
of distortion of their accounts than memory deficits; thus it is essential to use appropriate questioning from the early stages of an interview. Make every effort to obtain spontaneous information from the witness that is not contaminated by you as
the interviewer.

What if the person chooses to remain silent and gives no response?
There is no general rule. Changing to another interviewer might be one option.
However, when interviewing a person that has said nothing relevant to, you
should consider whether or not to continue to the next phase of the interview.
When making this decision, the needs of the person and the law (including human rights) must be considered.
Additional specific questioning
The first phase can be rounded off by giving the interviewee the opportunity
to agree or disagree with the points noted so far by the interviewer. The interviewer or interviewing team may now choose to insert a break here. When en-

Interviewing

111

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 4

tering the second phase, the interviewer should change his / her approach from
general matters to one of specific questioning about specific events or issues.

3.3. Follow-up 131 132 133 134 135 136

3.2.5. ‘C’ for closure

Notes to the trainer
It is essential that the gathering, sharing and dissemination of intelligence and intelligence management be carried out in strict compliance with the law. This section
aims at building the capacity of border guards to carry out data collection and processing in full respect of fundamental rights, and thus in compliance with the law.

At the conclusion of the questioning, the interviewer should:
◆◆ go through the contents of it;
◆◆ invite the interviewee to add any final points, make any corrections or alterations, or clarify any points of ambiguity;
◆◆ upon closure of an interview, summarise for the last time the allegation(s) and
invite him / her for the final time to either admit or deny the truth of them;
◆◆ in accordance with national procedures, ask the interviewee to check the record of the interview in the presence of his / her lawyer and then invite him / her
to sign it as being correct; if the interview has been audio- or video-recorded,
the interviewee should be invited to observe the sealing of the tape(s) and to
countersign any label or seal that is attached to the tape(s);
◆◆ explain to the interviewee (and his / her lawyer, if present) what is going to
happen to him / her next;
◆◆ provide for a contact name and / or telephone number;
◆◆ where applicable, interviewed persons should be offered information as to where
rapid help and support can be obtained; a leaflet listing names, addresses and
telephone numbers of relevant individuals and agencies will prove to be of great
help; where possible, law enforcement officers should assist migrants in accessing such support and be familiar with how to make referrals in this regard;
◆◆ ask if there are any questions and, where possible, answer them appropriately.

References
◆◆ Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
EU (2000)
◆◆ Directive 2004/38/EC of the
European Parliament and of the
Council of 29 April 2004 on the right
of citizens of the Union and their
family members to move and reside
freely within the territory of the
Member States amending Regulation
(EEC) No 1612/68 and repealing
Directives 64/221/EEC, 68/360/EEC,
72/194/EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC,
75/35/EEC, 90/364/EEC, 90/365/EEC
and 93/96/EEC131
◆◆ The Schengen area and cooperation
(2009)
◆◆ Sirene (supplementary information
request at the national entry)
◆◆ Sirene manual132

3.2.6. ‘E’ for evaluation

◆◆ Legal instruments governing
migration from SIS 1+ to SIS II

At this stage, the interviewer should consider whether the aims and objectives
of the interview have been achieved, how the knowledge discovered in the interview affects the investigation and whether further steps are necessary.
The evaluation should / could also comprise a review of the performance of the
interviewing officers, how well they conducted the interview and what improvements could be made in future. It is a key part of learning and improving the art
of interviewing; assessing the preparation and conduct of the interview, identifying what worked well and what didn’t and learning from any mistakes or parts
of the performance that could be improved.

112

◆◆ Regulation (EC) No 1987/2006 of the
European Parliament and of the
Council of 20 December 2006 on the
establishment, operation and use
of the second generation Schengen
Information System (SIS II)133
◆◆ Council Decision 2007/533/JHA

◆◆ European Agency for the Operational
Management of Large-Scale IT
Systems in the Area of Freedom,
Security and Justice134
◆◆ Council Regulation (EC) No 871/2004
of 29 April 2004 concerning the
introduction of some new functions
for the Schengen Information
System, including in the fight against
terrorism135
◆◆ Council Decision 2005/211/JHA
of 24 February 2005 concerning the
introduction of some new functions
for the Schengen Information
System, including in the fight against
terrorism136
◆◆ ‘Eurodac’ system (Council Regulation
(EC) No 2725/2000 and Council
Regulation (EC) No 407/2002)
◆◆ Communication on ‘Strengthened
practical cooperation new structures,
new approaches: Improving the
quality of decision making in the
common European asylum system’
(COM(2006) 67 final of 17 February
2006)
◆◆ Data protection in the European
Union: http://ec.europa.
eu/dataprotectionofficer/
useful_information_en.htm

131

OJ L 158, 30.4.2004, p. 77.

132

OJ C 38, 17.2.2003, p. 1.

133

OJ L 381, 28.12.2006, p. 4.

134

http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/home-affairs/what-we-do/policies/borders-and-visas/agency

135

OJ L 162, 30.4.2004, p. 29.

136

OJ L 68, 15.3.2005, p. 44.

Interviewing

113

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 4

cd. references
◆◆ Council Regulation (EC) No 343/2003
◆◆ The Dublin II regulation: A UNHCR
discussion paper, UN High
Commissioner for Refugees, April 2006
◆◆ Building in quality: A manual on
building a high quality asylum system,
UNHCR, September 2011, p. 77

tus of the migrant, to lead to decisions regarding his / her entry or residence,
for operational or strategic analysis, etc.
◆◆ The judicial law enforcement purpose has a mostly repressive character as it
aims at detecting and investigating crimes, collecting evidence, catching the
perpetrators and having them convicted.
◆◆ The ‘social–humanitarian’ communication flux covers the contacts with help
and support organisations, shelters, social services (including child protection units), medical and health care, etc.

◆◆ UNHCR Dublin II recast comments
Debriefing – The UK model
– A argeted investigative technique,
United Kingdom Border Agency,
H. M. Inspector Ben Nicholls,
Intelligence Manager Europe and
Mediterranean

The information the border guard gathers during an interview will mainly be
of a specific nature, relating to the individual case of a person that has been
stopped or apprehended. However, this specific information will be added to, or
enriched by, tactical and strategic information that may help counter illegal activities of people smugglers and traffickers of persons.
◆◆ Tactical information might point at safe houses, meeting points or suppliers of forged documents.
◆◆ Strategic information will teach more about modus operandi, trends, routes,
or push and pull factors.

The need for a ‘specified purpose’ returns in the Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the EU, where Article 8 states that personal data must be processed:
◆◆ fairly;
◆◆ for specified purposes; and
◆◆ on the basis of the consent of the person concerned or some other legitimate basis laid down by law. Everyone has the right of access to data which
has been collected concerning him/her, and the right to have it rectified.
The charter continues to say that compliance with these rules shall be subject to control by an independent authority. Eurodac for example, as mentioned in Module 3,
allows for the computerised exchange of fingerprints solely in order to support the
application of the Dublin arrangements by identifying those applicants already known
to other participating states. The Eurodac database cannot be accessed for the purposes of law enforcement reasons nor can its data be used to support prosecutions.

This information can assist in protecting the rights of the migrants. International
law does not criminalise or penalise the migrant for the fact of being smuggled;
however, information provided by the irregular migrant can contribute to identifying the smugglers. Thus, the irregular migrant should not be treated as a criminal when questioned.

Where law enforcement is concerned, the process of gathering, using and sharing data – the so-called hard as well as soft information – is usually very strictly
organised and limited, both in a preventive, proactive context as well as in a repressive and reactive context. However, as modern (information) technology provides opportunities, it also presents border guard services, law enforcement and
society in general with new challenges (e.g. the issue of systematic data-mining).

Debriefing
Where allowed and when aiming at the tactical and strategic information, debriefing might be a good and very often underestimated alternative to a formally processed interview.
Debriefing is ‘to interview informally and confidentially for the purposes of obtaining knowledge or information’.

As such, there should not be much room for discretion137 of the border guard.
Outside this well-organised, mostly legal framework, the first questions should
be whether any use of information will not endanger or harm the person and
whether there is the right balance between the ‘need to know’ and the ‘nice to
know’. Reality and practice, however, prove not to be that simple. The information the border guard is willing to share with the person responsible for a local
shelter, for example, will sometimes differ from place to place, as cooperation
may be the result of building a trusting partnership over many years. The border
guard should be well prepared and armed with a national framework of acceptable

It is not part of any formal process or evidence.
It is voluntary and fully based on trust.
Records themselves are kept fully confidential. The information they contain is filtered, integrated and shared in reports.

Information gathered from an irregular migrant can be used for three main purposes, namely an ‘administrative’, ‘social–humanitarian’ or ‘judicial law enforcement’ purpose.
◆◆ Administrative information is used within as well as outside the border guard
organisation. Data can be used to determine the legal character or the sta-

114

137

The word ‘discretion’ should be understood here as the room for ‘having an individual choice or judgment’, ‘the power
of free decision or latitude of choice within certain legal bound’ (derived from Merriam-Webster online dictionary).

Interviewing

115

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

solutions for challenges that will not unexceptionally occur when different data
fluxes interfere. Details of a medical intervention might also be included in a report to the judiciary and give away the address of the safe place where a victim
of trafficking has found refuge. Or, returning to the issue of Eurodac mentioned
earlier, how is the question being resolved when a case of smuggling of migrants
also requires those same fingerprints as for a national (criminal) database?
The EU requires all Member States to legislate to ensure that people have a right
to privacy, through directives such as Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council. However, in 1980, in an effort to create a comprehensive
data protection system throughout Europe, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) issued its ‘Recommendations of the Council concerning guidelines governing the protection of privacy and trans-border
flows of personal data.’ The seven principles governing the OECD’s recommendations for the protection of personal data are:
1. notice – data subjects should be given notice when their data is being collected;
2.	purpose – data should only be used for the purpose stated and not for any other purposes;
3. consent – data should not be disclosed without the data subject’s consent;
4. security – collected data should be kept secure from any potential abuses;
5.	disclosure – data subjects should be informed as to who is collecting their data;
6.	access – data subjects should be allowed to access their data and make corrections to any inaccurate data; and
7.	accountability – data subjects should have a method available to them to
hold data collectors accountable for following the above principles.
Privacy is an essential condition for effective confidentiality. None of the information provided by migrants, including information provided when lodging an
application for international protection, should routinely be shared with authorities of the country of origin without the consent of the migrant. For many, including asylum seekers, victims of trafficking and other migrants, this could not
only endanger themselves, but also their families. Procedures need to be set in
place so that border guards can and actually do reassure them of this guarantee.
© Frontex, 2010

All data, including personal data, facts surrounding travel and any other relevant
information, should be kept under strict confidentiality, and those handling such
data must abide by relevant national and EU laws on data protection. These also
impose restrictions on disclosing or requesting information from the alleged persecutors in such a way which might reveal that an application for international
protection has been made138.

138

116

Article 22 of Council Directive 2005/85/EC.

Module 5

Deprivation of liberty

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

This module aims to enable border guards to effectively carry out deprivation of liberty according to fundamental rights standards and principles.

Module 5

3 Training material 139 140
3.1. Introduction to fundamental rights in the deprivation of liberty

This module should be used in combination with Module 2 when explaining the
use of force in the process of depriving someone of their liberty. It should be
made clear that the limitations guiding the use of force also apply when depriving someone of their liberty, if and when there is a justifiable need.

Notes to the trainer
The aim of this section is to introduce the right to liberty in the context of the deprivation of liberty, in order to enable participants to develop the necessary skills to
carry out a detention with full respect for fundamental rights.

1. Learning outcomes

This section covers the conditions, duration and fundamental rights related to the
deprivation of liberty.
The authors of this manual chose to use the term ‘deprivation of liberty’ and not ‘arrest’ or ‘detention’ as these last two have connotations that do not exactly apply to
the condition of migrants when stopped for questioning. Furthermore, they are aware
of the importance not to criminalise what is often an administrative misdemeanour
in the case of migrants entering a country irregularly.

At the end of this module, participants will be able to, in accordance with
fundamental rights:
◆◆ recognise the circumstances under which it is permissible to deprive someone of their liberty;
◆◆ explain the rights of persons deprived of their liberty;
◆◆ recognise the fundamental rights implications relevant to the detention
of groups with particular / special needs and identify the actions that need
to be taken.

References
◆◆ International Covenant on Civil and
Political Rights (1966)
◆◆ European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR) (1950)

2. Lesson plan

◆◆ Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
EU (2000)
◆◆ Reception conditions directive (2003)

Content

Method

Toolkit

1.	Introduction to
fundamental rights in the
deprivation of liberty

◆◆ Presentation

◆◆ Deprivation of liberty (PowerPoint presentation)

◆◆ Case-law research

◆◆ Instructions for research and analysis of case-law

◆◆ Dublin II regulation (2003)
◆◆ Asylum procedures directive (2005)
◆◆ Twenty guidelines on forced returns,
Council of Europe Committee
of Ministers (2005)

2.	Deprivation of liberty
◆◆ Presentation
of some groups and
◆◆ Scenario
individuals requiring special
attention

◆◆ Child protection and deprivation of liberty

◆◆ European Committee for the
Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment
(CPT), The CPT Standards, CPT/Inf/E
(2002) 1 – Rev. 2010

3. Assessment

◆◆ Multiple-choice questions

◆◆ FRA annual report 2011 –
Fundamental rights: Challenges
and achievements in 2011 (1.2.3.
Alternatives to detention, p. 48)

◆◆ Multiple-choice
questions

◆◆ Detention of third-country nationals
in return procedures, FRA (2010)

139

◆◆ Detention guidelines: Guidelines on
the applicable criteria and standards
relating to the detention of asylum
seekers and alternatives to detention,
UNHCR (2012)139
◆◆ UNHCR protection training
manual for European border and
entry officials, page 14 and Annex
4 of Module 7
◆◆ Report of the Special Rapporteur
on the Human Rights of Migrants,
A/HRC/20/24 (2012)140
◆◆ International detention coalition
report ‘Captured childhood’ (2012)
◆◆ Global detention project
working paper on detention and
proportionality
◆◆ FRA annual report 2011 –
Fundamental rights: Challenges
and achievements in 2011 (1.2.3.
Alternatives to detention, p. 48)
◆◆ FRA annual report 2012 –
Fundamental rights: challenges
and achievements in 2012 (1.3.3.
Alternatives to detention, p.52)

http://www.unhcr.org/505b10ee9.html

140 http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/RegularSession/Session20/A-HRC-20-24_en.pdf

118

Deprivation of liberty

119

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 5

3.1.1. The right to liberty and permissible limitations

deprivation of liberty may aim to address particular interests of states, it should
not undermine those fundamental rights standards143.

In his 2012 annual submitted to the UN Human Rights Council, the Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants, Francois Crépeau, states:

There is no EU legislation regulating alternatives to detention. It is left to Member
States to decide how to implement alternatives. However, under international
human rights law, Member States have an obligation to provide alternatives to
detention, which must be a measure of last resort, and consider its use before
envisaging the use of such a measure.

‘Migrants who are detained find themselves in an especially vulnerable situation, as they may not speak the language and therefore understand why
they are detained, or be aware of ways to challenge the legality of their detention. The Special Rapporteur has been made aware that migrants in detention are frequently denied key procedural safeguards, such as prompt
access to a lawyer, interpretation / translation services, necessary medical care, means of contacting family or consular representatives and ways
of challenging detention.’

There are various alternatives to detention to address irregular migration that
take due account of the concerns of governments as well as the particular circumstances of the individual involved. In fact, there is no evidence that detention
has any deterrent effect on irregular migration144. The UN Special Rapporteur on
the Human Rights of Migrants provides useful guidance on the different types
of alternatives to detention, and how to apply them, in his 2012 report to the
Human Rights Council (A/HRC/20/24) (see footnote 146).

In both international and European human rights law, detention must not be arbitrary, and any decision to deprive someone of their liberty must be based on an assessment of the individual’s particular circumstances, according to the following141:
◆◆ detention is an exceptional measure and can only be justified for a legitimate
purpose (Guideline 4.1.);
◆◆ detention can only be used as last resort when it is determined to be necessary, reasonable in all the circumstances and proportionate to a legitimate
purpose (Guideline 4.2.);
◆◆ alternatives must always be considered before resorting to detention (Guideline 4.3.).

Types of alternative forms of detention145:
◆◆ bond / bail;
◆◆ registration and / or deposit of documents;
◆◆ designated residence or other freedom of movement restrictions;
◆◆ community release / supervision;
◆◆ reporting conditions;
◆◆ electronic tagging;
◆◆ home curfew.146

The deprivation of liberty is something that is likely to have a direct and long-term
adverse effect on the migrant who has risked his or her life fleeing persecution
in search of protection and to reach a new land in the hope of a better future.

‘States should avoid criminalising persons moving irregularly through imposing penal sanctions or conditions of treatment that are not suitable to persons who have
not committed a crime’146.

Moreover, it curtails the enjoyment of many other rights, from the right to family life, to the right to freedom of assembly, association and expression, to the
right to freedom of movement. Deprivation of liberty may put the person affected into a vulnerable position, exposing him or her to the potential of being
subjected to inhuman and degrading treatment142.
The increasing use of detention to restrict freedom of movement of migrants
on the grounds of their irregular entry is a matter of major concern. While the

There are three purposes for which detention may be necessary in an individual
case, and which are generally in line with international law, namely public order, public health or national security147.
143

144 ‘Detention guidelines: Guidelines on the applicable criteria and standards relating to the detention of asylum seekers
and alternatives to detention’, UNHCR, 2012.
145

141

‘Detention guidelines: Guidelines on the applicable criteria and standards relating to the detention of asylum seekers
and alternatives to detention’, UNHCR, 2012.

142

‘The right to liberty and security of the person: A guide to the implementation of Article 5 of the European Convention
on Human Rights’, Monica Macovei, Human rights handbooks No 5, Council of Europe, 2002.

120

Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants to the Human Rights Council and UNHCR revised
guidelines on applicable criteria and standards relating to the detention of asylum seekers.

All forms of detention, including alternative means, should be assessed in order to ascertain possible negative effects to
each individual in question.

146 ‘Global roundtable on alternatives to detention of asylum seekers, refugees, migrants and stateless persons: Summary
conclusions’, UNHCR and the OHCHR, July 2011, p. 2. (http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4e315b882.html). See also
Module 3, Introduction.
147

Ibid and report of the Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants to the Human Rights Council.

Deprivation of liberty

121

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 5

3.1.2. The right to liberty and security148

Additionally, the European Court of Human Rights stresses the importance
of both key elements – physical liberty and personal security – in the Kurt v Turkey case154, in its interpretation of Article 5 of the ECHR:

The ‘right to liberty and security’ in the ECHR is a unique right, as the expression has to be read as a whole; ‘security of a person’ must be understood in the
context of physical liberty.

‘… What is at stake is both the protection of the physical liberty of individuals
as well as their personal security in a context which, in the absence of safeguards, could result in a subversion of the rule of law and place detainees beyond the reach of the most rudimentary forms of legal protection’155.

The guarantee of ‘security of person’ serves to underline a requirement that the
authorities have to ensure that liberty is intrinsically linked to security. One is
more secure when not deprived of one’s own liberty.149

The deprivation of liberty when extending to personal security puts at risk fundamental guarantees contained in other articles of the convention, such as the
right to life156 and the prohibition of torture157. The loss of or the limitations on
this right put a person at risk of being subjected to torture, inhuman and degrading treatment. The European Court of Human Rights acknowledges this risk and
draws the attention in prompt judicial review so as to ensure that any deprivation of Article 5 would not lead to further violations as stated earlier:

Hence, the duration of the administrative detention of a migrant should be as short
as possible, and the decision to keep the person detained must be judicially reviewed
regularly. The deprivation of liberty should not continue beyond the period for which
the state can provide appropriate justification.
Under no circumstances should administrative detention of migrants be indefinite.
A maximum period of detention should be set by law, and the custody may in no case
be unlimited or of excessive length.148

‘Prompt judicial intervention may lead to the detection and prevention of lifethreatening measures or serious ill-treatment which violate the fundamental guarantees contained in Articles 2 and 3 of the convention’158.

Personal liberty is a key fundamental right, which everyone is entitled to enjoy.
This right constitutes the condition for the protection of each individual and its
deprivation affects the enjoyment of other rights such as the freedom of movement150, right to family and private life151 and right to assembly152. Liberty is the
rule, and detention is the exception.

3.1.3. The lawfulness of the deprivation of one’s liberty
The deprivation of liberty must be objectively justified and the duration of the
deprivation of liberty as such must be absolutely necessary. The wording of Article 9 of the ICCPR and Article 5.1 of the ECHR underlines that any limitations on it
should be permitted only in exceptional circumstances based on justified grounds.

The ‘right to liberty and security’ is a unique right which extends the protection of a person, from his / her physical liberty to his / her personal security. In
the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment, the deprivation of one’s liberty
is defined as follows:

‘Both the ICCPR and the ECHR require that the length of detention must be
as short as possible, and the more the detention is prolonged, the more it is
likely to become arbitrary159. Excessive length of detention, or uncertainty as
to its duration, may also raise issues of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment,
and the Committee against Torture has repeatedly warned against the use

‘… deprivation of liberty means any form of detention or imprisonment or
the placement of a person in a public or private custodial setting which that
person is not permitted to leave at will by order of any judicial, administrative or other authority’153.
148 Article 5 of the ECHR; Article 6 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU and Article 9(1)–(5) of the ICCPR.

154

149 ‘The right to liberty and security of the person: A guide to the implementation of Article 5 of the European Convention
on Human Rights’, Monica Macovei, Human rights No 5, Council of Europe, 2002.

Kurt v Turkey, Appl. No. 15/1997/799/1002, Council of Europe: European Court of Human Rights, 25 May 1998 (http://
www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/49997ae512.html).

155

Kurt v Turkey, para. 123.

150 Article 2 of Protocol No 4 as amended by Protocol No 11 of the ECHR.

156

Article 2 of the ECHR.

151

Article 8 of the ECHR.

157

Article 3 of the ECHR.

152

Article 11 of the ECHR.

158

Kurt v Turkey, para. 123.

153

Article 4.2 of the Optional Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading
Treatment or Punishment. This definition refers to any form of deprivation, i.e. search, detention, interviewing.

159

‘Annual report 1998’, WGAD, op. cit., fn. 598, para. 69, Guarantee 10; ‘Annual report 1999’, WGAD, op. cit., fn. 598,
Principle 7; and ‘ Annual report 2008’, WGAD, op. cit., fn. 580, paras 67 and 82.

122

Deprivation of liberty

123

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

of prolonged or indefinite detention in the immigration context160. Prolonged
detention of minors calls for particularly strict scrutiny and may violate obligations under the CRC (Articles 3 and 37) as well as Article 24 ICCPR161.’162
Article 9 of the ICCPR
‘1. Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be
subjected to arbitrary arrest or detention. No one shall be deprived of his liberty except on such grounds and in accordance with such procedure as are
established by law.’
Article 5 of ECHR
‘Right to liberty and security
1. Everyone has the right to liberty and security of person. No one shall be deprived of his liberty save in the following cases and in accordance with a procedure prescribed by law:
(a) the lawful detention of a person after conviction by a competent court;
(b) the lawful arrest or detention of a person for noncompliance with the
lawful order of a court or in order to secure the fulfilment of any obligation
prescribed by law;
(c) the lawful arrest or detention of a person effected for the purpose of bringing him before the competent legal authority on reasonable suspicion of having committed an offence or when it is reasonably considered necessary to
prevent his committing an offence or fleeing after having done so;
(d) the detention of a minor by lawful order for the purpose of educational
supervision or his lawful detention for the purpose of bringing him before
the competent legal authority;
(e) the lawful detention of persons for the prevention of the spreading of infectious diseases, of persons of unsound mind, alcoholics or drug addicts or
vagrants;

160 ‘Consideration of reports submitted by states parties under Article 19 of the convention: Concluding observations
of the Committee against Torture – Sweden’, CAT, UN Doc. CAT/C/SWE/CO/2, 4 June 2008, para. 12: ‘detention
should be for the shortest possible time’; ‘Consideration of reports submitted by states parties under Article 19 of the
convention: Concluding observations of the Committee against Torture – Costa Rica’, CAT, UN Doc. CAT/C/CRI/CO/2,
7 July 2008, para. 10 expressed concern at failure to limit the length of administrative detention of non-nationals. The
CAT recommended: ‘the state party should also set a maximum legal period for detention pending deportation, which
should in no circumstances be indefinite.’
161

‘Consideration of reports submitted by states parties under Article 40 of the convention: Concluding observations
of the Committee against Torture – Czech Republic’, CCPR, UN Doc. CCPR/C/CZE/CO/2, 9 August 2007, para. 15: the
committee expressed concern at legislation permitting the detention of those under the age of 18 for up to 90 days, in
light of obligations under Articles 10 and 24 ICCPR, and recommended that this period should be reduced.

162

Migration and international human rights law, Practitioners Guide No 6, International Commission of Jurists, p. 153.

124

Module 5

(f) the lawful arrest or detention of a person to prevent his effecting an unauthorised entry into the country or of a person against whom action is being taken with a view to deportation or extradition.’
The lawfulness of the deprivation of one’s liberty is stipulated in the wording
of Article 5.4 of the ECHR:
‘Everyone who is deprived of his / her liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings by which the lawfulness of his detention shall be decided speedily by a court and his release ordered if the detention is not lawful.’
And according to Article 9.4 of the ICCPR:
‘Anyone who is deprived of his liberty by arrest or detention shall be entitled to take proceedings before a court, in order that that court may decide
without delay on the lawfulness of his detention and order his release if the
detention is not lawful.’
Therefore, the lawfulness of any deprivation of liberty is met by the principles
of legality, proportionality and necessity. Any action taken for the limitation
of this right should be viewed through these principles and be supported by
them; otherwise, any action (arrest, detention, etc.) taken to deprive one’s liberty is regarded as illegal and the duration of the deprivation (detention) cannot be justified by any means.

3.1.4. Pertinent rights in relation to the deprivation of liberty
Article 5.2 of the ECHR ensures that the authorities provide, without delay, information to the arrestee / detainee for the reasoning of his / her arrest/detention
promptly and in a language that he / she understands or to provide the necessary means to him / her in time, so that he / she could exercise those rights within
a reasonable time. These rights would be meaningless if, for example, the arrestee / detainee is informed one year after the deprivation of his / her liberty about
the reasoning of his / her arrest, or that he / she could contact the outside world
(a lawyer, his / her relatives, etc.).
Timing plays a key role, on the one hand for eliminating the possibilities of the
arbitrary arrest / detention or indefinite and secret detention, tortures, forced
disappearances, etc., and, on the other hand, for guaranteeing the right of the

Deprivation of liberty

125

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 5

arrestee to exercise his / her rights promptly, the right to take proceedings with
regard to the lawfulness of his / her detention163 and the right to compensation164.

◆◆ Article 8 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU on the protection
of personal data.
◆◆ Article 8 of the ECHR and Article 17(1) of the ICCPR on the respect of private
and family life.

In the context of the principles of necessity and legality, these rights should be
applied promptly and properly.

Length of detention, conditions and related human rights while deprived of liberty
After the deprivation of his / her liberty which should be conducted only on justified and specific grounds, the arrestee / detainee should enjoy a number of human rights (basic protection):
◆◆ Article 1 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU about human dignity,
‘Human dignity is inviolable. It must be respected and protected’, and Article 1
of the UDHR, ‘All human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights’.
◆◆ Articles 6 and 7 of the ECHR and Article 14 of the ICCPR: fair trial, presumed
innocence, etc. Further, international law prohibits secret detention on any
grounds.

Under no circumstances should administrative detention of migrants be indefinite. A maximum period of detention should be set by law, and the custody may
in no case be unlimited or of excessive length.

The 1990 International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of all Migrant
Workers and Members of their Families expressly states that if migrants are detained for violating provisions relating to migration, they should be held separately from convicted persons or persons detained pending trial. They should
not be seen as criminals165.
As regards interviewing and investigations which could be referred to as other
forms of deprivation of liberty according to the definition provided by the Optional
Protocol to the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment166, these must be carried out in line with the human rights standards. Relevant rights involved in the interviewing / investigations:
◆◆ Article 3 of the ECHR and Article 7 of the ICCPR: prohibition of torture.
◆◆ Article 10(1) of the ICCPR: ‘All persons deprived of their liberty shall be treated
with humanity and with respect… ’
◆◆ Article 14 of the ECHR (prohibition of discrimination) and Article 2 of the
UDHR: ‘Everyone is entitled to all the rights and freedoms without distinction of any kind, such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or
other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status. Furthermore, no distinction shall be made on the basis of the political, jurisdictional or international status of the country or territory to which a person
belongs, whether it be independent, trust, non-self-governing or under any
other limitation of sovereignty.’
163

Article 5.4 of the ECHR, right to judicial review.

164 Article 5.5 of the ECHR, right to compensation.
165

Article 17(3) of the convention.

166 See footnote 151.

126

Deprivation of liberty

127

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 5

3.2. Deprivation of liberty of some groups and individuals requiring
special attention167

detention, but if this is unavoidable and justified by national law, rigorous guarantees, as outlined below, need to be secured.
People with disabilities and the elderly

Notes to the trainer

The Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities establishes that:

The aim of this section is to introduce rights involved in the deprivation of the liberty
of individuals requiring particular attention.

Article 14(2)
References
◆◆ UN Convention on the Rights of the
Child (1989)
◆◆ UN Convention on the Rights
of Persons with Disabilities (2006)
◆◆ Yogyakarta Principles on the
Application of International Human
Rights Law in relation to Sexual
Orientation and Gender Identity
(2006)
◆◆ UN Rules for the Treatment
of Women Prisoners and NonCustodial Measures for Women
Offenders (the Bangkok rules),
A/C.3/65/L.5 (2010)
◆◆ Council Directive 2003/9/EC
(reception conditions directive)

‘States parties shall ensure that if persons with disabilities are deprived of their
liberty through any process, they are, on an equal basis with others, entitled
to guarantees in accordance with international human rights law and shall
be treated in compliance with the objectives and principles of this convention, including by provision of reasonable accommodation.’

◆◆ UNHCR revised guidelines on
applicable criteria and standards
relating to the detention of asylum
seekers (1999)
◆◆ Global roundtable on alternatives
to detention of asylum seekers,
refugees, migrants and stateless
persons: Summary conclusions
(Global roundtable summary
conclusions), UNHCR and the Office
of the High Commissioner for Human
Rights (OHCHR) (2011)167

Article 16 ‘2. states parties shall also take all appropriate measures to prevent all
forms of exploitation, violence and abuse by ensuring, inter alia, appropriate forms
of gender-and age-sensitive assistance and support for persons with disabilities
and their families and caregivers, including through the provision of information
and education on how to avoid, recognise and report instances of exploitation,
violence and abuse. States parties shall ensure that protection services are age-,
gender- and disability-sensitive.

◆◆ Detention guidelines: Guidelines on
the applicable criteria and standards
relating to the detention of asylum
seekers and alternatives to detention,
UNHCR (2012)

‘3. In order to prevent the occurrence of all forms of exploitation, violence
and abuse, states parties shall ensure that all facilities and programmes designed to serve persons with disabilities are effectively monitored by independent authorities.’

‘The detention of asylum seekers is, in the view of UNHCR, inherently undesirable. This is even more so in the case of vulnerable groups such as single
women, children, unaccompanied minors and those with special medical or
psychological needs’168.

The UNHCR recommends ‘a swift and systematic identification and registration
of such persons is needed to avoid arbitrary detention and any alternative arrangements may need to be tailored to their specific needs, such as telephone
reporting for persons with physical constraints’170.

In considering the prescription of detention, it is important to observe the principle of minimum intervention or last resort169 and pay close attention to the
specific situation of each individual to determine if they require particular attention such as accompanied and unaccompanied children, pregnant women,
the elderly, persons with disabilities, survivors of torture, victims of crime or violence, or other persons exhibiting symptoms of trauma or psychological conditions. In these cases, it is recommended to find alternative forms to custodial
167

http://www.unhcr.org/refworld/docid/4e315b882.html

168 UNCHR revised guidelines on applicable criteria and standards relating to the detention of asylum seekers, 1999.
169 On the recommendation of the Eighth Congress, the General Assembly, in its Resolution 45/110 of 14 December 1990,
adopted the United Nations’ standard minimum rules for non-custodial measures and approved the recommendation
of the committee that the rules should be known as ‘the Tokyo rules’.

128

The UNHCR’s Detention Guideline 9.6171 emphasises that, in the case of elderly
individuals seeking international protection, they ‘may require special care and
assistance owing to their age, vulnerability, lessened mobility, psychological or
physical health, or other conditions. Without such care and assistance, their de-

170 ‘Detention guidelines: Guidelines on the applicable criteria and standards relating to the detention of asylum seekers
and alternatives to detention’, UNHCR, 2012.
171

‘Detention guidelines: Guidelines on the applicable criteria and standards relating to the detention of asylum seekers
and alternatives to detention’, UNHCR, 2012.

Deprivation of liberty

129

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 5

tention may become unlawful. Alternative arrangements would need to take into
account their particular circumstances, including physical and mental well-being’172.

entation or gender identity176. When security to their physical and mental integrity cannot be guaranteed in detention, their release or alternatives to detention
need to be contemplated. Solitary confinement is not an appropriate alternative177.

Women
Survivors of torture
In co-sex facilities, men and women should be separated, unless they belong to
the same family. Ideally, the majority of guards looking after women detainees
should also be female. The specific hygiene needs of women should be met173.

Survivors of torture should be deprived of their liberty only in exceptional cases,
as the incarceration may well bring back and augment their physical and psychological suffering.

The detention of pregnant women and breastfeeding mothers should be avoided174.
People suspected of suffering from trauma need to be monitored regularly so as
to ascertain the safety of their detention. Personnel need to be trained to identify symptoms of trauma, to ensure that particular behaviours are understood
and the individual in question is not punished, but rather referred for the appropriate care. As isolation can bring back memories of the torture experienced in
the past, it is strongly advised to avoid such practices.

Rule 25 of the UN rules for the treatment of women prisoners and non-custodial
measures for women offenders (the Bangkok rules) provides that:
‘1. Women prisoners who report abuse shall be provided immediate protection, support and counselling, and their claims shall be investigated by
competent and independent authorities, with full respect for the principle
of confidentiality. Protection measures shall take into account specifically
the risks of retaliation.
2. Women prisoners who have been subjected to sexual abuse, and especially
those who have become pregnant as a result, shall receive appropriate medical advice and counselling and shall be provided with the requisite physical
and mental health care, support and legal aid.
3. In order to monitor the conditions of detention and treatment of women
prisoners, inspectorates, visiting or monitoring boards or supervisory bodies shall include women members’175.

Minors178
Article 37 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child provides for the protection of children:
‘States parties shall ensure that:
(a) No child shall be subjected to torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Neither capital punishment nor life imprisonment without possibility of release shall be imposed for offences committed
by persons below eighteen years of age;
(b) No child shall be deprived of his or her liberty unlawfully or arbitrarily.
The arrest, detention or imprisonment of a child shall be in conformity with
the law and shall be used only as a measure of last resort and for the shortest appropriate period of time;
(c) Every child deprived of liberty shall be treated with humanity and respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, and in a manner which
takes into account the needs of persons of his or her age. In particular,
every child deprived of liberty shall be separated from adults unless it is
considered in the child’s best interest not to do so and shall have the right

Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex individuals
The placement in detention of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or intersex
people should not put them at risk of violence, ill-treatment or physical, mental
or sexual abuse. Moreover, any member of staff working in public or private detention facilities has to be trained in international human rights standards and
principles of equality and non-discrimination, including in relation to sexual ori-

172

See, for example, Article 17(1) of Council Directive 2003/9/EC.

173

UN rules for the treatment of women prisoners and non-custodial measures for women offenders (the Bangkok rules),
A/C.3/65/L.5, 6 October 2010.

176

Yogyakarta principles on the application of international human rights law in relation to sexual orientation and gender
identity, 2006, Principle 9: The right to treatment with humanity while in detention.

174

Report of the Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants, A/HRC/20/24, para. 72(g).

177

175

Though Rule 25 of the UN rules for the treatment of women prisoners and non-custodial measures for women
offenders (the Bangkok rules) applies to women who have been convicted of a criminal offence or awaiting trial, its
best practice is transferrable to the administrative detention of migrant women.

‘Detention guidelines: Guidelines on the applicable criteria and standards relating to the detention of asylum seekers
and alternatives to detention’, UNHCR, 2012, p. 39.

178

Adapted from the ‘Detention guidelines: Guidelines on the applicable criteria and standards relating to the detention
of asylum seekers and alternatives to detention’, UNHCR, 2012.

130

Deprivation of liberty

131

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Module 5

to maintain contact with his or her family through correspondence and
visits, save in exceptional circumstances;
(d) Every child deprived of his or her liberty shall have the right to prompt access to legal and other appropriate assistance, as well as the right to challenge the legality of the deprivation of his or her liberty before a court or
other competent, independent and impartial authority, and to a prompt decision on any such action.’

of their education upon release. Provision should be made for their recreation
and play, which is essential to a child’s mental development and will alleviate
stress and trauma.

Moreover, the Convention on the Rights of the Child also calls for the following.
◆◆ Article 2 which requires that states take all measures appropriate to ensure
that children are protected from all forms of discrimination or punishment on
the basis of the status, activities, expressed opinions or beliefs of the child’s
parents, legal guardians or family members.
◆◆ Article 3 which provides that in any action taken by states parties concerning children, the best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration.
◆◆ Article 9 which grants children the right not to be separated from their parents against their will.
◆◆ Article 22 which requires that states parties take appropriate measures to
ensure that minors who are seeking refugee status or who are recognised
refugees, whether accompanied or not, receive appropriate protection and
assistance.

Legislation should not allow for the detention of unaccompanied children, and
the detention of children should be permitted only as a measure of last resort
and only when it has been determined to be in the best interest of the child, for
the shortest appropriate period of time and in conditions that ensure the realisation of the rights enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child179.

Children who are detained benefit from the same minimum procedural guarantees (listed under Guideline 9.2 of the UNCHR detention guidelines) as adults.
A legal guardian or adviser should be appointed for unaccompanied minors.

Families
If special facilities for families do not exist, this should not mean that they are
placed in solitary confinement wings.
‘All appropriate alternative care arrangements should be considered in the
case of children accompanying their parents, not least because of the welldocumented deleterious effects of detention on children’s well-being, including on their physical and mental development. The detention of children with
their parents or primary caregivers needs to balance, inter alia, the right to
family and private life of the family as a whole, the appropriateness of the
detention facilities for children, and the best interests of the child’180.

Unaccompanied and separated minors should not, as a general rule, be detained.
Where possible, they should be released into the care of family members who already
have residency. Where this is not possible, alternative care arrangements should be
made by the competent childcare authorities for unaccompanied minors to receive
adequate accommodation and appropriate supervision. Residential homes or fostercare placements may provide the necessary facilities to ensure that appropriate care,
both physical and mental, is provided while longer term solutions are being considered.

The detention of children whose parents are detained should not be justified on
the basis of maintaining the family unit; instead, alternatives to detention should
be applied to the entire family181.

If none of the alternatives can be applied and states do detain children, this should,
in accordance with Article 37 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child, be as
a measure of last resort, and for the shortest period of time.
If children are detained at airports, immigration-holding centres or prisons, they
must not be held under prison-like conditions. All efforts must be made to have
them released from detention and placed in other accommodation. If this proves
impossible, special arrangements must be made for living quarters which are
suitable for children and their families.
During detention, children have a right to education which should optimally
take place outside the detention premises in order to facilitate the continuation

132

179

Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants, A/HRC/20/24, para. 72(h).

180 ‘Detention guidelines: Guidelines on the applicable criteria and standards relating to the detention of asylum seekers
and alternatives to detention’, UNHCR, 2012, p. 35.
181

Special Rapporteur on the Human Rights of Migrants, A/HRC/20/24, para. 72(h).

Deprivation of liberty

133

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Glossary

Glossary
Applicant: A person who formally requests some government or legal action, such
as the granting of refugee status, a visa or working permit.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Application: A request (usually written) submitted to the government by a person
or organisation seeking some governmental action.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Related term: claim
Arbitrary: In an unreasonable manner, related to the concepts of injustice, unpredictability, unreasonableness and capriciousness.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Armed conflict: All cases of declared war or of any other armed conflict which may
arise between two or more states, even if the state of war is not recognised by
one of them (see Article 2, Geneva conventions I–IV, 1949 – international armed
conflict). An armed conflict exists whenever there is a resort to armed force between states or protracted armed violence between governmental authorities and
organised armed groups or between such groups within a state (Tadic case No
IT-94-1-AR 72, p.35, Appeals Chamber, ICTY – non-international armed conflict).
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Asylum: The granting, by a state, of protection on its territory to persons from another state who are fleeing persecution or serious danger. Asylum encompasses
a variety of elements, including non-refoulement, permission to remain on the
territory of the asylum country and humane standards of treatment.
Asylum applicant, asylum seeker: An asylum seeker is an individual who is seeking
international protection. An asylum seeker is someone whose claim has not yet
been decided on by the country in which he or she has submitted it. Not every
asylum seeker will ultimately be recognised as a refugee, but every refugee is
initially an asylum seeker.
Best practice: Means to further the application of existing norms and principles, both
at the international and the national levels. Best practices may be translated into
operational directives, codes of conduct or other manifestations of soft law, but
should not lead to a weakening or erosion of positive law. They are characterised
by: being innovative, developing creative solutions; showing a positive impact on

the level of implementation of migrants’ rights; having a sustainable effect, especially by involving migrants themselves; and having the potential for replication.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Border: Line separating the land territory or maritime zones of one state from another.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Border control: Means the activity carried out at a border, in accordance with and
for the purposes of Regulation (EC) No 562/2006, in response exclusively to an
intention to cross or the act of crossing that border, regardless of any other consideration, consisting of border checks and border surveillance.
(Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006 establishing a community code on the rules governing the
movement of persons across borders (Schengen borders code))
Border crossing: Means the physical act of crossing a border (as defined above) either at a border crossing point (as defined elsewhere) or another point along the
border, in case entry is likely to be illegal.
(Asylum and migration glossary, European Migration Network)
Border crossing point: Means any crossing point authorised by the competent authorities for crossing external borders.
(Council Directive 2004/82/EC of 29 April 2004 on the obligation of carriers to
communicate passenger data182)
Border guard: A generic term describing those officials whose primary task is to guard
the border and enforce the immigration (and possibly customs) laws of the state.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Related terms: border officials, border police
Border management: Integrated border management is a concept consisting of the
following dimensions.
◆◆ Border control (checks and surveillance) as defined in the Schengen borders
code, including relevant risk analysis and crime intelligence.
◆◆ Detection and investigation of cross-border crime in coordination with all
competent law enforcement authorities.
◆◆ The four-tier access control model (measures in third countries, cooperation with neighbouring countries, border control, control measures within
the area of free movement, including return).

182

134

OJ L 261, 6.8.2004, p. 24.

135

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

◆◆ Inter-agency cooperation for border management (border guards, customs,
police, national security and other relevant authorities) and international
cooperation.
◆◆ Coordination and coherence of the activities of Member States and institutions and other bodies of the Community and the Union.
(Council conclusions on integrated border management, December 2006)
Border official: See ‘border guard’
Capacity building: A process by which individuals, institutions and societies develop
abilities, individually and collectively, to perform functions, solve problems and
set and achieve their goals.
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union: Reaffirms, with due regard for the powers and tasks of the Community and the Union and the principle
of subsidiarity, the rights as they result, in particular, from the constitutional traditions and international obligations common to the Member States, the Treaty
on European Union, the Community Treaties, the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), the Social Charters adopted by the Community and by the
Council of Europe and the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Communities and of the European Court of Human Rights.
(Asylum and migration glossary, European Migration Network)
Checkpoint: A location (on the land border or at an airport or seaport) where persons are stopped by border officials for inspection and clearance, in order to enter the state.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Related terms: border, border control, border official, border guard
Child: Any person below 18 years of age.
(Directive 2011/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April
2011 on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its
victims, and replacing Council Framework Decision 2002/629/JHA)
Related term: minor
Child (separated): Means a child under 18 years of age who is outside their country
of origin and separated from both parents and their previous legal / customary
primary caregiver. Some may be totally alone while others may be living with
extended family members. All such children are separated children and entitled to international protection under a broad range of international and regional instruments.
(Study on separated, asylum-seeking children in EU Member States, European
Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA))

136

Glossary

Child (unaccompanied): Persons under the age of majority who are not accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other adult who by law or custom is responsible
for them. Unaccompanied minors present special challenges for border control
officials, because detention and other practices used with undocumented adult
aliens may not be appropriate for minors.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Citizen: A person, who, either by birth or naturalisation, is a member of a political
community, owing allegiance to the community and being entitled to enjoy all
its civil and political rights and protection; a member of the state, entitled to all
its privileges. A person enjoying a nationality of a given state.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
See also ‘National’
Civil and political rights: Commonly used to describe the various rights contained in
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966) (e.g. right of self-determination; of free disposition of natural wealth and resources; of non-discrimination; of equal rights of men and women; right to life; freedom from torture,
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; of freedom from slavery and servitude; of freedom from arbitrary arrest or detention; of freedom
of movement within a state; right to liberty and security of the person; equality before the courts; right to a fair and public hearing by an impartial tribunal
in respect of criminal charges; prohibition of retroactive criminal liability; right
of privacy of the family, the home or correspondence; freedom of thought, conscience and religion; freedom of expression; right to peaceful assembly; freedom
of association and of participation in public affairs).
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Claim: An assertion made to a government agency or court seeking an action or
determination of a right or benefit, such as refugee status or the right to compensation or legal redress in civil proceedings.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Related term: application
Clandestine migration: Secret or concealed migration in breach of immigration requirements. It can occur when a non-national breaches the entry regulations
of a country; or having entered a country legally overstays in breach of immigration regulations.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Related terms: irregular migrant, irregular migration, regular migration
Code of conduct: A common set of principles or standards that a group of agencies
or organisations have agreed to abide by while providing assistance in response

137

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

to complex emergencies or natural disasters. For example, the principles of conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and non-governmental organisations in disaster response programmes, and the IASC core
principles of a code of conduct for protection from sexual abuse and exploitation.
Combatant: A person who takes an active part in hostilities, who can kill, and who,
in turn, is a lawful military target. She / he can be a member of the armed forces,
other than medical personnel and chaplains, or of an organised group. Under international humanitarian law, armed forces are subject to an internal disciplinary
system which, inter alia, must enforce compliance with the rules of international
law applicable to armed conflict.
Complementary protection: Formal permission, under national law or practice, to
reside in a country extended by that country to persons who are in need of international protection even though they do not qualify for the 1951 refugee convention status.
Convention: Formal international agreements among nations (to which states become party), which create binding legal obligations. Such agreements may have
different names: treaty, convention, covenant or pact. Conventions are one of two
main types of UN human rights instruments, the other being UN standards.
See ‘Treaty’
Convention grounds: The definition of refugee in the 1951 convention requires that
the fear of persecution be linked to one or more of the following five grounds: race,
religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion.
Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness: A convention that provides for the
acquisition of nationality by those who would otherwise be stateless and who
have an appropriate link with the state through birth on the territory or through
descent from a national. The convention also provides for the retention of nationality by those who would become stateless if they were to lose the state’s
nationality. The convention was adopted in August 1961 and came into force in
December 1975. The UNHCR has been mandated with specific functions under
Article 11 of the 1961 Convention on the Reduction of statelessness.
Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC): Adopted in 1989, this treaty sets comprehensive standards for the protection of the rights of children. It is underpinned
by four guiding principles, one of which is non-discrimination in the application
of its standards to all children. Therefore, refugee children come fully within its
scope. The other guiding principles are the ‘best interest’ of the child, the right
to life, survival and development, and the right to participation.

Glossary

Country of destination (destination country): The country that is a destination
for migratory flows.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Country of origin (source country): The country (or countries) which are a source
of migratory flows and of which a migrant may have citizenship. In the refugee
context, based on Council Directive 2004/83/EC, this means the country (or
countries) of nationality or, for stateless persons, of former habitual residence.
(Derived by EMN, based on the IOM definition)
(Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004 on minimum standards for the
qualification and status of third-country nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need international protection and the content of the protection granted183)
Synonym: state of origin
Narrower terms: Country of origin information, safe country of origin
Related terms: country of nationality, country of transit
Note: In some cases, a migrant may enter the EU from another country, which
is not his / her country of origin. See ‘Country of transit’.
Country of transit (transit country): The country through which migratory flows
(legal or illegal) move. This is taken to mean, the country (or countries), different from the country of origin, which a migrant passes through in order to enter a country of destination.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Related terms: Country of origin, country of destination
Culture: Should be regarded as the set of distinctive spiritual, material, intellectual
and emotional features of society or a social group, and that it encompasses, in
addition to art and literature, lifestyles, ways of living together, value systems,
traditions and beliefs.
(Asylum and migration glossary, European Migration Network)
Custody: Responsibility for the care and control of an individual. A court might assign custody of a minor to a relative or other guardian. A person who is detained
by authorities is ‘in custody’.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Customary law, international: A source of international law. The two criteria for
a norm to be recognised as ‘customary law’ are state practice and opinio juris
(a conception that the practice is required by or consistent with the prevailing law).
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
183

138

OJ L 304, 30.9.2004, p. 12.

139

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Custody: Responsibility for the care and control of an individual. A court might assign custody of a minor to a relative or other guardian. A person who is detained
by authorities is ‘in custody’.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Degrading treatment: Degrading treatment or punishment has a broader definition than inhuman treatment, and what is degrading may depend on the particular attributes of the person in question. For treatment to be deemed degrading,
other people sharing the same characteristics as that individual would have to
find it degrading.
(http: //www.abouthumanrights.co.uk)
The notion of ‘degrading treatment’ has been defined by the European Commission of Human Rights as treatment or punishment that ‘grossly humiliates the victim before others or drives the detainee to act against his / her will or conscience’.
European Commission of Human Rights, Greek case (cited in Vol. II, Ch. 32, § 1339).
Dependant: In general use, one who relies on another for support. In the migration
context, a spouse and minor children are generally considered ‘dependants’, even
if the spouse is not financially dependent.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Deportation: The act of a state in the exercise of its sovereignty in removing an alien from its territory to a certain place after refusal of admission or termination
of permission to remain.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Derogation: The restriction or suspension of rights in certain defined situations (for
example the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966) permits
a state to derogate from its obligations under the covenant ‘in time of public
emergency which threatens the life of the nation.’) The partial repeal or abrogation of a law by a later act that limits its scope or impairs its utility and force.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Detention: Restriction on freedom of movement through confinement that is ordered by an administrative or judicial authority(ies) in order that another procedure may be implemented. In an EU asylum context, this means confinement
of an asylum applicant by a Member State within a particular place, where the
applicant is deprived of his or her freedom of movement.
There are two types of detention: criminal detention, having as a purpose punishment for the committed crime; and administrative detention, guaranteeing
that another administrative measure (such as deportation or expulsion) can be
implemented. In the majority of the countries, irregular migrants are subject to

140

Glossary

administrative detention, as they have violated immigration laws and regulations, which is not considered to be a crime.
Any detention shall be for as short a period as possible and only maintained as
long as removal arrangements are in progress and executed with due diligence.
(Adapted by the EMN based on the definition given in UNESCO’s ‘People on the
move’ handbook, Council Directive 2003/9/EC in the EU asylum context and Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council in the EU return context.)
Detention facility: A specialised facility – different from prison accommodation –
used for the detention of a third-country national in accordance with national law.
(Guidelines for risk analysis units, Frontex)
Discrimination (direct): Occurs where one person is treated less favourably than
another is, has been or would be treated in a comparable situation.
(Council Directive 2000/43/EC of 29 June 2000 implementing the principle of equal
treatment between persons irrespective of racial or ethnic origin)
Article 21 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU asserts that any discrimination based on grounds such as ‘sex, race, colour, ethnic or social origin,
genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual orientation shall be prohibited.’
Discrimination (indirect): Occurs where an apparently neutral provision, criterion or
practice would put persons… at a particular disadvantage compared with other
persons, unless that provision, criterion or practice is objectively justified by a legitimate aim and the means of achieving that aim are appropriate and necessary.
(Council Directive 2000/43/EC)
Displacement: A forced removal of a person from his / her home or country, often
due to armed conflict or natural disasters.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Dissociation: Your sense of reality and who you are depend on your feelings, thoughts,
sensations, perceptions and memories. If these become ‘disconnected’ from each
other, or don’t register in your conscious mind, your sense of identity, your memories and the way you see things around you will change. Dissociation is also
a defence mechanism that can help us survive traumatic experiences (e.g. persecution, torture, war) and it can be related to post-traumatic stress disorder.
There are five types of dissociation.
◆◆ Amnesia
	This is when you can’t remember incidents or experiences that happened at
a particular time, or when you can’t remember important personal information.

141

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

◆◆ Depersonalisation
	A feeling that your body is unreal, changing or dissolving. It also includes outof-body experiences, such as seeing yourself as if watching a movie.
◆◆ Derealisation
	The world around you seems unreal. You may see objects changing in shape,
size or colour, or you may feel that other people are robots.
◆◆ Identity confusion
	Feeling uncertain about who you are. You may feel as if there is a struggle
within to define yourself.
◆◆ Identity alteration
	This is when there is a shift in your role or identity that changes your behaviour in ways that others could notice. For instance, you may be very different at work from when you are at home.
(Mind UK website, 2013)
Documented person: A person who entered a country legally and remains in the
country in accordance with his / her admission criteria.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Dublin convention: An agreement between EU Member States (adopted in 1990,
entered into force in 1997) determining which Member State of the European
Union is responsible for examining an application for asylum lodged in one of the
contracting states. The convention prevents the same applicants from being examined by several EU Member States at the same time, as well as ensuring that
an asylum seeker is not redirected from state to state simply because no one
will take the responsibility of handling his / her case.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Dublin regulation: Regulation which lays down the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an application for asylum
lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country national.
(Council Regulation (EC) No 343/2003 of 18 February 2003 establishing the criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country
national)
Empowerment: A process that allows people to take greater control over the decisions, assets, policies, processes and institutions that affect their lives.
Entry: Any entrance of an alien into a foreign country, whether voluntary or involuntary, legally or illegally.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)

142

Glossary

Entry (irregular): In the EU context, this means the entry of a third-country national into an EU Member State which does not satisfy Article 5 of the Schengen Border Code.
In a wider context, this means crossing borders without complying with the necessary requirements for legal entry into the receiving State.
(Council Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 – Schengen Border Code; United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organised Crime and its Protocols).
Entry (legal): Entry of a third-country national into an EU Member State which satisfies Article 5 of the Schengen Border Code.
(Council Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 – Schengen Border Code)
Entry into force: When a treaty or convention becomes a functioning and enforceable legal document. Conventions ‘enter into force’ after the required number
of ratifications (by states) have been received.
Entry point: See ‘border crossing point’
Eurodac: This is the name given to an informatics system, the purpose of which, via
the collection, transmission and comparison of fingerprints, is to assist in determining which Member State is to be responsible pursuant to the Dublin convention for examining an application for asylum lodged in a Member State, and
otherwise to facilitate the application of the Dublin convention under the conditions set out in the regulation establishing Eurodac.
(Asylum and migration glossary, European Migration Network)
European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR): Signed in Rome under the aegis of the Council of Europe on 4 November 1950, the convention established
an unprecedented system of international protection for human rights, offering
individuals the possibility of applying to the courts for the enforcement of their
rights. More formally referred to the European Convention for the Protection
of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms.
Evaluation: A systematic and objective analysis and assessment of the organisation’s policies, programmes, practices, training programmes, partnerships and
procedures, focused on planning, design, implementation and impacts achieved.
Exclusion clauses: Legal provisions that deny the benefits of international protection to persons who would otherwise satisfy the criteria for refugee status. In the
1951 convention, the exclusion clauses are found in Articles 1D, 1E and 1F. These
clauses apply to the following categories: persons who are receiving protection
or assistance from UN agencies other than the UNHCR; persons who are recognised by the authorities of the country as having the rights and obligations at-

143

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Glossary

tached to the possession of nationality of their country of residence; and persons
in respect of whom there are serious reasons for considering that they have committed a crime against peace, a war crime, a crime against humanity, a serious
non-political crime, or acts contrary to the purposes and principles of the UN.

or that has been improperly issued or obtained through misrepresentation, corruption or duress or in any other unlawful manner; or that is being used by a person other than the rightful holder (Article 3(c) of the UN Protocol Against the
Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations
Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (2000)).

Expulsion: An act by an authority of the state with the intention and with the effect of securing the removal of a person or persons (aliens or stateless persons)
against their will from the territory of that state.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Family unity, right to: A family’s right to live together and, as a fundamental unit
of a society, to receive respect, protection, assistance and support. This right is
not limited to nationals living in their own state and is protected by international
law (e.g. Article 16 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948; Article
8 of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, 1950; Article 16 of the European Social Charter, 1961; Articles
17 and 23 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, 1966; Article 1 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 1966;
Article 17 of the American Convention on Human Rights, 1969).
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Forced return: The compulsory return of an individual to the country of origin, transit or third country, on the basis of an administrative or judicial act.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Forged document: See fraudulent document.
FRA (European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights): The FRA serves to provide the relevant institutions and authorities of the Community and its Member States when implementing Community law with assistance and expertise
relating to fundamental rights in order to support them when they take measures or formulate courses of action within their respective spheres of competence to fully respect fundamental rights. Its tasks include information and data
collection, research and analysis; advice to EU institutions and Member States;
cooperation with civil society and awareness-raising.
(Council Regulation (EC) No 168/2007 of 15 February 2007 establishing a European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights184)

Frontex: The European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union is a specialised and independent body tasked to coordinate the operational cooperation
between Member States in the field of border security. The activities of Frontex are intelligence driven. Frontex complements and provides particular added
value to the national border management systems of the Member States. Its
tasks include carrying out risk analysis; coordination of operational cooperation
between Member States in the field of management of external borders; assistance to Member States in the training of national border guards, including the
establishment of common training standards; following up the development
of research relevant for the control and surveillance of external borders; assistance to Member States in circumstances requiring increased technical and operational assistance at external borders; and providing Member States with the
necessary support in organising joint return operations.
(Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 of 26 October 2004 establishing a European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union185)
Fundamental rights: Refers to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU (OJ C
83, 30 March 2010, p. 389) where these rights, freedoms and principles are set out.
The term is used interchangeably with human rights.
Gender: Gender refers to the socially constructed attributes, roles, activities, responsibilities and needs predominantly connected to being male or female in given
societies or communities at a given time.
(Asylum and migration glossary, European Migration Network)
Good practice: An innovative, interesting and inspiring practice that has the potential to be transferred in whole or in part to other national contexts.

Fraudulent document: Any travel or identity document that has been falsely made
or altered in some material way by anyone other than a person or agency lawfully
authorised to make or issue the travel or identity document on behalf of a state;
184 OJ L 53, 22.2.2007, p. 1

144

185

OJ L 349, 25.11.2004, p. 1.

145

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Guardian: One who has the legal authority and duty to care for another’s person or
property, usually because of the other’s incapacity, disability or status as a minor.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Health: A state of complete physical, mental and social wellbeing and not merely
the absence of disease or infirmity.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Human rights: Human rights are rights inherent to all human beings, whatever our
nationality, place of residence, sex, national or ethnic origin, colour, religion, language or any other status. We are all equally entitled to our human rights without
discrimination. These rights are all interrelated, interdependent and indivisible.
(OHCHR)
Human rights law: The body of customary international law, human rights instruments and national law that recognises and protects human rights. Refugee law
and human rights law complement each other.
Humanitarian assistance (relief): Aid that addresses the immediate needs of individuals affected by crises and is provided mainly by non-governmental and international organisations.
Humanitarian law: Rules of international law especially designed for the protection of the individual in time of war or armed conflict.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Humanitarian principles: Ethical standards applicable to all humanitarian actors,
which have their underpinnings in international human rights and humanitarian
law, and seek to protect the integrity of humanitarian action. The first explicit
statement of humanitarian principles is found in the ‘Fundamental principles
of the Red Cross and Red Crescent’ adopted in 1965.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Identification of victims of trafficking: (In the context of this manual) the combination of the profile, the presence of specific indicators and / or material evidence and the interview of a person leading to the detection of a (possible) victim
of trafficking in human beings.
(Anti-trafficking training for border guards, Frontex, 2012)
Illegal entry: See ‘entry (illegal)’

Glossary

Indicator: This refers to a single data item that acts as a pointer or clue conveying a sense of suggestion, condition or status. For example, an indicator can be
suggestive of a particular event or activity taking place, or of a set of conditions
for such an event to occur, or suggestive about the possible intentions of a target. To be useful and persuasive, indicators are best developed, gathered and
assessed as ‘sets’.
(Guidelines for risk analysis units, Frontex)
Inhumane treatment: Physical or mental cruelty so severe that it endangers life
or health.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Instrument: A formal or legal document in writing such as a contract or treaty. In
the case of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession to a treaty, it is the
document which establishes the consent of the state to be bound by the treaty.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Intelligence: Information that has been considered and interpreted in the light of interests or needs and that is related to one of the components of risk (i.e. related
to a threat, the vulnerability to this threat and the impact of the threat). An intelligence product is generated by the collection, evaluation, integration, analysis
and interpretation of all available information which is immediately or potentially
significant to planning, policy and operations personnel and decision-makers.
(Guidelines for risk analysis units, Frontex)
Intergovernmental organisation (IGO): An organisation made up of state members.
Examples include the United Nations organisation (UN) and its agencies, the Organisation of African Unity (OAU), the Organisation of American states (OAS),
the European Union (EU) and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS).
International humanitarian law (or law of armed conflict): The body of law, regulations and principles that governs situations of international or non-international armed conflict. The core instruments of international humanitarian law are
the four Geneva conventions of 12 August 1949 and their two additional protocols
of 8 June 1977. Virtually every state is a party to the Geneva conventions of 1949.
International law: The legal principles governing the relationships between states.
More modern, the law of international relations embraces not only states but
also such participants such as international organisations, and even individuals (such as those who invoke their human rights or commit war crimes). Also
termed law of nations, public international law, jus gentium.

Inalienable: Not transferable or assignable or removable.

146

147

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

International protection: In the EU asylum acquis, it means the refugee (third-country national who, owing to a well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons
of race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership of a particular social
group, is outside the country of nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear,
is unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country) and subsidiary protection status (third-country national or a stateless person who does
not qualify as a refugee but… if returned to his or her country of origin / former
habitual residence, would face a real risk of suffering serious harm).
(UNHCR)

Glossary

trative requirements for leaving the country. There is, however, a tendency to
restrict the use of the term ‘illegal migration’ to cases of smuggling of migrants
and trafficking in persons.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Judicial review: A court’s power to invalidate legislative and executive actions as being unconstitutional or being contrary to law; a court’s review of lower court’s
or an administrative body’s factual or legal findings.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)

Interview: The process of questioning or talking with a person in order to obtain
information or determine the personal qualities of the person. An interview is
a common step in the adjudication of an application for refugee or other immigration status.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)

Legal remedies: The rule that local remedies must be exhausted before international proceedings may be instituted is a well-established rule of customary international law; the rule has been generally observed in cases in which a state
has adopted the cause of its national whose rights are claimed to have been disregarded in another state in violation of international law. Before resort may be
had to an international court in such a situation, it has been considered necessary
that the state where the violation occurs should have an opportunity to redress
it by its own means, within the framework of its own domestic legal system (Interhandel case (preliminary objections), International Commission of Jurists, 1959).
(Glossary on migration, IOM)

Investigation: Refers in this context to a thorough and systematic inquiry into criminal activities.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)

Mental health: A term used to describe either a level of cognitive or emotional wellbeing or an absence of a mental disorder.
(Webster’s online dictionary)

Irregular migrant: ‘[E]very person who, owing to undocumented entry or the expiry of his or her visa, lacks legal status in a transit or host country. The term applies to migrants who infringe a country’s admission rules and any other person
not authorised to remain in the host country.’
(International migration and human rights – Challenges and opportunities on
the threshold of the 60th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, Global Migration Group, Geneva, 2008, p. 7)

Migrant: A broader term for an immigrant and emigrant, referring to a person who
leaves one country or region to settle in another, often in search of a better life.
Note: In the EU asylum and migration policy context, this is understood to refer
to a third-country national entering (or within) the EU.
(Asylum and migration glossary, European Migration Network)

International refugee law: The body of customary international law and international instruments that establishes standards for refugee protection. The cornerstone of refugee law is the 1951 convention and its 1967 protocol relating to
the status of refugees.

Irregular migration: Movement that takes place outside the regulatory norms of the
sending, transit and receiving countries.
There is no clear or universally accepted definition of irregular migration. From the
perspective of destination countries it is illegal entry, stay or work in a country, meaning that the migrant does not have the necessary authorisation or
documents required under immigration regulations to enter, reside or work in
a given country. From the perspective of the sending country, the irregularity
is for example seen in cases in which a person crosses an international boundary without a valid passport or travel document or does not fulfil the adminis-

148

Migration: In the EU context, migration is a broader term for an immigration and
emigration, i.e. the action by which a person either: establishes his or her usual
residence in the territory of a Member State for a period that is, or is expected
to be, of at least 12 months, having previously been usually resident in another
Member State or a third country; or having previously been usually resident in
the territory of a Member State, ceases to have his or her usual residence in that
Member State for a period that is, or is expected to be, of at least 12 months.
In a global context, this refers to a process of moving, either across an international border (international migration) or within a state (internal migration). It is
a population movement, encompassing any kind of movement of people, whatever its length, composition and causes; it includes migration of refugees, displaced persons, uprooted people, and economic migrants.

149

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Glossary

(Glossary on Migration, IOM)
(Derived by the European Migration Network on the basis of definitions for immigration and emigration; Glossary on migration, IOM)
Narrower terms: emigration, immigration

(‘National referral mechanisms: Joining efforts to protect the rights of trafficked
persons – A practical handbook’, OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights (ODIHR), 2004)
Nationality: The status of being a citizen of a particular nation or country.

Migration management: A term used to encompass numerous governmental
functions and a national system of orderly and humane management for crossborder migration, particularly managing the entry and presence of foreigners
within the borders of the state and the protection of refugees and others in
need of protection.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)

Non-derogable rights: While most human rights are not absolute and can be limited in their application, some rights are not derogable, i.e. know no limitations
or exceptions under any conditions, including the following: the right to life; the
right not to be subjected to torture, or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment; freedom from slavery and servitude; freedom of thought,
conscience and religion.

Minor: See ‘child’
Minority: Although there is no universally accepted definition of minority in international law, a minority may be considered to be a group which is numerically
inferior to the rest of the population of a state and in a non-dominant position,
whose members possess ethnic, religious or linguistic characteristics which differ from those of the rest of the population and who, if only implicitly, maintain
a sense of solidarity directed towards preserving their culture, traditions, religion or language.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Mixed flows: Complex population movements including refugees, asylum seekers,
economic migrants and other migrants.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Related term: mixed migration
Movement, the right to freedom of: This right is made up of three basic elements:
freedom of movement within the territory of a country (Article 13(1) of the UDHR
(1948): ‘Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the
borders of each state’), right to leave any country and the right to return to his
or her own country (Article 13(2) of the UDHR: ‘Everyone has the right to leave
any country, including his own, and to return to his country.’)
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
National: A person recognised to have the status of a legal bond with a state as provided for under law. Some states use the word ‘nationality’ to refer to this legal
bond, while other states use the word ‘citizenship’.
National referral mechanism: A cooperative framework through which state actors fulfil their obligations to protect and promote the human rights of migrants,
coordinating their efforts in a strategic partnership with civil society.

150

Non-discrimination: The refusal to apply distinctions of an adverse nature to human beings simply because they belong to a specific category. Discrimination
is prohibited by international law, for example in Article 26 of the International
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (1966), which states: ‘All persons are equal
before the law and are entitled without any discrimination to the equal protection of the law. In this respect, the law shall prohibit any discrimination and guarantee to all persons equal and effective protection against discrimination on any
ground such as race, colour, sex, language, religion, political or other opinion, national or social origin, property, birth or other status.’
Related terms: discrimination, humanitarian principles
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Non-governmental organisation (NGO): An organised entity that is functionally independent of, and does not represent, a government or state. This term
is normally applied to organisations devoted to humanitarian and human rights
causes, many of which implement their refugee-related programmes in partnership with the UNHCR and other agencies.
Non-refoulement: A principle laid down in the Geneva Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees (1951) according to which ‘no contracting state shall expel or
return (‘refouler’) a refugee in any manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would be threatened on account of his race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion.’ This
principle cannot be ‘claimed by a refugee, whom there are reasonable grounds
for regarding as a danger to the security of the country in which he is, or who,
having been convicted by a final judgement of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger to the community of that country.’
(Article 33(1) and (2), Geneva convention relating to the status of refugees, 1951)
(Glossary on migration, IOM)

151

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Perpetrator: A term commonly used by law enforcement officers to designate a person who actually commits a crime.
(Legal dictionary, the free dictionary by Farlex)
Persecution: The core concept of persecution was deliberately not defined in the
1951 convention, suggesting that the drafters intended it to be interpreted in
a sufficiently flexible manner so as to encompass ever-changing forms of persecution. It is understood to comprise human rights abuses or other serious harm,
often, but not always, with a systematic or repetitive element.
(UNHCR)
Post-traumatic stress disorder: Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is an anxiety disorder caused by very stressful, frightening or distressing events. PTSD can
develop immediately after someone experiences a disturbing event or it can occur weeks, months or even years later.
PTSD can develop in any situation where a person feels extreme fear, horror or
helplessness.
(National Health Service UK website, 2013)
Prohibition of torture: Torture is prohibited by numerous international documents,
such as the UDHR (1948) (Article 5), American Declaration of Rights and Duties
of Man (1948) (Article 26), UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(1966) (Article 7), ECHR (1950) (Article 3) and various UN resolutions. Torture is
an international crime; the protection against torture is an obligation of states
and is seen as a fundamental human right. The prohibition of torture is generally viewed as having reached the level of jus cogens, a peremptory norm of international law.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Related terms: jus cogens, fundamental human rights, torture
Prosecution: A criminal proceeding in which an accused person is tried.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Protection: A concept that encompasses all activities aimed at obtaining full respect
for the rights of the individual in accordance with the letter and spirit of human
rights, refugee and international humanitarian law. Protection involves creating
an environment conducive to respect for human beings, preventing and / or alleviating the immediate effects of a specific pattern of abuse, and restoring dignified conditions of life through reparation, restitution and rehabilitation.
(Master glossary of terms, UNHCR)
Protection (person eligible for subsidiary): Means a third-country national or
a stateless person who does not qualify as a refugee but in respect of whom
substantial grounds have been shown for believing that the person concerned,

152

Glossary

if returned to his or her country of origin, or in the case of a stateless person, to
his or her country of former habitual residence, would face a real risk of suffering
serious harm as defined in Article 15 of Council Directive 2004/83/EC, and to
whom Article 17(1) and (2) of said directive do not apply, and is unable, or, owing
to such risk, unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that country
(Article 2(e) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC).
(Asylum and migration glossary , European Migration Network)
Protection (subsidiarity): Refers to the protection given to a person eligible for subsidiary protection (see ‘Protection (person eligible for subsidiary)’)
Pull factor: Refers to the condition(s) or circumstance(s) that attracts a migrant to
another country. This can be for a specific or variety of reasons, e.g. expanding economic opportunities and potential for advancement in the country of destination.
(Derived by the EMN working group, based on definitions given by the project
‘European reintegration networking’ and in the Glossary on migration, IOM)
Push factor: Refers to the condition(s) or circumstance(s) in a country of origin that
impel or stimulate emigration. This can be for a specific or a variety of reasons, e.g.
declining economic opportunities or political instability may stimulate emigration.
(Derived by the EMN, based on definitions given by the project ‘European reintegration networking’ and in the Glossary on migration, IOM)
Referral: An act of referring (sending) someone or something for consultation, review, or further action.
(Oxford dictionary)
Refoulement: The return by a state, in any manner whatsoever, of an individual to
the territory of another state in which he or she may be persecuted for reasons
of race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group or political
opinion; or would run the risk of torture. Refoulement includes any action having the effect of returning the individual to a state, including expulsion, deportation, extradition, rejection at the frontier, extra-territorial interception and
physical return.
(International thesaurus of refugee terminology, UNHCR)
Related term: Forced return
Refoulement (non-): A core principle of international refugee law that prohibits
states from returning refugees in any manner whatsoever to countries or territories in which their lives or freedom may be threatened. The principle of nonrefoulement is a part of customary international law and is therefore binding
on all states, whether or not they are parties to the 1951 Geneva convention.
(Article 33 of the Geneva convention, 1951)

153

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Refugee: According to the Geneva convention, a person who, owing to a wellfounded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, political opinion or membership of a particular social group, is outside the country
of nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail himself or
herself of the protection of that country, or a stateless person, who, being outside of the country of former habitual residence for the same reasons as mentioned before, is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to return to it.
Within an EU context, this refers specifically to a third-country national or stateless person within the meaning of Article 1A (above) of the Geneva convention
and authorised to reside as such on the territory of a Member State and to whom
Article 12 (exclusion) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC does not apply.
(Geneva convention; Article 2(c) of Council Directive 2004/83/EC)
A person who meets the eligibility criteria under the applicable refugee definition, as provided for in international or regional refugee instruments, under the
UNHCR’s mandate, and / or in national legislation.
Broader term: Forced migrant
Refugee status determination procedures: Legal and administrative procedures undertaken by the UNHCR and / or states to determine whether an individual should
be recognised as a refugee in accordance with national and international law.
(UNHCR)
Return (including repatriation, involuntary / voluntary return): Broadly, this refers to the movement of a person returning to his / her country of origin, country of nationality or habitual residence usually after spending a significant period
of time (i.e. excluding holiday visits, business meetings and typically considered
to be for a period of time of more than three months) in another country. This
return may or may not be voluntary.
In the context of the return directive (2008/115/EC), this means the process
of going back – whether in voluntary compliance with an obligation to return,
or enforced – to:
◆◆ one’s country of origin; or
◆◆ a country of transit in accordance with Community or bilateral readmission
agreements or other arrangements; or
◆◆ another third country, to which the third-country national concerned voluntarily decides to return and in which he / she will be accepted.
(Glossary on Migration, IOM; Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 16 December 2008 on common standards and procedures
in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals)
Synonym: Return migration
Note: From the IOM definition, this could be within the territorial boundaries
of a country, as in the case of returning internally displaced people (IDPs) and
demobilised combatants; or from a host country (either transit or destination)

154

Glossary

to the country of origin, as in the case of refugees, asylum seekers and qualified
nationals. There are subcategories of return which can describe the way the return is implemented, e.g. voluntary, forced, assisted and spontaneous return.
Risk: The potential that a chosen action or activity (including the choice of inaction)
will lead to a loss (an undesirable outcome). The notion implies that a choice having an influence on the outcome exists (or existed).
(Wikipedia)
For the management of the external borders, risk is defined as the likelihood
of a threat occurring at the external borders, given the measures in place at the
borders and within the EU, which will impact the EU internal security and / or
security of the external borders.
More generally, risk can be understood as:
◆◆ a measure of the probability and severity of an adverse effect to law, enforcement, public safety, national security or the environment;
◆◆ a measure of uncertainty. Such uncertainty may be about the achievement
of organisational objectives and may involve positive or negative consequences. Most positive risks are known as opportunities and negative risks
are simply called risks.
(Guidelines for risk analysis units, Frontex)
Rule of non-discrimination: This is a basic concept underlining international human
rights law. The prohibition of discrimination means that, as a general rule, the
rights and freedoms recognised by international human rights law apply to everyone and states may not make distinctions (for example, on the basis of race)
between different individuals in protecting these rights.
Safe third country: A country in which an asylum seeker could have had access to
an effective asylum regime, and in which he / she has been physically present
prior to arriving in the country in which she / he is applying for asylum.
Schengen Agreement: Intergovernmental agreement signed in 1985 to create a European free-movement zone without controls at internal land, water and airport
frontiers. In order to maintain internal security, a variety of measures have been
taken, such as the coordination of visa controls at external borders of Member
States. Although the Schengen Agreement was concluded outside the context
of the EU, it has been brought into the realm of the European Communities/EU
under the Amsterdam Treaty (1997).
Secondary trauma: Secondary trauma is the stress resulting from working with traumatised persons or persons undergoing distressing situations. Vicarious trauma

155

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

is the term used to describe the cumulative transformative effect of working
with survivors of trauma.
(‘Guide to compassion fatigue and secondary trauma in human services’, L. Goossen, 2011)
Related term: secondary victimisation
Shelter: … a wider group of facilities providing accommodation and assistance to
victims of trafficking, such as medical rehabilitation centres, transit shelters and
halfway houses, unless otherwise specified…
(‘Handbook on direct assistance for victims of trafficking’, IOM)
The state of being covered and protected; protection; security.
(Webster’s online dictionary)
Stateless person: A person who is not considered as a national by any state under
the operation of its law (Article 1 of the UN convention relating to the Status
of Stateless Persons (1954)). As such, a stateless person lacks those rights attributable to nationality: the diplomatic protection of a state, no inherent right
of sojourn in the state of residence and no right of return in case she / he travels.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Slavery: The status or condition of a person over whom any or all the powers attaching to the right of ownership are exercised (Article 1 of the Slavery Convention (1926) as amended by the 1953 protocol). Slavery is identified by an element
of ownership or control over another’s life, coercion and the restriction of movement and by the fact that someone is not free to leave or to change employer
(e.g. traditional chattel slavery, bonded labour, serfdom, forced labour and slavery for ritual or religious purposes).
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Smuggler: An intermediary who is moving people in furtherance of a contract with
them, in order to illegally transport them across an internationally recognised
state border.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Smuggling: The procurement, in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial or
other material benefit, of the illegal entry of a person into a state party of which
the person is not a national or a permanent resident (Article 3(a) of the UN Protocol Against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing
the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime (2000)).
Smuggling contrary to trafficking does not require an element of exploitation,
coercion or violation of human rights.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)

156

Glossary

Smuggling, of people, of migrants: The transportation – for financial or other material benefit – of people to countries for which they lack the necessary visas or
entry permits. Normally takes place at the initiative of the smuggled person or
with their consent.
(the European Commission’s anti-trafficking website glossary)
(also see ‘smuggling of migrants’)
Source country: See ‘Country of origin’
Third-country national: A person not being a citizen of an EU Member State.
Torture: Article 1 of the Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment
‘1. For the purposes of this convention, the term “torture” means any act by which
severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on
a person for such purposes as obtaining from him or a third person information
or a confession, punishing him for an act he or a third person has committed or
is suspected of having committed, or intimidating or coercing him or a third person, or for any reason based on discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at the instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence
of a public official or other person acting in an official capacity. It does not include
pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions.’
Torture survivor: A person who has experienced torture and has not died from it.
See definition of torture above.
Trafficker, human: An intermediary who is moving people in order to obtain an
economic or other profit by means of deception, coercion and / or other forms
of exploitation. The intent ab initio on the part of the trafficker is to exploit the
person and gain profit or advantage from the exploitation.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Trafficking in human beings: The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring
or reception of persons, including the exchange or transfer of control over those
persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent
of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation.
(Directive 2011/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council)
Trafficking of children: The recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of a child for the purpose of exploitation.
(derived from Directive 2011/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council)

157

Fundamental Rights Training for Border Guards

Glossary

A child has been trafficked if she or he has been moved within a country, or
across borders, whether by force or not, with the purpose of exploiting the child.
(http: //www.unicef.org)
Transit country: See ‘Country of transit’
Treaty: An international agreement concluded between states in written form and
governed by international law, whether embodied in a single instrument or in
two or more related instruments and whatever its particular designation (Article 2.1(a) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties (1969)).
Victim of human trafficking: An individual who is a victim of the crime of trafficking in persons.
(Glossary on migration, IOM)
Violence against women: Any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely
to result in, physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether occurring in public or in private life.
(Article 1 of the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women (1993))
Vulnerable person: Refers to minors, unaccompanied minors, separated minors,
people with disabilities, elderly people, pregnant women, single parents with
minor children and persons who have been subjected to torture, rape or other
serious forms of psychological, physical or sexual violence.
(Article 17(1) of Council Directive 2003/9/EC; Article 3(9) of Directive 2008/115/
EC of the European Parliament and of the Council).
Well-founded fear of persecution: See also ‘persecution’. A key element of the
1951 convention’s definition of a refugee. Well-founded fear contains both a subjective element (fear of persecution) and an objective element (the fear must
have an objectively justifiable basis). According to the 1951 convention, persecution must be linked to any one of the five specified grounds: race, religion, nationality, membership of a particular social group and political opinion.
(UNHCR)

158

159

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union
Rondo ONZ 1
00-124 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

