General Report 2013

Frontex · General Report 2013

Table of contents
1. Introduction #7
2.	Developments at Policy Level #9
3.	Developments at Agency Level #17
4. Eurosur #23
5. Building Capacity #27
6.	Transparency and Access to Information #37
7. Fundamental Rights #41
8.	Internal Communication, Ethics and Integrity #45
9.	Summary of Budgetary and HR Issues 2013 #47
10. Annexes #51
Annex A. List of Management Board Members #51
Annex B. List of Management Board Decisions taken in 2013 #53
Annex C. Situation at the external borders in 2013 #54
Annex D. List of Joint Operational Activities 2013 #57
Annex E. Comparative analysis of Joint Operational Activities #62
Annex F. List of Research and Development Projects #65
Annex G. Fundamental Rights Progress Report #68
Annex H. Annual Report on Access to Documents #73
Annex I. Appropriations 2013 #74
Annex J. Breakdown of Staff by Unit as on 31 December 2013 #75
Annex K. Breakdown of Temporary Agents as on 31 December 2013 #76

© Frontex

Abbreviations used in General Report 2013 #77

1

Frontex · General Report 2013

2

Frontex · General Report 2013

Foreword from
the Chair of the
Management Board
In 2013 the border police situation at the external borders of the Union was largely characterised by the precarious situation of refugees
in Syria and the increasing amount of migrants
coming via the southern Mediterranean region.
This confronted the European Community with
challenges, particularly after the tragic incident
of Lampedusa, which are not to be overcome
through border policing alone.
EUROSUR, the European Border Surveillance
System, whose successful implementation
began in 2013, is intended to make an operational contribution in the future. The rapid
exchange of information and the use of additional detection technology are supposed
to support the operational capacities of the
EU Member States and improve their effectiveness. EUROSUR will enable the competent authorities and Frontex to improve the
situational awareness and to support searchand rescue situations at sea.
In 2013, more than 37,000 persons were rescued in sea border surveillance operations
coordinated by the Agency. However, it is
important to remember that the border authorities and the EU agency Frontex have only
limited possibilities to prevent future tragedies. Nevertheless, all means available must
be used to further minimise the risks.
Those in need of protection can only be identified and granted an orderly admission procedure if the EU's external borders are under
intensive surveillance. The same applies when
it comes to combating human smuggling as
a complex, international, unscrupulous and
organised business.
In order to improve the situation of refugees
sustainably and to fight all aspects of cross-

border crime we need to step up and coordinate our cooperation with the relevant
countries of origin, the transit of irregular
migration and cross-border crime. The border police authorities of the Member States
and the Agency assist third countries in capacity-building by bringing in their expertise.
Further efforts must be made in this area to
make the best possible use of the available
resources.
In 2013 an external review was initiated to
evaluate the application of the Frontex Regulation, amended in 2011, to examine the Agency's efficiency and to assess added value and
working practices. The review is also trying to
find out to what extent the Charter of Fundamental Rights was respected when applying
the Regulation. The review is accompanied
by an independent study conducted by the
European Commission. It is expected to receive the results later in 2014.
In the first year after the Consultative Forum
on Fundamental Rights and the Frontex Fundamental Rights Officer took up their work,
there was an intensive exchange among the
stakeholders concerned. The consultations
led to constructive recommendations on how
the Agency might perform its tasks, some of
which have already been implemented. Apart
from the monitoring function of the Fundamental Rights Officer, a binding code of conduct was established for Frontex-coordinated
return operations and training measures on
fundamental rights were developed further.
Both institutions confirm that Frontex-coordinated measures comply fully with fundamental rights standards. The involvement of
the Agency and the resulting presence of EU
guest officers both make sure that these values are adhered to and respected.

3

Frontex · General Report 2013

The flexible assistance with border surveillance
for EU Member States under particular strain
is a clear signal of European solidarity and an
essential part of Europe's border management.
I would especially like to thank the members
of the Frontex Management Board who have
always supported me in a constructive way.
Furthermore, my thanks go to all employees
of the Agency. With their great dedication
and considerable expertise they have helped
us to overcome last year's challenges. Once
more they made a valuable contribution to
the protection of Europe's external borders.

4

Ilkka Laitinen, the first Executive Director of
Frontex, recently finished his term of office.
Looking back on nine eventful and successful years, he has substantially contributed to
the development of Frontex since its foundation. He succeeded in shaping Frontex in
such a way that it has become an indispensable element of Europe's security architecture. On behalf of the Management Board,
I would like to express my thanks and appreciation to him for all he has achieved.
Ralf Göbel
Chair of the Management Board

Frontex · General Report 2013

Foreword from the
Executive Director
Following a year of financial belt-tightening
and rationalisation of agency priorities, 2013
proved the need for flexibility. As the period of
consolidation and zero-growth continued from
2012, the fluid nature of border guarding again
asserted itself, requiring targeted responses.
The shift in routes of organised irregular migration, the changing nature of mixed flows,
new tasks and responsibilities for the agency
and, of course, unforeseeable events, all shaped
what proved to be a very mixed year.
The war in Syria continued to cast its shadow
over the Middle East, neighbouring and partner countries and the EU itself. The challenge
of increased flows, often including people in
distress, required concerted support for Member States facing unfamiliar border situations.
Rapid reinforcement was given to Bulgaria,
one of the more active Member States in joint
operations. The strengthening and reallocation of Joint Operation Poseidon Land was
one example of European solidarity in action.
Hungary, Greece and Italy also faced extraordinary situations and received Frontex support.
The year was also marked by catastrophe. Not
least of these was the disaster off the coast
of Lampedusa that cost the lives of more
than 360 people and brought home to Europe’s citizens the grim realities of migration
by sea. The subsequent public reaction and
the Commission’s response highlighted once
more the need to adapt to circumstances and
react swiftly. Frontex supported and advised
the Task Force for the Mediterranean, instigated changes to existing sea operations and
started work on refining and reinforcing the
European Patrols Network to enhance patrolling of the Mediterranean.
Away from the border too, Frontex remained
committed to continuous improvement. The

key change here was Eurosur. This stateof-the-art information-exchange platform,
developed by Frontex over recent years, became fully operational in its first phase and
will continue to be expanded Europe-wide
during the coming year. Increased responsibilities for the agency in terms of Schengen Evaluation as well as its involvement
in key processes such as the Common European Asylum System all involved Frontex
expertise and required focussed attention.
The revision of rules for maritime operations, the nascent ‘Smart Borders’ package
and work towards the future of the Justice
and Home Affairs area, similarly necessitated
input at expert level and the commitment
of specialists.
Beyond the borders and their management
per sé, Frontex developed its relations with
international organisations and civil society,
not least through the Consultative Forum on
Fundamental Rights. This grouping of human
rights advisors had its first full year of work, as
did the agency’s Fundamental Rights Officer.
New milestones were reached and goals set
in this vital area as Frontex worked to meet
its new obligations and fulfil new and challenging roles.
Finally, Frontex’s new legal capacity to control its own resources was taken forward with
the entry into service of Seconded Guest Officers. This new class of operational personnel has already added flexibility and speed to
actions on the ground and will continue to
yield benefits in the years to come. Work towards leasing surveillance services was also
initiated in what will be seen in retrospect
as a turning point for operational logistics.
Ilkka Laitinen
Executive Director

5

6

1. Introduction
Mission Statement

Values

Frontex supports, coordinates and develops
European border management in line with
the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
EU. Frontex supports the Member States*
(MS) to achieve an efficient, high and uniform level of border control. Frontex coordinates operational and EU measures to jointly
respond to exceptional situations at the external borders. Frontex develops capacities
at the Member State and European level as
combined instruments to tackle the challenges of migration flows and serious organised crime and terrorism at the external
borders. The European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the
External Borders of the Member States of the
European Union was established by Council
Regulation (EC) 2007 / 2004.

Within a teamwork-focused framework,
enabled by open communication, Frontex’s
staff members share and live the corporate
values. Consequently, they perform their
activities in a highly professional manner.
Humanity links Frontex’s activities with
the promotion and respect of Fundamental Rights as an unconditional and integral
component of effective integrated border
management resulting in trust in Frontex.

Vision
Frontex is the trustworthy European Border
Agency, strengthening the European area of
Freedom, Security and Justice by supporting
the Member States to meet their responsibilities. Frontex applies the concept of Integrated Border Management and promotes
European border guard culture based on the
full respect of EU Fundamental Rights. Professional staff and a set of operational and
administrative capabilities enable Frontex to
add value to the European Union.

© Marcin Klepacki

* The term ‘Member
State’ includes the
Member States of the
European Union and the
Schengen Associated
Countries

Purpose of the report
Frontex General Report 2013 takes the Programme of Work 2013 as a reference but does
not aim to report against each and every objective set. It gives the reader a broad overview of activities carried out during 2013, and
additionally highlights individual operational
activities and achievements. This information is then complemented with general financial information and annexes presenting
lists of different types of activity, comparative analysis of joint operations and summaries of budgetary and human resources. Some
information is repeated between chapters to
provide context.
The organisation of this year’s General Report is slightly altered from previous years
with the ‘Situation at the external borders’
section now in the Annexes, a separate section on Eurosur and, as last year, sub-chapters
on fundamental rights and public access to
documents. Additionally achievements were
introduced in a form of text boxes throughout the report.

7

2.	Developments at Policy Level
The year 2013 was an eventful one for political and legal developments affecting Frontex. New proposals were put forward by the
European Commission and certain legislative
files were adopted, whilst others will require
further negotiation during 2014.
The year brought an increased focus on the
activities of Frontex and on EU migratory
issues in general. One reason for this was a
tragedy off the coast of the Italian island of
Lampedusa, where 364 migrants drowned
attempting to reach EU territory. This resulted in an increase in pressure to adopt
legislation to reduce or eliminate the occurrence of such disasters. The immediate
policy response came following the Justice
and Home Affairs Council of 7-8 October
2013, which established the Task Force Mediterranean (TFM) to develop and propose
solutions. A European Commission Communication was published on 4 December 2013
proposing various immediate and practical

8

solutions to complement ongoing activities
in the Mediterranean.
Five main areas of action were decided upon,
namely: actions in cooperation with third
countries; regional protection, resettlement
and reinforced legal avenues to Europe; reinforcement of the fight against human
trafficking, smuggling and organised crime;
reinforced border surveillance contributing to
an enhanced maritime situational picture and
to the protection and saving of lives in the
Mediterranean, and finally, assistance to and
solidarity with Member States dealing with
high migratory pressure. The task force’s recommendations were welcomed by the European Council in December.

Eurosur
The main policy development concerning Frontex during 2013 was the adoption of the European Border Surveillance System (Eurosur)

Regulation (EU 1052/2013) and its entry into
force on 2 December, thus providing the legal
framework for a system which will aid Member
States in border surveillance at, and situational
awareness of, the external borders of the EU.
The Eurosur Regulation puts in place a common framework for Member State authorities to exchange information with each other
and with Frontex in order to improve situational awareness of the external borders of
the Member States and increase their reaction capability in border control and the
fight against cross-border crime.

© Tomasz Mincer

Rules of Maritime Surveillance
Another legislative file which saw significant progress during 2013 was the new proposal for a regulation establishing rules for
the surveillance of the external sea borders
in the context of operational cooperation
coordinated by Frontex. The proposal was
extensively negotiated throughout the year
in the relevant European Parliament committees and Council working parties. This
regulation aims at replacing Council Decision 2010/252/EU annulled in September
2012 by the Court of Justice of the European

9

Frontex · General Report 2013

Union, which concluded that the rules required the consideration and approval of
the European Parliament.

Council Directive
2005/85/EC on minimum
standards on procedures
for granting and
withdrawing refugee
status;
1

2
Directive 2013/33/EU of
the European Parliament
and of the Council laying
down standards for the
reception of applicants
for international
protection (Recast)

3
Council Directive
2004/83/EC on minimum
standards for the
qualification and status
of third country nationals
or stateless persons as
refugees or as persons
who otherwise need
international protection
and the content of the
protection granted

Council Regulation
343/2003/EC
establishing the criteria
and mechanisms for
determining the Member
State responsible for
examining an asylum
application lodged in one
of the Member States by
a third-country national

The Council and Parliament both agreed on
versions though differences between them
remained. Discussions will continue during
meetings involving the Council and the European Parliament, the aim of which will be
to find a compromise position and agreement
by the end of April 2014.
The aim of the new regulation is to resolve
confusion over diverging national interpretations of international rules on maritime
surveillance and to replace them with a single set of clearly defined rules to be followed during all Frontex-coordinated joint
operations.
The new rules — to be adopted in 2014 — are
expected to reinforce the principle of ‘non-refoulement’ while underlining the legal obligation to perform search-and-rescue activities.
It will also replace non-mandatory rules with
legally binding ones specifying clear responsibilities and obligations, an annual report on
the fulfilment of which will be submitted to
the European Parliament.

4

5
Council Regulation
2725/2000/EC concerning
the establishment
of ‘Eurodac’ for
the comparison of
fingerprints for the
effective application of
the Dublin Convention

10

Smart Borders Package
On 28 February, the European Commission
proposed a 'Smart Borders Package' aimed
at harnessing new technologies for the purpose of accelerating and simplifying, but also
reinforcing, border checks for those crossing the EU external borders. This ‘package’
is in fact two separate regulatory proposals
put forward jointly by the Commission. The
first, the Registered Traveller Programme,
would allow frequent travellers who are not
EU citizens to bypass lengthy passport lines
upon arrival.
The package also includes a proposal for an
Entry/Exit System. This potential database

would keep a record of the time and place
of entry and exit of third-country nationals
travelling to the EU. It would also replace the
current manual system of stamping passports
to calculate the length of the authorised stay
of an individual with a simplified, electronic
system. The data would then be made available to border control and immigration authorities. The stated objective of the smart
borders package, is to create a more open
and secure Europe relying on state-of-theart technologies. Progress on the matter was
restricted to studies by the European Commission and one by the European Parliament.
Because the Parliament and Council had not
managed to discuss the proposals by yearend, these discussions are not expected to
take place until after European Parliamentary elections in May 2014.

Adoption of the Common
European Asylum System,
Phase II
Since 1999, the EU has been working to create a Common European Asylum System and
to improve the existing legislative framework. The year 2013 saw the completion of
the second phase of adoption of the Common European Asylum System. In mid-2013
the European Parliament gave its approval to
adopt revised rules to the asylum package —
a series of regulations and directives aimed at
improving the existing legislative framework.
The framework now includes revisions of the
Asylum Procedures Directive1, the Receptions
Conditions Directive2, the Qualifications Directive3 , the revised Dublin Regulation4 and
the new revised Eurodac Regulation5 . The
new regulations sought to clarify and standardise the rules relating to the reception of
asylum seekers in the EU. The completion
of this regulatory framework is a significant
achievement and one that has been more
than a decade in the making.

Frontex · General Report 2013

Council Regulation
539/2001/EC listing the
third countries whose
nationals must be in
possession of visas

6

Visa Safeguard Clause

Main Developments under EU
Policy Cycle

A significant amending regulation regarding EU visa legislation was also adopted in
2013. A Council Regulation6, listing the third
countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt
from that requirement (PE-COS 65/13) was
amended to allow for the temporary reintroduction of the visa requirement in specific
circumstances. This will allow in the future
for a Member State, when confronted over
a six-month period with, “one or more well
defined circumstances related to nationals
of a third country leading to an emergency
situation which it is unable to remedy on its
own,” to request the Commission to suspend
for a short period of time the visa waiver for
the nationals of that country. However, the
clause was clearly defined as a temporarily
applicable measure of last resort.

A fresh EU policy cycle started in 2013 on the
fight against serious and organised crime. The
previous policy cycle — the full process from
identifying priorities through to implementing new action plans — was first established
by Council on 9-10 June 2011. As 2013 was the
final year of the first policy cycle, a new, fouryear cycle with revised priorities will be implemented between 2014 and 2017.
This four-year plan for the EU-wide fight
against serious and organised crime, is essentially based on Europol’s Serious and Organised Crime Threat Assessment (SOCTA)8,
upon which the Justice and Home Affairs
Council on 6 and 7 June set out nine priorities including disruption of organised crime
groups involved in people-smuggling, trafficking in human beings, drug trafficking and
the production and distribution of counterfeit goods. Each priority area is tackled by a
separate operational action plan. To achieve
these objectives, the EU policy cycle requires
the full operational support of EU institutions,
bodies and Justice and Home Affairs Agencies
together with the Member States and their
respective national organisations.

The revised Schengen evaluation mechanism
is based on new legislation7, which was approved at the end of 2013. It foresees, for the
first time, a role for EU agencies and in particular for Frontex. The EU legislator recognised how the expertise and information held
by the Agency can contribute to more effective implementation of the Schengen Acquis.
Frontex must deliver two risk analyses on an
annual basis: one to the European Commission and the Member States containing the
priorities for the evaluation in the following
year and one to the European Commission
containing only the priorities for the implementation of unannounced visits (Frontex experts may also participate in the evaluation
visits). The Agency will also continue to reinforce Schengen Evaluation training.

8
The EU Serious and
Organised Crime Threat
Assessment (SOCTA) is
the product of systematic
analysis of law enforcement
information on criminal
activities and groups
affecting the EU. A new
report is published every
four years and updated
every two years.

© European Union

Schengen Evaluation
Mechanism

7
Council Regulation
1053/2013/EC establishing
an evaluation and
monitoring mechanism
to verify the application
of the Schengen acquis
and repealing the
Decision of the Executive
Committee of 16
September 1998 setting
up a Standing Committee
on the evaluation and
implementation of
Schengen when crossing
the external borders and
those whose nationals
are exempt from that
requirement

Cecilia Malmström gives a press conference on a smart border package

11

Frontex · General Report 2013

JHA Agencies, the European Commission, Council Presidency, European Parliament and representatives of academia. The event was intended
to identify future cooperation and coordination
needs among national border management systems in the fields of operations, capacities and
inter-agency cooperation, and the possible role
of Frontex in matching these needs.

The Future of the Justice and
Home Affairs area
From a wider EU policy perspective, discussions also began on the future direction for
the field of Justice and Home Affairs (JHA)
of Member States of the European Union.
These talks are in view of the forthcoming
close of the Stockholm Programme, which
covers the period from 2010 until the end of
2014. The existing programme emphasises
finding common approaches and solutions
to dealing with EU migration issues. Negotiations on the focus for the next five-year
plan, which mirrors the length of mandate
of Members of the European Parliament and
Commission, will continue into 2014 and will
be of great importance to Frontex and the
policies affecting it over the next five years.

Cooperation with Third
Countries, EU Agencies and
International Organisations
In 2013, partnerships and cooperation were
strengthened with competent authorities of
third countries. Moreover, in April 2013, structured cooperation was expanded by concluding a working arrangement with the State
Border Service of the Republic of Azerbaijan.
Frontex succeeded in progressively developing sustainable partnerships beyond the
EU external borders. Tangible results were
achieved in the fields of information-sharing, training, joint operational activities and
research and development.

One aspect of the future of the JHA area related
to border management and migration, and of
central importance to Frontex, is the possible
future development of a European System of
Border Guards. To promote discussion of this
topic among border management practitioners, Frontex organised a conference on the subject in Warsaw on 28-29 October involving all

Further steps were taken in the implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding
with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Turkey. A series of activities were taken
forward with the competent Turkish authorities, mainly in the fields of risk analysis, information exchange, training and joint operations.

© Frontex

* This designation is
without prejudice to
positions on status,
and is in line with
UNSCR 1244/99 and
the ICJ Opinion on the
Kosovo declaration of
independence

European System of Border Guards conference panelists during the debate,
October 2013

12

Cooperation on risk analysis at regional level
between Frontex and third country partners
was further consolidated, especially under
the Western Balkans Risk Analysis Network
(WB-RAN). Following political developments
in the region and the outcome of consultations made during the year, Frontex forged
contacts with the Kosovo* Border Police in
order to expand the WB-RAN network and
to improve analytical activities on the migratory phenomena in the region.

Frontex · General Report 2013

With regard to the Western Balkan region,
Frontex continued to play a role in the EU
post-visa-liberalisation monitoring mechanism through risk analysis activities at the
request of the European Commission.
Contacts in the area of return with some key
third countries, including Nigeria, were maintained. Best Practices for the organisation of joint
return operations to Nigeria were agreed with
the aim of harmonising procedures for effective management of return operations and
formalised by signing a Note-Attestation in
December 2013, further cementing Nigeria’s
cooperation with Frontex.
Particular and continuous attention was paid
to third countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea, especially considering the humanitarian aspects of irregular migration along
maritime routes.
Frontex participated in European Commission-led initiatives within the framework of
the EU Dialogue on Migration, Mobility and
Security with Tunisia and Morocco, thus establishing and maintaining direct contacts
with the competent authorities of those
countries and exploring the possibility of
launching formal negotiations for the conclusion of a working arrangement, based on
the relevant mandates adopted by the Frontex Management Board.
Furthermore, Frontex contributed to preparatory activities undertaken and coordinated by the European External Action

© Frontex

The Africa-Frontex Intelligence Community
(AFIC) continued to expand — Cameroon, the
Democratic Republic of Congo, and Mauritania joined as members while Libya also participated in a conference — at the same time
consolidating its role as a unique platform for
development and joint analysis between EU
and African experts. The year 2013 saw the
publication of AFIC’s second analytical report.

The signature of the agreement on 'Best Practices for the Organisation of Joint
Return Operations to Nigeria', December 2013

Service (EEAS) aimed at launching a civilian
Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP)
mission to Libya on border security. In this
context, the Agency participated in an EEAS/
Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability-led
Technical Assessment Mission to Libya, with
the purpose of outlining the main activities
to be undertaken by the CSDP mission and
preparing the proposal of capacity building
activities to be implemented by Frontex under the mission. As a follow-up, a high-level
Libyan delegation visited Frontex Headquarters and Libyan experts participated in two
events organised by the Agency: the International Border Police Conference (IBPC) and
the AFIC meeting.
Frontex also focused in 2013 on establishing direct contacts with the authorities of
third countries where important airport
hubs are located with direct flight connections to Europe, including the United Arab
Emirates, China and Thailand as well as with
Hong Kong, in order to explore practical cooperation avenues in the areas of information exchange, risk analysis and air-border
management.

13

Frontex · General Report 2013

In the wider scope, Frontex was involved in
key EU migration and border managementrelated initiatives and political dialogues such
as the Mobility Partnerships, Rabat Process,
Eastern Partnership, Prague Process and Budapest Process. Furthermore, Frontex was
involved in JAIEX (JHA-External Relations)
and other EU-level meetings focused on cooperation in the external dimension, e.g. the
United States, Russian Federation and Western Balkans region. Contacts were also maintained and support provided to EU regional
programmes, projects and missions in third
countries, including EUROMED Migration,
EUBAM, EULEX, BSRBCC, and BSCF.

In the context of technical assistance initiatives, Frontex was directly awarded a EUR 4.5
million grant by the European Commission’s
Directorate General Development and Cooperation (DG DEVCO) to launch the Eastern
Partnership IBM Capacity Building Project.
The main aim of this project is to enable improved border security and to facilitate legitimate movement of people and goods in the
region, while ensuring that respect for human rights and the fight against corruption
are given necessary attention throughout
the project. The project partners and cobeneficiaries are the World Customs Organisation and the International Organisation
for Migration (IOM), as well as the International Centre for Migration Policy Development. The three-year project also foresees
the involvement of other actors, including
European and United Nations agencies, in
implementing specific actions.

Frontex contributed to the implementation
of EU-funded capacity-building projects on
border security benefiting third countries and
implemented by the relevant international
organisations which have concluded working arrangements with Frontex. In particular,
Frontex delivered training on anti-trafficking in Georgia and Ukraine targeted to border guard officials of the Eastern Partnership
countries under the International Centre for
Migration Policy Development Eastern Partnership Integrated Border Management (IBM)
Training project.

© Frontex

With the aim of promoting the strengthening of the international border guard community and offering the opportunity for
sharing best practices globally, in November 2013 Frontex organised the 21st International Border Police Conference. The event
gathered top-executive-level participants
from 60 countries. The 2013 IBPC concentrated on global challenges for future border security with regard to key aspects seen
from the angles of society, migration and
transnational crime.

First International Border Police Conference organised by Frontex, November 2013

14

This was the first time Frontex had organised the event, having taken it over from
the Hungarian Police. A strategic decision
was taken to revitalise the conference by
increasing its relevance and appeal to thirdcountry attendees. The discussion topics
approached global challenges in a holistic
way rather than focusing on issues of particular importance to Europe. The speakers,
meanwhile, reflected the conference’s international nature and wide scope of interest.

Frontex · General Report 2013

Frontex engaged with the European Asylum
Support Office (EASO) in a technical assistance project aimed at familiarising Tunisia
and Morocco with the work of both Agencies. The 18-month project, “Promoting the
participation of Jordan in the work of EASO
as well as the participation of Morocco and
Tunisia in the work of EASO and Frontex” is
funded by DG DEVCO. Frontex will focus on
implementing awareness-raising activities in
Morocco and Tunisia, laying the foundation
for structured future cooperation.
The cooperation plan signed with EASO in
2013 addresses other important issues such
as operations and capacity building. The first
concrete step towards the implementation
was made in the Frontex rapid-intervention exercise (REX 2013) in which EASO participated in the field operation. Two EASO
experts were present during coordination
meetings throughout the exercise. EASO representatives also participate in meetings of
the Frontex Risk Analysis Network.
Cooperation with other JHA agencies, EU institutions and bodies as well as with international
organisations was developed throughout the
year. The coordination between Frontex and
other EU Justice and Home Affairs agencies focused in 2013 on information exchange, training and relations with third country partners.
Specifically, Frontex and Eurojust signed a
Memorandum of Understanding in December
to enhance cooperation in the fight against

serious cross-border crime, such as smuggling
and trafficking in human beings.
Cooperation with Europol continued through
joint operations, risk analysis and implementation of the EU information management
strategy. Frontex has been actively contributing to the "Illegal Immigration" Operational
Action Plan (OAP) managed by the Council
Standing Committee on Operational Cooperation on Internal Security (COSI).
Frontex remains an active contributor to European Police College (CEPOL) training mainly
related to the implementation of LETS — the
Law Enforcement Training Scheme. In addition, Frontex cooperated with the European
Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA) within the
remit of Eurosur, in order to provide the European situational picture and the common
application of surveillance tools.
The year 2013 also saw the successful conclusion of negotiations for a working arrangement with the European Agency for
the operational management of large-scale
IT systems in the area of freedom, security
and justice (eu-LISA). The agreement is to be
signed in early 2014.
Cooperation with Interpol, UNHCR and IOM
covered, apart from sharing expertise, intensive operational cooperation and information
exchange. In the last quarter of 2013, Frontex
resumed negotiations on a working arrangement with the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO).

15

3.	Developments at Agency
Level
Reinforcement of flexible
operational support in the
Mediterranean
Due to increased activity on migratory routes
in the Mediterranean Sea, Frontex developed additional operational response activities and provided tailored support to Italy
and Greece by extending and reinforcing joint
maritime operations. In particular, after the
tragedy near Lampedusa on 3 October with
the death of a high number of migrants, reinforced border surveillance and contribution to search-and-rescue (SAR) capacity
was implemented in the Central and Eastern
Mediterranean regions. For this purpose an
additional budgetary allocation was received
from the Commission, internal reallocations
were made and activities re-prioritised.

16

Frontex actively participated in the Task Force
for the Mediterranean, established by the
Commission, contributing with the proposal
of reinforcing the existing European Patrols
Network (EPN) to extend its reach across the
length of the Mediterranean border to better control irregular migration and contribute
to SAR activities coordinated by the Member
States in the Mediterranean Sea.
The year was marked by an increase in irregular sea-border crossings and an unusually high death toll due to accidents involving
overloaded and unseaworthy boats, in particular in the Central Mediterranean area.
In the operational areas of Frontex-coordinated joint operations, there were 683 searchand-rescue incidents coordinated by Member
States with more than 37 000 people rescued.

© Jose Cordoba

17

Frontex · General Report 2013

Cooperation was established for each joint
operation with relevant EU Agencies, bodies and international organisations (e.g. Europol, EFCA, EMSA, CeCLAD(M), MAOC(N),
Interpol, UNODC), which led to smooth information flow and exchange of best practices among partners responsible for fighting
cross-border crime.

Targeted response 