Warsaw, 13-12-2012
Reg. No
Ref.

Frontex`Programme of
Work 2013
As adopted by Frontex’ Management Board on 21 December 2012

Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1. GENERAL PART

4
10

1.1. INTRODUCTION
10
1.2. MISSION
10
1.3. VISION
11
1.4. VALUES
11
1.5. APPROACH TAKEN
11
1.5.1. GOAL ORIENTED APPROACH
11
1.5.2. IDENTIFICATION OF PROGRAMMES, PROJECTS, PRODUCTS AND SERVICES
12
1.5.3. OBJECTIVES AND OUTPUTS
13
1.6. ENVIRONMENTAL SCANNING
14
1.6.1. TENTATIVE LIST OF GENERIC ISSUES DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY INFLUENCING ELEMENTS OF THE WORK OF
FRONTEX DURING 2013
14
1.6.2. AMENDED FRONTEX REGULATION – IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
15
1.6.3. EUROSUR
16
1.7. RISKS IDENTIFIED IN THE ARA 2012 AND OUTLOOK OF THE SITUATION AT THE EXTERNAL BORDERS IN 2013
17
1.7.1. RISK OF LARGE AND SUSTAINED NUMBERS OF ILLEGAL BORDER-CROSSINGS AT THE EXTERNAL LAND AND SEA
BORDER WITH TURKEY
17
1.7.2. RISK OF DOCUMENT FRAUD TO CIRCUMVENT BORDER-CONTROL MEASURES
18
1.7.3. RISK OF RENEWED LARGE NUMBERS OF ILLEGAL BORDER-CROSSINGS AT THE SOUTHERN MARITIME BORDER
18
1.7.4. RISK OF BORDER-CONTROL AUTHORITIES FACED WITH LARGE NUMBERS OF PEOPLE IN SEARCH OF
INTERNATIONAL PROTECTION
19
1.7.5. RISK OF INCREASED FACILITATION OF SECONDARY MOVEMENTS OF ILLEGAL STAYERS IN THE EU
20
1.7.6. RISK OF LESS EFFECTIVE BORDER CONTROL DUE TO A CHANGING OPERATIONAL ENVIRONMENT
20
1.7.7. RISK OF ABUSE OF NEW LEGAL TRAVEL CHANNELS TO ENTER AND SUB-SEQUENT ILLEGAL STAY IN THE EU 21
1.7.8. RISK OF BORDER-CONTROL AUTHORITIES INCREASINGLY CONFRONTED WITH CROSS-BORDER CRIMES AND
TRAVELLERS WITH THE INTENT TO COMMIT CRIME OR TERRORISM WITHIN THE EU
22
1.8. RISK BASED STATEMENT ON OPERATIONAL MITIGATION MEASURES NEEDED INCLUDING AREAS CONCERNED
23
1.9. FINANCIAL AND HUMAN RESOURCES TO PURSUE FRONTEX’ STRATEGY
26
2. FRONTEX’ KEY BUSINESS AREAS AND RELATED OBJECTIVES

31

2.1. GOVERNANCE AND PRIORITIZATION
2.1.1. PERFORMANCE AND GOVERNANCE INDICATORS

31
31
Page 2 of 142

2.1.2. PRIORITIZATION - METHODOLOGY
32
2.2. FRONTEX’ PORTFOLIO (OPERATIONAL PROGRAMMING)
33
2.3. OVERVIEW OF OBJECTIVES, OUTPUTS (PROJECTS/PRODUCTS/SERVICE), PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
AND RESOURCE ALLOCATION
34
2.3.1. OPERATIONS DIVISION
35
2.3.2. CAPACITY BUILDING DIVISION
58
2.3.3. ADMINISTRATION DIVISION
80
2.3.4. DIRECTORATE AND EXECUTIVE SUPPORT
89
2.3.5. INTERNAL AUDIT
102
2.3.6. FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OFFICER (CONSULTATIVE FORUM)
103
ANNEX 1 – CAPACITY BUILDING PORTFOLIO

104

ANNEX 2 – ADMINISTRATION PORTFLOIO

126

ANNEX 3 – GOVERNANCE INDICATORS

134

ANNEX 4 – PROCUREMENT PLAN 2013

140

Table of Figures
FIGURE 1: DEVELOPMENT OF FINANCIAL MEANS (2005-2013) ...........................................................................27
FIGURE 2: DEVELOPMENT OF STAFF (2005-2013) ................................................................................................29

Tables
TABLE 1: DEVELOPMENT OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES (2011 - 2013) ..................................................................26
TABLE 2: OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES ALLOCATED TO ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIVITIES (2011 2013) ..................................................................................................................................................................28
TABLE 3: OVERVIEW OF FINANCIAL RESOURCES ALLOCATED TO OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES (2011 - 2013)29

Page 3 of 142

Executive Summary
The Programme of Work1 is Frontex’ operative plan against which the reporting for
governance purposes (assessing and evaluating operational activities initiated and
implemented during the relevant) will be done. It proposes and outlines Frontex’ areas of
possible activities for the year in question.
Compared to previous years the following issues will drive changes to the structure and
allocation of resources reflected in the annual programme of work:





the further development and implementation of the EUROSUR system,
the operational support to Greece aimed at building sustainable capacity for border
management, giving added value at the EU level,
further and refined implementation measures related to the amended Frontex
Regulation (‘move from SHALL to MAY’)
the utilization of new structures (EBGT) and types of officers (seconded guest officer
and Frontex’ coordination officer - FCO) including training;

Considering the high number of new tasks and responsibilities to be taken care of by Frontex,
the increase in financial contributions is relatively low. Financing these tasks will also be
achieved by slowing down implementation measures related to non-mandatory tasks and
responsibilities.
In EUR

Budget 2011 N3

DB 2012
N2

DB 2013

I. Subsidy from the European Union
entered in the general budget of the EU
(18 02 03)

111 000 000

84 000 000

79 500 000

II. Contributions from countries associated
with the implementation, application
and development of the Schengen
Acquis2

6 337 000

4 758 000

5 207 100

850 000

820 000

1 000 000

p.m.

p.m.

p.m.

III. Contributions from the UK and Ireland
IV. Any voluntary contribution from the
Member States

1

A Programme of Work is a statement for the activities or steps needed to accomplish a plan. It aims
to make a strategy action related;

2

Based on GNI figures as published by Eurostat on 10 January 2011. The GNI figures are regularly
revised by Eurostat and a final figure will only appear after some years.
Page 4 of 142

In EUR

Budget 2011 N3

TOTAL
V. Earmarked revenue

DB 2012
N2

DB 2013

118 187 000

89 578 000

85 707 100

p.m.

p.m.

p.m.

118 187 000 89 578 000

85 707 100

The financing of those new and increased demands will also be done by shifting resources
from operational and other activities which will directly and indirectly benefit from new
systems such as EUROSUR and EBGT, seconded guest officers and FCO, but also by allocating
additional resources to activities.
2013 will see a net increase of two staff member. The growth of temporary agents (+10) will
be compensated by a reduction in the number of contract agents (-4) and seconded national
experts (-5). The positions for temporary staff will be allocated to External Relations, Risk
Analysis, Frontex’ Situation Centre, Information and Communication Technology, Joint
Operations Unit and Research & Development.

Types of post
Temporary Agents - AD
Temporary Agents - AST
Subtotal Establishment
plan
Contract Agents (CA)
Seconded National Experts
(SNE)

Occupied on
31.12.2011
86
55

2012
Approved by the
Budgetary Authority
87
56

Proposal for
2013
97
56

141

143

153

85

873

844

78

83

78

304

313

315

3

Early in 2011, because of urgent needs, a decision was made by the Executive Director to hire two
additional Contract Agents.
In May 2011, in relation to the developments in the Mediterranean Region, 6 additional Contract Agents
and 6 additional SNE posts were created.
At the end of 2011 an additional SNE post was established due to the need for strengthening the
protection of the Senior Management.
4

Currently it can’t be decided from which entities the three CA positions will be taken. Each renewal of a
CA position, due to be done during 2013, will be used to evaluate the needs of the Agency against the
priorities set to make sure that the reduction of 3 CA position is executed until end of 2013.

Page 5 of 142

During 2013 the ratio between administrative and operational expenditure will be at the level
of 37%. Direct operational expenditures will amount to 63 % of the budget in 2013; which
(overall) will be a decrease of 3.9 M € compared to the budget for 2012.
Commitments
2011
Title 1 –

Payments
2011

Budget 2012 N2

Draft Budget
2013

20 526 894

20 230 217

20 550 000

21 641 000

9 935 981

7 468 725

10 077 000

9 758 100

Subtotal
administrative
expenditure

30 462 875

27 698 943

30 627 000

31 399 100

26%

36%

34%

37%

Title 3

85 956 281

49 972 320

58 951 000

54 308 000

74%

64%

66%

63%

116 419 156

77 671 262

89 578 000

85 707 100

Staff related
expenditure
Title 2 –
other administrative
expenditure

Total

When comparing the budget allocations of different years, changes during the year should be
taken into consideration. Despite that, the following paragraphs compare the figures for 2013
with the figures for 2012 after the second budget amendment (released as part of the
operational contingency package).
The largest part of Frontex’ budget is allocated to Joint Operations. This is in order to further
improve the capabilities of Member States to tackle demanding situations and also to enhance
Frontex’ capabilities and effectiveness in coordinating the operational activities of the
Member States and Schengen Associated Countries based on risk analysis. Such risk analysis
enables better focusing on the main routes of irregular migration and the enhancement of the
impact of border management on fighting crime at the external borders.
During the 39th meeting of Frontex’ Management Board (MB) the mandate for the Frontex
Operational Office (FOO) pilot was extended until the end of 2013. Consequently, and as was
done during previous years, the pilot will be financed and staffed via reallocations from
within Frontex’ budget. The FOO is not shown as a separate entity, and resources assigned to
the functions of the FOO are only reflected in the regular functional structure of the head
quarters (e.g. Joint Operations Unit, Risk Analysis Unit, Frontex Situation Centre, Pooled
Resources Unit, Human Resources and Services, Information and Communication Technology
Unit).

Page 6 of 142

Joint Operations and Pilot Projects at Land Borders will require an amount of 9.4 M EUR
(+4.1 M EUR) to tackle irregular migration flows and to enhance the impact on crime fighting
at the EU’s external borders by targeting the Eastern Mediterranean and Balkan routes as well
as Eastern routes where appropriate.
Joint Operations and Pilot Projects at Sea Borders will be, as in earlier years, the recipients
of the biggest share of Frontex budget allocations, with an allocated amount of 20.1 M EUR (8.2 M EUR). Strengthening the Member States’ operational capacity to cover increased
operational areas and implementation periods will enhance the tackling of irregular migration
flows on routes identified by risk analysis.
Air Borders will have a budget of 2.3 M EUR (+ 0.1 M EUR) for the further implementation of
a flexible approach to fluctuations in the phenomena of irregular migration and crime fighting
mainly by utilising Focal Points at various airports identified by risk analysis.
Return Operations will intensify their capacity building activities (assistance to Greece) and
maintain their support for Member States and SACs organizing joint return operations. A
slightly decreased budget of 10.0 M € (-0.2 M €) will be made available.
Within the Operations Division, a certain percentage of the financial means allocated to units
and sectors have been ‘earmarked’ (arg: centralized operational reserve). This will be used
as a means to cover activities in case of a reprioritization due to changes to the migration
situation/risks. Consequently, those amounts (which will remain assigned to certain
objectives of the units/sectors) will follow an enhanced approval process prior to the issuance
of a financial commitment.
Risk Analysis will provide strategic analytical products and related advice as well as
operational and tactical analytical products to internal and external stakeholders in a timely
manner. A budget of 1.4 M € (+0.1 M €) will be made available to improve the quality of
these products and services, to produce several periodical and ad hoc risk assessments, and to
provide analytical support to operational activities of the Agency.
Frontex Situation Centre (FSC) will maintain situational awareness, support risk analysis and
assist emergency/crisis management processes through further increased operability provided
by a 9/7 service (1.4 M €);
The development and implementation of projects related to Eurosur (ESP, CPIP, CONOPS) will
require significant allocations of resources, in addition to what is described subsequently in
this report; this follows the outcome of COM Financial Impact Assessment study carried out in
2011, and reads: for RAU + 1.5 M EUR, for FSC +1.4 M EUR.
In 2013 Research & Development activities will have a budget of 1.3 M € to drive the process
of the harmonization and development of standards - both operational and technical - for
border control; this is in order to keep Member States informed about new
technical/technological developments in the field of border controls and to represent the
common interests of the Member States in border security research.

Page 7 of 142

In 2013 Frontex, together with the Member States, will focus on the continued development
of EUROSUR. An amount of 2.24 M € (+0.9 M €) will be used for ensuring the EUROSUR
network is further extended, secured and maintained.

Training activities fall broadly into the following main categories: standardized common
curricula and upgrade courses, further training in order to achieve co-operability for BG
officers not trained on common training standards and training support. A budget of 4.5 M €
(+0.5 M €) will be made available for different activities. In addition, Frontex will actively
contribute to the European Training Scheme (ETS) in close cooperation with CEPOL.
With a budget of 1.0 M € Pooled Resources will manage and further develop the European
Border Guard Teams and Technical Equipment Pools. By increasing the availability and
deployability of operational resources for joint operations, technical and operational
assistance, and rapid operational assistance, Frontex’ response capacity will be strengthened.

Increased tasks will only allow for the stabilizing of primary operational activities but shall
lead to an overall increase of training activities by 14% during 2013.
Regarding the list of governance indicators used by Frontex, the following targets have been
established for a selection of them.
The Participation Index (PA_PART) should be kept at the same level as during 2011 (average:
25)
The usage of pools (PA_POOL-UTL) should be increased from the current level of 17% to 40%
through a better tailoring of profiles and availability (arg: EBGT) .
The ratio for the implementation of the operational plans (EFF_OP_PLAN_HR and
EFF_OP_PLAN_TE) should be kept at the same level as during 2011/2012 (annual average is
90%).
Stabilizing the level of the external contribution ratio (EFF_EX_CTRB) at 85% will allow
Frontex’ product delivery ratio (EFF_TIMELINESS) to remain at the level of 2011/2012
(100%). At the same time, the customer satisfaction level (IM_SAT_LVL) should increase
from 3.8 to 4.2 (average).
Increasing the joint character of operational activities should enable Frontex to decrease the
resources ratios - HR Host and TE Host – (IM_RES_HR and IM_RES_TE). As the figures vary
significantly between the different types of borders, the focus will be on sea borders with a
current value of 63%.
The monitoring of these indicators, together with the further implementation of measures to
fulfill the Internal Control Standards, should guarantee governance and management of
Frontex towards its strategic goals.

Page 8 of 142

The Programme of Work is grouped in a way that allows the reader to assess the plans for
2013 in two different ways:
1. Following the functional structure of Frontex or
2. Following Frontex’ portfolio.
The first part of the document (General Part) starts with an Introduction and outlines
Frontex’ Mission and Vision and the Approach taken. The Environmental Scanning section
briefly touches on Frontex’ societal environment and elaborates in more detail on the
implementation of the amended Frontex’ Regulation and the (draft) Eurosur Regulation. The
chapter closes with an elaboration on Risks encountered, Mitigation measures proposed and
an overview of the human and financial resources needed to implement the suggested
activities.
As indicated by the heading, this chapter is required to be read regardless of the perspective
the reader would prefer to take for the rest of the document.
The second part of the document (Frontex’ Key Business Areas) follows the functional
structure of Frontex and contains, after a short explanation of prioritization and
performance indicators, an overview of objectives, outputs (projects/products/services),
performance indicators and resource allocations per unit.
The third part consists of a number of attached annexes (Annex 1 – Annex 4) and follows a
holistic approach elaborating on the elements of Frontex’ integrated portfolio.
Annex 1 and 2 elaborate on the Capacity Building and Administration Portfolios. Annex 3
summarized the indicators used to measure the performance of Frontex (including targets).
Annex 4 contains an overview of procurement procedures to be launched during 2013.
Frontex’ Operational Portfolio, contained in Annex 5, has been classified as ‘RESTREINT UE’
due to its sensitive content, the disclosure of which would jeopardize and seriously harm the
success of MS driven and supported operational activities coordinated by Frontex.

Page 9 of 142

1. General Part
1.1. Introduction
The Programme of Work, as mentioned by the Frontex Regulation5, aims to outline and agree
on Frontex’ areas of possible activities for the year in question.
The Programme of Work balances transparency, security and flexibility, allowing Frontex to
adjust its activities by making use of its operational independence (“room to maneuver”).
This preliminary Programme of Work 2013 strives for:
1. Alignment with Frontex’ Multi Annual Plan 2013 - 2016,
2. Sustained delivery of established “Products” and “Services” (including further
development), clustered into Portfolios, and further into Programmes, and
3. Initiation and execution of new initiatives (Projects or Programmes)
As a planning tool, the programme of work will undergo minor or even significant changes
during the year of its realization. As such, changes to the assignment of human and financial
resources to objectives in chapter 2.3. might occur. Any such changes will have to be
reasoned and justified and will, depending on the impact and the margins established,
undergo an internal or external validation and approval process; involving Frontex’
Management Board in the latter case.

1.2. Mission
Frontex supports, coordinates and develops European border management in line with the EU
fundamental rights charter.
Frontex supports the Member States6 (MS) to achieve an efficient, high and uniform level of
border control.
Frontex coordinates operational and EU measures to jointly respond to exceptional situations
at the external borders.
Frontex develops capacities at the Member State and European level as combined
instruments to tackle challenges of migration flows, serious organized crime and terrorism at
the external borders
5

Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 of 26 October 2004, establishing a European Agency for the
Management of Operational Coordination at the External Borders of the Member States of the European
Union (No 1168/2011 of 22 November 2011)
6

The term ‘Member State’ as used in this document includes Member States of the European Union and
Schengen Associated Countries
Page 10 of 142

1.3. Vision
Frontex is the trustworthy European Border Agency, strengthening the European area of
Freedom, Security and Justice by supporting the Member States to keep up with their
responsibilities.
Frontex applies the concept of Integrated Border Management and promotes a European
border culture based on the full respect of EU fundamental rights.
Professional staff and a set of operational and administrative capabilities enable Frontex to
add value to the European Union.

1.4. Values
Within a team-work focused framework, enabled by open communication, Frontex’ staff
members share and live the corporate values. Consequently, they perform their activities in a
highly professional way. Humanity links Frontex’ activities with fundamental rights as an
unconditional and integral component of effective integrated border management resulting in
trust in Frontex

1.5. Approach taken
1.5.1. Goal oriented approach
Frontex continues to apply a goal oriented approach. The identification of goals enables the
Agency to apply multi-annual planning. The initial goals (Awareness, Response,
Interoperability, and Performance) have been redefined. Development, Situational
Awareness, Supporting Response, Emergency Response, Organization, and Staff will be the
six goals forming the basis for the elaboration of Frontex’ objectives and outputs as contained
in the annual Programme of Work.

Development
Frontex strengthens Member States border management capacity to its full potential by using
its portfolio as a whole, promoting interoperability and harmonization, and by prioritizing
measures impacting at the European level.

Situational Awareness
Frontex creates and delivers comprehensive analysis supporting the Member States and
serving as a basis for operational cooperation and for meeting the needs of European
institutions.
Page 11 of 142

Supporting Response
Frontex delivers well targeted joint operations at sea-, land- and air borders and joint return
operations, thus





strengthening the capacity of the Member States under the greatest pressure,
enhancing proactive responses to significant uncertainties at external borders, and

safeguarding positive achievements in demanding situations.

Emergency Response
Frontex provides timely and structured responses to the EU and the Member States in
exceptional situations at the external borders.

Organization
Frontex operates through an effective and flexible organizational structure that enables the
concerted delivery of services and products.
Activities are continuously prioritized and result oriented.
Sound and transparent governance strengthens cost-effectiveness and the positive reputation
of the agency.

Staff
Staff is Frontex’ most valuable asset.
Frontex has professional and motivated staff, fully committed to providing optimal input to
the objectives and values of the agency.
Frontex is an attractive and fair employer that takes care of its staff, and systematically
develops its capabilities and the working conditions.

1.5.2. Identification of Programmes, Projects, Products and Services
In 2013 Frontex will continue to further strengthen its Portfolio (Programmes) of Products
and Services by refining quality, but also establish new products and services.
During the last few years several Member States and the Commission have strongly addressed
the issue of transforming Frontex’ activities into mid to long term deliverables. But ‘zero
growth’ and changing demands advocate revising the applied approach. Operations have to be
needs based. Consequently, as well as newly launched operational activities, the continuation
of operational activities must be based on updated risk analysis. Frontex will continue to
address permanent and temporary needs in a tailored and satisfying way by grouping
products, services and projects into programmes and portfolios.

Page 12 of 142

Portfolios/Programmes have a mid to long term scope which allows to arrange and rearrange
individual operational activities in adjustment to changes of needs. The assessment of needs
is done in a cyclical way. It is well understood that this timeframe must be aligned with the
ones applied by Frontex stakeholders at the operational and political level (e.g. Stockholm
Programme and Action Plan implementing the Stockholm Programme7).
The configuration of portfolios/programmes follows different approaches such as addressing a
specific geographic area, application of a harmonized operational approach, achievement of
cross cutting objectives under one management, or clustering activities. This allows for the
addressing of the core of a problem instead of tackling solely its consequences. Furthermore,
this also enables the assessment of outcomes and their ability to satisfy the customers’
expectations; defined as the impact of such activities.
Projects will remain in the portfolio of the Agency, used for time limited activities of a nonrecurring nature. Projects will also be carried out to develop, design and implement new
tools with the aim of making them permanent products and services of the Agency.
Frontex’ products and services will be clustered into mid to long term programmes. The
clustering can be either vertical (within one division/unit) or horizontal (linking the activities
of different divisions/units into one entity).

1.5.3. Objectives and Outputs
Frontex understands objectives as end results of planned activities, stating what is to be
accomplished, by when, and quantified if possible. These should be operationally related
statements of outputs, contributing to the achievement of a particular goal with a clear
ownership.
The description of objectives, mentioned in the Programme of Work 2013, will remain at a
high (governance) level, and will refrain from moving to a micro level, which will be required
for the day-to-day management of Frontex.

Regarding the achievement of objectives and the delivery of outputs, the strict application of
a zero growth policy will negatively impact on Frontex’ ability to perform to its stakeholders’
expectations. Especially as those expectations have been increased by Frontex’ amended
mandate and tasks.
 Availability of financial resources:
An increased demand – with tasking remaining at the same level – would actually require an
increased input of financial resources (effectiveness). Zero growth does not allow for a

7

Council document 17024/09, adopted by the European Council on 10/11 December 2009 and COM
(2010) 171
Page 13 of 142

directly increased input but will require the redistribution of available financial resources to
identified priorities as an initial mitigation measure.
The current utilisation level of financial resources offers only a small ‘buffer’ to be used for
enhanced operational activities. This, together with the increased efficiency of coordinating
activities to be carried out by Frontex’, could be sufficient to counter the increased needs
even with unchanged financial resources available.
 Availability/utilisation of human resources:
The situation is different with regard to human resources. The development and deployment
of Frontex products and services is driven and performed by Frontex’ staff (including different
types of SNEs). The utilisation of synergies, reassignments and merger of tasks, and
internal redeployment are fully leveraged (efficiency – e.g. FOO pilot). Only the proposed
increase of staff will allow Frontex to fulfill those new tasks as foreseen in the amended
Frontex regulation. Additionally, the newly created function of ‘seconded guest officer’ will
be utilised initially as a measure to cope with the short term need for additional resources for
operational purposes.

1.6. Environmental Scanning
Frontex does not act in a stable environment, immune to externalities such as political,
economical, social, technological, legal or environmental factors. These factors determine
and, directly or indirectly (via an intermediate), have an effect on the Agency or its
environment.
Before turning to different factors, it is worth stressing, that Frontex, primarily acting as a
coordinator, is extremely dependent on the Member States and Schengen Associated
Countries and their willingness to actively participate in, and to deploy technical assets to,
the Agency's activities. The aim of this section is to make the governing body and the
European institutions aware of the factors that Frontex is exposed to and which, directly or
indirectly, might have an impact on the implementation of the proposed Programme of Work.
Environmental scanning is an ongoing process that could lead to changes of high or low
significance. The findings of numerous environmental scanning’s are contained in core
documents, such as the Annual and Semiannual Risk Assessments, but also in quarterly reports
such as the FRAN quarterlies and Tailored Risk Assessments focusing on a particular issue.

1.6.1. Tentative list of generic issues directly or indirectly influencing elements of
the work of Frontex during 2013




Lisbon Treaty and the Fundamental Rights Charter;
The enlargement of the European Union and the Schengen area;
The Stockholm Programme;
Page 14 of 142










The Internal Security Strategy;
The amended Frontex Regulation;
Council Conclusions
Conclusion of working and readmission agreements;
The current and proposed EU Multiannual Financial Framework (2014 – 2020);
The financial situation within the public sectors of Member States, within the EU and
the subsequent ‘zero-growth-policy’;
The political developments in Third Countries of origin or transit for irregular
migration;
The establishment of the European Border Surveillance System (EUROSUR) and the
Smart Borders Initiative;

1.6.2. Amended Frontex Regulation – Implementation Measures

During 2012 Frontex has started to implement measures to cope with changes and
amendments to its legal framework. The following table highlights subjects that have not
been (fully) implemented yet but will start, continue or end during 2013.

ART.

SUBJECT

TIMELINE

2.2

ED shall inform on bilateral operational cooperation
(complementing Frontex’ action) between MSs and between MSs
and third countries

3.3

Transmission to the MB of the detailed evaluation reports of Joint
Operations and Pilot Projects

Within 60 days after
the end of JO/PP

7.1

Acquisition of own technical equipment entailing significant costs
(with the Agency’s budget)

Q3

Q2

March
7.5

Rules relating to technical equipment (overall minimum numbers,
conditions of deployment and the reimbursement of costs)

7.6

Report on the composition and deployment of equipment forming
part of the technical pool

Monthly

11c.3

Processing of personal data collected during joint operations, pilot
projects and rapid interventions – cooperation with Europol

Q3

14.3

Deployment of LO in third countries and the list of priorities for
their deployment.

Q2

(Q3 2012 MB
decision on concept
and methodology)

Page 15 of 142

ART.

SUBJECT

TIMELINE
Q18

15a

HQ Agreement

17.4

Implementing measures in agreement with COM pursuant to the
arrangements provided for in article 110 of the Staff Regulation

20.2
(i)

Agency’s Multi Annual Plan outlining the future long term strategy

Q3

2.1 (i)

Provide necessary assistance to the development and operation of
EUROSUR

2012 onwards

5

Establish an exchange programme for national border guards
participating in the EBGT

On a needs basis

Q2

For a more detailed scanning, focusing on other political, economical, social, technical,
environmental, and legal issues directly or indirectly impacting on Frontex’ societal and task
environment, other documents such as the ARA 2012, SARA 2011, or FRAN quarterlies may be
consulted.

1.6.3. Eurosur
The EUROSUR regulation is scheduled to enter into force on 1 October 2013, establishing a
framework for information sharing and improving situational awareness and reaction
capabilities. The EUROSUR network has been in use for the exchange of operational
information since the end of 2011 and the number of connected MSs, as well as the scope of
the provided services, has steadily increased.
In 2013 the Frontex EUROSUR Programme will continue to prepare Frontex and the Member
States for the entry into force of the Regulation. The Network will be enhanced and expanded
to all Member States, the common surveillance tools will be tested and evaluated, and the
European Situational Picture, as well as the Common Pre-Frontier Intelligence Picture, will be
further developed. Overall, EUROSUR will form an increasingly important framework for
Frontex operational activities.
Frontex will ensure that the investments bring the expected benefits for the Member States.
Internal reallocations of resources and the realignment of activities will enable Frontex to
provide many of the services already from 1 October 2013. However, to fully implement all
parts of the Regulation (e.g. full services on a 24/7 basis, comprehensive services regarding
the common surveillance tools and operational management) will require additional resources
and shall reach beyond 2013.

8

Dependent on the hosting MS, the negotiations have to be launched and finalized
Page 16 of 142

1.7. Risks identified in the ARA 2012 and outlook of the situation at the
external borders in 2013
The following risks at the external borders of the EU were identified according to the results
of an annual risk analysis process involving Member State analysts participating in the Frontex
Risk Analysis Network. They represent the main risks identified by the Frontex Risk Analysis
Unit after an Annual Analytical Review with Member State analysts.
The risks presented are a summary of the risks presented in the restricted version of the
Annual Risk Analysis 2012 for the Frontex Management Board. This summary does not contain
references to identified vulnerabilities, nor proposals for recommendations that were
presented to the Frontex Management Board as a basis for their discussions in elaborating the
Programme of Work for 2013.
They are primarily aimed for strategic and long term planning purposes, and require specific
tailored analysis for tactical and operational decisions.

1.7.1. Risk of large and sustained numbers of illegal border-crossings at the
external land and sea border with Turkey
The border between Greece and Turkey is very likely to remain in 2013 among the main areas
for detections of illegal border crossing along the external border, at levels similar to those
reported between 2008 and 2011, i.e. between 40 000 and 57 000 detections per annum.
This area of the external border neighbours Turkey and offers a natural transit bridge with
Asia, which contains many source countries for migrants hoping to illegally cross the border
into the EU. This situation is largely exploited by facilitators, in particular at the land border
between Turkey and Greece. The challenge is ever increasing, as criminal groups continue to
develop their networks and practices across the Greek-Turkish borders.
The majority of migrants are expected to come from Asian countries particularly Afghanistan,
Iran and Pakistan, pushed by poor living conditions at home and pulled by the presence of a
large number of fellow citizens already in the EU, relatively low return risks at this particular
border section compared to other border sections like air borders, rumours spread among
migrants about the benefits available in EU Member States and long-term established
perceptions about the apparent ease of crossing illegally into the EU which is also fed back
from recent successes.
Depending on the political situation, migrants from the Middle East may increasingly join the
flow. In addition, migrants from northern and western Africa, willing to illegally cross the EU
external borders, are expected to increasingly take advantage of Turkish visa policies, that
grant visas to a different set of nationalities than the EU does, and the expansion of Turkish
Airlines, which assists them in transiting through the Turkish air borders and subsequently
offers the opportunity to attempt to enter the EU illegally, either by air or through the
neighbouring land or sea borders. As a result, border-control authorities will increasingly be

Page 17 of 142

confronted with a wider variety of nationalities, and probably also a greater diversity of
facilitation networks, further complicating the tasks of law-enforcement authorities.
This risk is interlinked with the risk of criminal groups facilitating secondary movements and
the risk of border-control authorities faced with large flows of people in search of
international protection.

1.7.2. Risk of document fraud to circumvent border-control measures
The use of biometric travel documents renders document fraud increasingly difficult.
Nevertheless, facilitators are developing new techniques to circumvent biometric checks,
such as using supporting documents to fraudulently obtain authentic travel documents, or
using impostor techniques. Consistent with the distribution of regular passengers among
border types (land, air and sea), this risk is mostly associated with passenger entries at the
external air borders, and to a lesser extent at the land borders.
Fraud is expected mostly among EU travel documents (e.g. passports, visas and ID cards) and
there are indications of a shift away from the use of passports towards less sophisticated
documents such as ID cards and residence permits.
Member States experience pressure from an extensive range of forgery techniques applied to
many types of documents and used by a very wide assortment of nationalities. Such a broad
landscape of document fraud inevitably renders profiling and effective control extremely
challenging, and confirms the utility of developing systematic analyses, alerts and operational
support at the EU level.
Document fraud allows migrants to illegally enter the territory of a Member State, and then
to move freely within the EU. In addition, assuming a false identity and operating within black
markets seriously undermines international criminal investigations, national social systems
and the ability of any state to effectively manage and protect its legitimate communities.
Document fraud progressively demands closer and stronger links to organised crime because
modern documents require more skilled and expensive techniques to produce quality
forgeries, and because the emerging trend of impersonation has created an illegal market
place for large volumes of stolen or complicity supplied documents.

1.7.3. Risk of renewed large numbers of illegal border-crossings at the southern
maritime border
The likelihood of large numbers of illegal border-crossings at the southern maritime border
remains very high, either in the form of sporadic episodes similar to those reported in 2011 or
in sustained flows on specific routes originating from Africa.
Irregular-migration flows at the southern maritime borders are expected to be concentrated
within one of three known routes, i.e. the Central Mediterranean route, the Western

Page 18 of 142

Mediterranean route or the Western African route. Larger flows are more likely to develop on
the Central Mediterranean route than on the other two routes, mostly because of its
proximity to Tunisia, Libya and Egypt, where political instability and high unemployment
rates among young people is pushing citizens away from their countries and where there is
evidence of well-organised facilitation networks.
On the Western Mediterranean route, the situation remains of concern because of the
increasing trend of illegal border-crossings reported throughout 2011. According to reported
detections, the situation on the Western African route has been mostly under control since
2008 but remains critically dependant of the implementation of effective return agreements
between Spain and western African countries. Should these agreements be jeopardised,
irregular migration, pushed by high unemployment and poverty, is likely to resume quickly
despite increased surveillance.
The composition of the immigration flow is dependent on the route and the countries of
departure, but includes a large majority of western and North Africans. Mostly economically
driven, irregular migration on these routes is also increasingly a result of the humanitarian
crisis in western and northern African countries. Facilitators are increasingly recruiting their
candidates for illegal border-crossings from the group that is most vulnerable to THB, i.e.
women and children, causing increasing challenges for border control authorities.

1.7.4. Risk of border-control authorities faced with large numbers of people in
search of international protection
Given the currently volatile and unstable security situation in the vicinity of the EU, there is
an increasing risk of political and humanitarian crises in third countries resulting in large
numbers of people in search of international protection being displaced to the land and sea
borders of the EU. The most likely pressures are linked to the situations in North Africa and
the Middle East.
In addition, the situation in western African countries like Nigeria may also trigger flows of
people in search of international protection to the external borders. In addition, facilitators
of illegal border-crossing often recommend that migrants apply for international protection if
detected at the external borders, only to abscond from asylum centres only a few days later.
This threat is predominantly linked to irregular transit migration through the Western Balkan
route and possibly, more sporadically, along the eastern land border. Facilitators are
exploiting the period, often several months, required for assessing asylum applications, and
the lack of a common policy on international protection at the EU level, as part of the modus
operandi proposed in their packages to the migrants. Their illegal activities are also thriving
because of the still insufficient coordination between border-control and other lawenforcement authorities with asylum authorities.
When applications for international protection are made in large numbers as part of a modus
operandi to illegally enter the EU, it overloads border-control authorities, thus diluting

Page 19 of 142

resources for those genuinely requiring protection. At the same time it also diverts resources
that would otherwise be used to carry out border controls.

1.7.5. Risk of increased facilitation of secondary movements of illegal stayers in
the EU
The persistently large number of annual illegal border-crossings along the external borders,
oscillating between 100 000 and 150 000 detections since EU totals became available in 2008,
has created a market for criminal organisations facilitating the movement of illegal stayers
within the EU. There is an increasing risk that these secondary movements are adding to the
pull factors for illegal border-crossings at the EU external borders.
Member States are increasingly reporting migrants who, after crossing the external border
illegally, transit through Greece, via the intra-Schengen air border, using fraudulent
documents. In support of this, the Europol Organised Crime Threat Assessment (OCTA 2011)
highlighted organised crime groups in Pakistan as key producers and suppliers of counterfeit
identity documents and linked the supply with the current high levels of irregular migration to
Greece, and the identification of laboratories producing counterfeit documents within Greece
itself.
The facilitation of secondary movements of illegal stayers takes advantage of cheaper
connections between small airports of EU Member States, as well as an increase in online
check-in systems that reduce the possibility of detecting fraudulent documents.
At the land borders, the Western Balkan route remained largely a path transiting the flow of
migrants that enter the EU at Greek-Turkish borders and later continue towards other
Member States through the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Serbia and Croatia.
Detections of illegal border-crossings at the land borders with Western Balkan countries in
Slovenia, Hungary and Romania, as well as detections of migrants between Greece and Italy,
will remain dependent on the volume of illegal border-crossings along the Eastern
Mediterranean route.
The risk of facilitation of secondary movements is also linked to the risk of border-control
authorities being faced with a flow of people in search of international protection.

1.7.6. Risk of less effective border control due to a changing operational
environment
At the horizon of 2013, the operational environments of border control are likely to be
affected, on the one hand, by austerity measures reducing resources, and on the other hand,
by increased passenger flows triggering more reliance on technological equipment. Austerity
measures have been introduced throughout Member States in various forms since 2009. The
most obvious examples are found in Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain and the Baltic countries.
These measures could result in increasing disparities between Member States in terms of their
Page 20 of 142

capacity to perform border controls, and hence enable facilitators to select those border
types and sections that are perceived as weaker in detecting specific modi operandi.
Budget cuts could also exacerbate the problem of corruption, increasing the vulnerability to
illegal activities across the external borders. Austerity measures will inevitably impact on the
efficacy of border-control authorities in detecting and preventing a wide array of illegal
activities at the borders, ranging from illegal border-crossings, through the smuggling of
excise goods, to THB.
Border-crossing points with large flows of passengers – mostly at the air borders and along the
eastern land borders – increasingly rely on technology to support border controls. This clearly
has advantages, such as increasing detection rates of known cases of fraudulent entry, but
the decreasing importance of human interventions increases the risk of a new modus operandi
to pass undetected and reduces the possibility of collecting human intelligence.

As reported by Member States, it also increases the likelihood of criminal groups relying on
classical techniques to target less-equipped border-crossing points such as small airports.

1.7.7. Risk of abuse of new legal travel channels to enter and sub-sequent illegal
stay in the EU
The increase in the number of air and overland passengers, and rising global mobility, will
increase the number of border checks. Visa liberalisation and local border-traffic agreements
are also being increasingly implemented or planned. As a result, the responsibilities and
workloads of border-control authorities are also increasing.
The purpose of visa liberalisation is to facilitate people-to-people contact, enhance business
opportunities and cultural exchange, and to offer opportunities in the EU to the people of the
given region/country.
These objectives implicitly entail increases in passenger flows, translating into an increased
workload for border-control authorities. In turn, this places additional stress on bordercontrol authorities to prevent irregular migration, especially in terms of overstaying.
It also carries an increased risk of document fraud, as migrants willing to enter the EU
illegally seek to obtain fraudulent documents from the third countries benefiting from visa
liberalisation.
In addition, the number of cases of asylum abuse by the five visa-exempt nationalities of the
Western Balkans, mostly Serbia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, even if
showing signs of decreasing compared to their peak in 2011, are likely to persist at a level
higher than was the case prior to visa liberalisation.

Page 21 of 142

1.7.8. Risk of border-control authorities increasingly confronted with crossborder crimes and travellers with the intent to commit crime or terrorism within
the EU
As a corollary to strengthened surveillance and checks along the external borders, bordercontrol authorities will be increasingly confronted with the detection of cross-border crimes
such as THB, drug trafficking and the smuggling of excise goods, as well as with detections of
cross-border crime committed on exit, like the smuggling of stolen assets, in particular
vehicles. The Eastern Mediterranean route across the external borders with Turkey remains
the main channel of entry for heroin into the EU. The Western Balkan route is also often used
as at transit region for hashish and heroin held by Western Balkan criminal groups. There is an
increasing risk of hashish and cocaine trafficking activity in the Western Mediterranean area,
from Morocco to Spain, sometimes combined with the smuggling of migrants. These groups
are operating with increasingly sophisticated means, such as the use of small aircraft.
Cigarette smuggling significantly affects the work of border authorities on the eastern land
border and the land borders with Western Balkan countries. It is also increasingly reported at
sea and air borders. The modi operandi range from ‘ant’ smuggling, carried by individuals, to
large-scale enterprises. The detection of cigarette smuggling consumes the time and
resources of border control authorities.
Trafficking of oil products is mainly reported at the eastern European borders with the
Russian Federation, Belarus and Ukraine, as well as with Balkan states. Even though petrol
smuggling is commonly believed to have only a limited and local impact on the EU economy,
fuel smugglers present a challenge to the management of the movement of passengers at the
borders.
Stolen vehicle identification is mainly linked to the controls at land borders and, to a lesser
extent, sea borders. Intelligence received from Member States also indicates an increase in
the trafficking of stolen vehicles leaving the EU at the external borders between Bulgaria and
Turkey, and also an increase in stolen heavy vehicles, machines, buses and trailers detected
at the external land borders with Belarus and Ukraine.
Given the sophistication of the modus operandi, the detection of stolen vehicles relies mostly
on the profiling of drivers and expertise in vehicle identification techniques; hence
collaboration between law-enforcement authorities operating in the territory and bordercontrol authorities is extremely important.
THB is not easily detected at the borders. Nevertheless, this criminal activity is inescapably
related to the movement of people, including the movement across borders, and thus bordercontrol authorities’ efforts can prove instrumental in combating it. According to information
received from Member States, Brazilians, Chinese, Nigerians, Ukrainians and Vietnamese
remain among the nationalities most commonly detected as victims of human trafficking in
the EU.
A worrying trend is the increasing number of detections of illegal border-crossing of minors
and pregnant women, in particular along the Western Mediterranean route, as criminal groups
take advantage of immigration legislation in Member States preventing the return of these
Page 22 of 142

two groups of migrants. Although it is not clear whether these cases are related to THB,
women and children are clearly among the most vulnerable.
There is an intelligence gap on the possible connections of terrorist groups that are active in
the EU, with irregular-migration networks. The absence of strategic knowledge on this issue
at the EU level may constitute vulnerability for internal security. Knowledge gained at the
external borders can be shared with other law enforcement authorities to contribute to
narrowing this gap.

1.8. Risk based statement on operational mitigation measures needed
including areas concerned
Mitigation Measures

Description of Risk
Area concerned

Risk of large and sustained numbers of illegal border-crossings at the external land and
sea border with Turkey
To maintain the level of operational response Land borders with Turkey and with Western
covering the Ionian Sea;
Balkan countries,
To coordinate and support Member States
return efforts to shorten the time between
Sea borders in the Eastern Mediterranean
detection at the external border and
area.
effective return to countries of origin.
To integrate the operational practices of
EASO with Frontex screening activities;
To reinforce the use of the platform of Focal
Points to strengthen border checks.
Risk of document fraud to circumvent border control measures
Flexible and targeted JO at air and land
Main EU airports with direct connections from
borders coordinating MSs efforts to detect
third countries;
document fraud;
To develop and maintain the situational
Main land border section;
picture of document fraud across the EU and
Sea ports with passengers among the top
Schengen Area borders, to develop indicators ranking nationalities detected for use of
for collecting document data in third
forged documents.
countries;
To use the platform of Focal Points to
strengthen border checks;
Risk of renewed large numbers of illegal border-crossings at the southern maritime border
To focus the relevant maritime JO, including
Sea borders, in particular in the Central
building MS’ surveillance capacity;
Mediterranean area. To a lesser extent the
To continue efforts on return activities;
Western Mediterranean area and the Atlantic
To make available a flexible deployment plan Coast off Western Africa;
to face the sudden arrival of a large number
of migrants;
Risk of border-control authorities faced with large numbers of people in search of
international protection
To provide advice during JO on mechanisms
Sea borders in the entire Mediterranean Sea;
Page 23 of 142

for the respect of Fundamental Rights;
To provide training to Guest Officers on the
Land border with Turkey; Western Balkans;
profiling and identification of people in
search of international protection;
Destination countries;
To implement and test specific modules in JO
focusing on the identification of people in
need of international protection.
Risk of increased facilitation of secondary movements of illegal stayers in the EU
To promote operational effectiveness by
Sea borders in the entire Mediterranean Sea;
processing personal data for analysis and
sharing with Europol once the process and
Land borders with Western Balkan countries;
capacity are established;
To further develop the Pilot Project
Air borders in Greece
Coordination Points where applicable;
To strengthen the use of mobile operational
units and debriefing teams.
Risk of less effective border control due to a changing operational environment
Based on risk analysis, to maintain existing JO Land, air and sea borders
and to implement targeted JO focusing on
assistance to most affected Member States;
To translate the outcomes of R&D activities
into operational activities during JO;
To increase the ability of and attention to
risk analysis as an effective tool to allocate
scarce resources to multiple priorities
Risk of abuse of new legal travel channels to enter and subsequent illegal stay in the EU
To develop activities at the new sections of
Particularly the Air borders, to lesser extent
the external border when Croatia joins the EU Land and Sea borders;
and to further develop Pilot Project
Coordination Points;
To reinforce the Focal Points established at
the Romanian and Bulgarian borders after
their Schengen accession;
Risk of border-control authorities increasingly confronted with cross-border crimes and
travellers with the intent to commit crime or terrorism within the EU
To develop multi-purpose JO at land, sea and All Land borders, in particular Eastern and
air borders;
South Eastern Land borders;
To develop JO at land borders that include
cooperation with Customs;
Sea borders in the Western Mediterranean;
To identify the main BCPs / BCUs used for
outgoing cross-border crime and propose joint
activities;
To use the platform of Focal Points to
strengthen border checks at selected BCPs.
Mitigation measures tackling more than one risk mentioned above and focusing on the
building of capacity at a national level and within the Agency
The entry into effect of the EUROSUR Regulation will enable the Agency
to utilize and further develop the network, and

Page 24 of 142

to develop and test tools and methods for providing the European Situational Picture
(ESP) as well as the Common Pre-frontier Intelligence Picture (CPIP).
To develop and implement common core curricula focusing on harmonizing learning standards
for mid-level and high-level border guard education;
To develop common modular study programmes as a basis for the exchange of border guard
students in both academic and vocational educational frameworks;
To promote the development and implementation of the European Training Scheme in
cooperation with CEPOL;
To share relevant operational information with other border guard/state services and with
relevant European Agencies, both at the national and international level, to increase the
effectiveness and efficiency of border checks at the external border to a comparable level
(Eurosur);
To provide support to MSs in building the EBGT pool(s) and in training the members of the
EBGT pool;
To further develop the EBGT pool (including reviewing, updating and complementing the
information contained) as the sole source for the deployment of border guards to Frontex
coordinated activities;
To analyze the operational needs, as well as the content and availability of the equipment
forming part of the TEP;
To acquire a limited number of technical means for Frontex

The planning for 2013, as expressed in chapter 2.3. was developed around the
implementation measures needed to mitigate the aforementioned risks.
Budgetary restrictions regarding financial and human resources could lead to a
reprioritization for which the parameter as explained in chapter 2.1.2. will be applied.
Consequently, chapter 2.3. already contains a proposed prioritization (shading) of different
groups of initiatives and activities.
With regard to the related operational activities the number of technical equipment and
human resources to be deployed during those activities is to be included in the portfolio of
the Operations Division. During 2012, in preparing the Programme of Work 2013, and until the
Management Board has decided upon the concept and methodology to establish the minimum
numbers of technical equipment, the Annual Bilateral Talks will be used to establish the
hosting MSs contributions and to identify the gaps (required contributions from participating
MS and SACs) for an effective operation (arg: minimum number of technical equipment).

Page 25 of 142

1.9. Financial and Human Resources to pursue Frontex’ Strategy
In implementing Frontex’ Multi-Annual Plan 2013 – 2016 Frontex will pursue a cooperative
approach towards the Member States and other key players in the area covered by the
definition of the integrated management of external borders of the EU Member States 9.
Changes to Frontex’ mandate and the accomplishment of related tasks do not allow for the
application of a zero growth policy regarding financial and human resources. Consequently,
the level of human resources will have to be increased during 2013. Also the increased
number of external partners, and their contributions to the overall budget, offers extended
opportunities to be utilized by Frontex.
Mainly driven by the amended Frontex Regulation, Frontex’ organizational structure will be
revised to utilise synergies. Interim outcomes of the Pilot Project ‘Frontex Operational
Office’, started during 2010, could also feed into structural changes.
In EUR

Budget 2011 N3

DB 2012
N2

DB 2013

I. Subsidy from the European Union
entered in the general budget of the EU
(18 02 03)

111 000 000

84 000 000

79 500 000

II. Contributions from countries associated
with the implementation, application
and development of the Schengen
Acquis10

6 337 000

4 758 000

5 207 100

850 000

820 000

1 000 000

p.m.

p.m.

p.m.

118 187 000

89 578 000

85 707 100

p.m.

p.m.

p.m.

118 187 000 89 578 000

85 707 100

III. Contributions from the UK and Ireland
IV. Any voluntary contribution from the
Member States
TOTAL
V. Earmarked revenue

Table 1: Development of financial resources (2011 - 2013)

9

10

Conclusions of the 2768th Justice and Home Affairs Council held in Brussels on 4-5 December 2006

Based on GNI figures as published by Eurostat on 10 January 2011. The GNI figures are regularly
revised by Eurostat and a final figure will only appear after some years.
Page 26 of 142

Financial Means 2005 - 2013
150
100
Million Euro

APP
AMM
SUM

50
0
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013

Figure 1: Development of financial means (2005-2013)

The financial part of Frontex’ budget decreased. Nevertheless, experiences gained during the
last few years should allow for a more precise assessment of financial needs and an increased
level of utilization.
Commitments
2011
11 – Staff

Payments
2011

Budget 2012
N2

Draft Budget 2013

19 274 245

19 252 000

19 150 000

20 070 000

12 – Recruitment

166 778

141 090

114 000

167 000

13 – Missions

600 000

485 472

500 000

485 000

5 500

781

61 000

64 000

480 371

350 874

725 000

845 000

-

-

-

10 000

20 526 894

20 230 217

20 550 000

21 641 000

Payments
2011

Budget 2012
N2

14 – Socio-medical
infrastructure
15 – Other staff costs
16 – Social welfare
Title 1

Commitments
2011

Draft Budget 2013

20 – Premises

3 887 853

3 737 015

3 805 000

4 766 000

21 – Data processing
&
Telecommunicat
ions

3 478 762

1 631 915

4 117 000

2 400 000

103 261

81 832

80 000

164 100

22 – Movable

Page 27 of 142

property
23 – Current
administrative
expenditure

1 304 474

1 195 244

720 000

668 000

24 – Postal
expenditure

121 304

97 603

100 000

160 000

25 – Non-operational
meetings

748 766

568 046

600 000

600 000

26 – Information &
Transparency

291 561

157 070

655 000

1 000 000

9 935 981

7 468 725

10 077 000

9 758 100

30 462 875

27 698 942

30 627 000

31 399 100

Title 2
Title 1 + Title 2

Table 2: Overview of financial resources allocated to administrative activities (2011 - 2013)

30 – Operations
300 – Land borders
301 – Sea borders
302 – Air borders
305 – Return
31 – Risk Analysis and
Situation centre
310 – Risk Analysis
311 – FSC
32 - Training
33 – Research &
Development
330 – Research &
Development
331 – Eurosur1
34 – Pooled Resources
340 – Pooled
resources
341 – RABIT
deployment
35 - Miscellaneous
350 – Miscellaneous
351 – IT projects
352 – European Day
for Border Guards &

Commitments
2011
73 223 500
10 360 000
48 322 500
2 870 000
11 671 000
2 506 548
1 333 136
1 173 412
5 652 650
2 611987

Payments
Budget 2012
2011
N2
44 346 181
46 993 000
5 695 252
5 800 000
29 023 664
28 750 000
2 109 718
2 200 000
7 517 546
10 243 000
851 879
2 450 000
468
383
2 987
1 228

238
640
767
211

1
1
4
2

400
050
000
340

000
000
000
000

Draft Budget 2013
41 739
9 400
20 550
2 289
10 000
2 825
1
1
4
3

445
380
500
444

000
000
000
000
000
000
000
000
000
000

1 166 987

650 712

1 032 000

1 200 000

1 445 000
451 973
283 348

577 499
371 912
203 286

1 308 000
1 000 000
1 000 000

2 244 000
1 000 000
1 000 000

168 625

168 625

PM

PM

1 509 622
191 340
1 318 282
-

186 371
161 324
25 047
-

000
000
000
000

800 000
150 000
PM
400 000

2 168
268
1 500
400

Page 28 of 142

Commitments
2011
353 - International
Border Police
Title 3

Payments
2011

Budget 2012
N2

Draft Budget 2013
250.000

85 956 281

49 972 320

58 951 000

54 308 000

Table 3: Overview of financial resources allocated to operational activities (2011 - 2013)

The number of human resources will be increased by 2 position. This is a result of the growth
of temporary positions (+10) compensated by a reduction of contract agents (-3) and
seconded national experts (-5).
Types of post

Occupied on
31.12.2011

Temporary Agents - AD
Temporary Agents - AST
Subtotal Establishment
plan
Contract Agents (CA)
Seconded National Experts
(SNE)

2012
Approved by the
Budgetary Authority
87
56

86
55
141
85

Proposal for
2013
97
56

143

153

11

8412

87

78

83

78

304

313

315

Staff
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

TA
CA
AUX
SNE
SUM

m

2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
Figure 2: Development of staff (2005-2013)
11

Early in 2011, because of urgent needs, a decision was made by the Executive Director to hire two
additional Contract Agents.
In May 2011, in relation to the developments in the Mediterranean Region, 6 additional Contract Agents
and 6 additional SNE posts were created.
At the end of 2011 an additional SNE post was established due to the need for strengthening the protection
of the Senior Management.
12 12

Currently it can’t be decided from which entities the three CA positions will be taken. Each renewal of a
CA position, due to be done during 2013, will be used to evaluate the needs of the Agency against the
priorities set to make sure that the reduction of 3 CA position is executed until end of 2013.

Page 29 of 142

Regarding the further development of Eurosur (from the pilot phase to implementation as a
fully fledged operational tool at the national and European level) it must be stated that the
current draft does not foresee additional financial or human resources allocable to execute
the related tasks. At the current time, the legal proposal does not make a reference to the
implications of its implementation (the impact assessment as part of the legal proposal).
Hence, and despite earlier impact assessments, the planning only covers the time until the
finalization of the pilot initiative which is scheduled for autumn 2013

Page 30 of 142

2. FRONTEX’ Key Business Areas and related objectives

2.1. Governance and Prioritization
2.1.1. Performance and Governance Indicators
Performance and governance indicators are used by Frontex’ management to assess and
control the progress made towards the accomplishment of the objectives or goals set for
Frontex activities, and to report to the governing body.
Frontex defines performance indicators as financial or non-financial metrics, used to
quantify objectives to reflect the strategic performance of the organization.
Frontex’ Performance Management System is based on three elements,
PEOPLE contributing to Frontex’ programmes, products, services, and projects;
PROCESSES as sequential steps of activities leading to Frontex’ deliverables and
INFORMATION generated during those processes, the analysis of which allows Frontex
to monitor and control the process towards objective achievement.
Performance indicators enable the management to steer activities towards the achievement
of objectives, some of them feeding into governance indicators that will enable the
Management Board to govern Frontex. Those indicators have been developed in close
cooperation with the Management Board, and are grouped around four topics (Participation,
Effectiveness, Impact and Performance) reflecting the organizations strategic goals
(Development, Situational Awareness, Supporting Response, Emergency Response,
Organization and Staff).
The collection of quantitative and qualitative data during 2011 and 2012 enabled the
identification of targets (values) to be reached during 2013. It has to be understood that the
values of some of the indicators undergo seasonal fluctuations. For those indicators ranges
(minimum and maximum) have been established as targets.
It has to be understood that the design and development of any measurement tool is based on
SMART objectives which will remain unchanged over a certain period of time, hence allowing
benchmarking, the establishment of improvement targets and monitoring. In following this
approach, the objectives for Frontex’ coordinated activities (chapter 2.5.) undergo only
editorial changes.
A detailed description of the indicators used, and the targets set, is attached as Annex 4. In
the further elaboration of the document, mainly in chapter 2.2, only the ID of the indicators
and the figures will be mentioned.

Page 31 of 142

2.1.2. Prioritization - Methodology
End-users and those paying for delivery need to have reasonable expectations and confidence
that the deliverables will satisfy their expectations. During the design phase of Frontex
products and services portfolio, reflected in the Frontex Programme of Work, different
requirements, based on risk analysis and customers’ needs, had to be balanced. It is
understood that expectations can shift as situations develop and threats materialize.
In May 2012 a corporate planning meeting was held with 20 MS, 3 SAC and the COM
participating. Prior to and during the meeting13, information on MSs’ national priorities and
updated preferences, for specific projects, products and services, were collected. This
information, and the outcome of the meeting, in conjunction with ongoing developments, was
used to fine tune the Draft Programme of Work 2013 towards its adoption in September 2012.

Coordination
to
Build Capacity

Within the portfolios and programmes Frontex will continue to prioritize activities.

Short term

Long term

respond to emergent needs

sustain operational presence in areas at
external borders where there is
constant high pressure

maintain the ‘status quo’

maintain core infrastructure for
operational cooperation

It is important to highlight that the terms used in the matrix should not purely be understood
in their operational but also in their capacity building dimension.
The dark shading shows high priorities (critical), medium priorities (urgent) are in medium
grey and low priorities (important) are shaded in light grey. In applying the shading to
deliverables and activities financed from Article 3 (excluding 35-Miscelaneaous) the following
overview was generated:

Priority Level (assigned)

Financial Resources (M Euros)

Human Resources

HIGH – CRITICAL
MEDIUM – URGENT
LOW - IMPORTANT

42.5
10.8
1.0

89
112
4

13

19 Member States and Schengen Associated Countries replied to the questionnaire distributed
Page 32 of 142

2.2. Frontex’ portfolio (operational programming)
The portfolios of the Divisions and Units have been developed during 2012 taking into
consideration developments after the adoption of the preliminary Programme of Work 2013 in
March 2012. As adjustments might be made, driven by possible changes to Frontex’
environment but also due to MSs and SACs requests, the portfolios have been attached as
Annexes 1 – 3, allowing adaptation without the need to change the hosting document.

Page 33 of 142

2.3. Overview of Objectives, Outputs (Projects/Products/Service), Performance Indicators and
Resource Allocation

The following part contains a general description of outputs delivered via products, services and projects that are also referred to 2.4.
To each of the objectives an estimation of the resources (human and financial) needed to achieve the objectives and to deliver the
related products and services will be provided.
As outlined under chapter 2.2., chapter 2.5.was elaborated to counter the threats related to ‘zero growth’ of financial and human
resources with the appropriate mitigation measures aiming for operational efficiency over effectiveness.
It is also important to mention that the applied ‘programming approach’ clusters a number of initiatives (joint operations, pilot
project, products and services provided by entities outside the functional structure of the Operations Division) under programmes. The
overview on initiatives under the programmes and their naming is seen as tentative. During the further elaboration and planning of the
related activities – considering findings of an ongoing risk assessment – changes and reallocations might occur. Those changes will be
reflected in the operational portfolio (Annex 4) which serves as a more detailed operational and tactical plan.
Finally, for the operational part of chapter 2.5. priorities have been assigned following the color code as explained under 2.3.2.

Page 34 of 142

2.3.1. Operations Division

Within the Operations Division and administrative tool (‘centralized reserve’) is implemented. In absence of a budget reserve this reserve consisting of
earmarked amount (on average 10% per unit of the division)
FTE

Division Management

Financial Means

201214

2013

2012 (N3)

2013

3

3

2,050.000

150.000

(10% of units’ budget earmarked)
Joint Operations

(4,470.000)
74

74

42,493.000

41,739.000
(4,200.000)

Risk Analysis

48

49

1,358.660

1,445.000
(140,000)

Frontex Situation Centre

26

27

1,175.000

1,380.000
(130,000)

15115

15316

47,076.660

44,714.000
(4,470.000)

14

Figures on the basis of OPD contribution to SPP 2012-2014

15

The figure on staff members include 4 FISOs not included in the establishment plan

16

The figure on staff members include 4 FISOs not included in the establishment plan
Page 35 of 142

2.3.1.1. Joint Operations Unit
FTE
2012

Financial Means
2013

2012

2013

(including internal
transfers during the
year)
Unit Management

8

8

Land Border Sector

17

17

10,125.000

9,400.000

Sea Border Sector

22

22

20,240,000

20,050.000

Air Border Sector

13

13

2,870.000

2,289.000

Return Operations

14

14

9,243,000

10,000.000

Joint Operations Unit

74

74

42,493.000

41,739.000

+250,000 (transfer from
RAU+PR)

(4,200.000)

Page 36 of 142

POSEIDON PROGRAMME
INDEX

OUTPUT
OBJECTIVES


JOU1

 Enhance operational



cooperation


 Enhance cooperation
with Third Country
diplomatic
representatives





 Enhance security at the
EU external borders






 Enhance efficiency of
border security

High level of MS/SAC participation
in JOs
Enhanced interagency cooperation
and cooperation between national
authorities of host MS
To seek involvement of 3rd countries
in operational activities
Improved positive contact with
diplomatic representations
Enhanced number of diplomatic
representations cooperating
Effective border control at southeastern external borders
maintaining deterrent effects
Improved detection and prevention
of cross border crime
Support given to the national
authorities in disclosing cases of
smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in human beings
Detection of all targets enabling to
intercept persons, to prevent
unauthorized border crossings,
counter other cross-border
criminality and take measures
against persons who have crossed
the border illegally as well as to
report the other illegal activities
observed

PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS

RESOURCES ALLOCATION
(FTE
Euros)
9.0
13,200,000.00
JO Poseidon Land
6,000.000

PA-CTBR_HR (350-800)
PA-CTBR_TE (45-85)
PA-HMS_COMM (10-50)
PA-HMS_REIM (20-80)
PA-PART (20-30)
IM-RES_HR (20-75)
IM-RES_TE (40-95)

East Mediterranean
region (area J, K)
5,000.000
Attica
2,200.000

EFF-ALIGN (parallel)
EFF-AVG-OPDAYS_HR
(98)
EFF-AVG_OPDAYS_TE
(80-85)
EFF-TIME_RESP (-)
EFF-VIGIL (99)
EFF_OP_PLAN_HR (98)
EFF_OP_PLAN_TE (95)

Page 37 of 142




 Enhance capability for
return of illegally staying
Third Country nationals





 Enhance exchange of
information

 Enhance efficiency of
the exchange of
information
 Identify possible risks
and threats






 Establish and exchange
best practices

 Support establishment of
permanent structures
 Support provision of
trainings




Carrying out border checks of all
persons crossing the external
maritime borders including means of
transport and objects in possession
Screening of migrants, contributing
to identification of needs for
international protection, and
facilitate effective return
Effective return of illegal staying
persons
Facilitate cooperation with
diplomatic representations
Collection of operational
information from all actors involved
and persons debriefed in order to
obtain intelligence, thus improving
the risk assessments that underpin
the operational activities
Implementation of fully automated
online reporting system;
Seeking standardized format and
quality of the reports and interviews
Debriefing activities to support
migration management and gaining
intelligence
Fostering practical cooperation
between the authorities involved in
tackling illegal migration and other
cross-border crime
Delivering workshops, briefings,
operational meetings to participants
To continue the fostering
cooperation/information exchange
between MS/SAC NCC/ICC/LCC
Implementation of targeted specific
training activities

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
IM-SAT_LVL (3.5-4.0)

Page 38 of 142

EPN PROGRAMME
INDEX

OUTPUT
- OBJECTIVES

JOU2



 Enhance operational
cooperation






 Enhance security at the
EU external borders






 Enhance efficiency of
border security



High level of MS/SAC participation
in JOs
Enhanced interagency cooperation
and cooperation between national
authorities of host MS
To seek involvement of 3rd
countries in operational activities
Multi-character operational concept
applied to all maritime operations
Contribute to discussions on a coast
guard function at EU level
Effective border control at southeastern external borders
maintaining deterrent effects
Improved detection and prevention
of cross border crime
Support given to the national
authorities in disclosing cases of
smuggling of migrants and
trafficking in human beings
Detection of all targets enabling to
intercept persons, to prevent
unauthorized border crossings,
counter other cross-border
criminality and take measures
against persons who have crossed
the border illegally as well as to
report the other illegal activities
observed
Carrying out border checks of all
persons crossing the external

PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS

RESOURCES ALLOCATION
(FTE
Euros)
14.0
15,050.000
General

PA-CTBR_HR (350-800)
PA-CTBR_TE (45-85)
PA-HMS_COMM (10-50)
PA-HMS_REIM (20-80)
PA-PART (20-30)
EFF-ALIGN (parallel)
EFF-AVG-OPDAYS_HR
(98)
EFF-AVG_OPDAYS_TE
(80-85)
EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)
EFF-TIME_RESP (-)
EFF-VIGIL (99)
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
IM-RES_HR (20-75)
IM-RES_TE (40-95)
IM-SAT_LVL (-)

1,500.000
East Mediterranean
region (area L)
4,000.000
Central Mediterranean
region (area M)
2,000.000
West Mediterranean
region (area N)
5,000.000
West Mediterranean
region (area O)
500.000
Atlantic region (area P)
2,050.000

Page 39 of 142

maritime borders including means of
transport and objects in possession
 Enhance capability for
return of illegally staying
Third Country nationals




 Enhance exchange of
information

 Enhance efficiency of
the exchange of
information
 Identify possible risks
and threats






 Establish and exchange
best practices

 Support establishment of
permanent structures
 Support provision of
trainings
 Develop appropriate
tools to ensure and
increase interoperability




Support given to national authorities
in screening of migrants, thus
improving national repatriation
efforts,
Collection of operational
information from all actors involved
and persons debriefed in order to
obtain intelligence, thus improving
the risk assessments that underpin
the operational activities
Implementation of fully automated
online reporting system;
Seeking standardized format and
quality of the reports and interviews
Debriefing activities to support
migration management and
obtaining intelligence
Fostering practical cooperation
between the authorities involved in
tackling illegal migration and other
cross-border crime
Organizing EPN meetings; Delivering
workshops, briefings, operational
meetings to participants
To continue the fostering
cooperation/information exchange
between MS/SAC NCC/ICC/LCC



Implementation of targeted specific
training activities



Implementation of tailored Pilot
Projects aiming to facilitate
interoperability and flexible
Page 40 of 142

response to illegal migration
phenomena and cross-border crime
PULSAR PROGRAMME
INDEX

OUTPUT
- OBJECTIVES

JOU3

 Enhance border security
at EU external air border
 Enhance operational
cooperation
 Establish and exchange
best practices
 Enhance exchange of
information
 Identify possible risks
and threats





Improved implementation of
flexible actions; certain number of
operational actions tailor made for
improved inter agency cooperation
on EU level and with relevant
International Organizations
Pilot projects for better tackling
illegal migration phenomena

PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS
PA-CTBR_HR (350-800)
PA-HMS_COMM (10-50)
PA-HMS_REIM (20-80)
PA-PART (20-30)

RESOURCES ALLOCATION
(FTE
Euros)
13.0
JO Flexi Force

EFF-ALIGN (parallel)
EFF-AVG-OPDAYS_HR
(98)
EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)
EFF-TIME_RESP (-)

949,000.00

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
IM-RES_HR (20-75)
IM-SAT_LVL (-)
PLUTO PROGRAMME
INDEX

OUTPUT
- OBJECTIVES


JOU4
 Enhance operational
cooperation




 Enhance border security



High level of MS/SAC participation
in JOs
Enhanced interagency cooperation
and cooperation between national
authorities of host MS
To seek involvement of 3rd
countries in operational activities
Effective border control at
external land borders, RA-based

PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS
PA-CTBR_HR (350-800)
PA-CTBR_TE (45-85)
PA-HMS_COMM (10-50)
PA-HMS_REIM (20-80)
PA-PART (20-30)

RESOURCES ALLOCATION
(FTE
Euros)
15.0
400.000
JO Neptun

EFF-ALIGN (parallel)
EFF-AVG-OPDAYS_HR
(98)
EFF-AVG_OPDAYS_TE

200.000
JO Jupiter
200.000
Page 41 of 142



 Enhance efficiency of
border security


 Enhance efficiency of
the exchange of
information






 Identify possible risks
and threats




 Establish and exchange
best practices
 Support establishment of
permanent structures
INDEX




FOCAL POINTS
PROGRAMME

targeted to specific needs related to
specific border sections
Improved detection and prevention
of cross border crime, in particular
facilitated clandestine entering,
victims and criminals of THB,
document fraud crime, other serious
cross-border crime
Strengthened border surveillance at
relevant border sections to decrease
illegal border crossings
Intensified border checks at BCPs
systematic exchange of operational
information
determination of implementation
periods and operational areas based
on RA
operational and analytical
recommendations
debriefing activities to support
migration management and gaining
intelligence (RAU)
Delivering briefings, operational
meetings to participants
sharing of best practices with
neighbored 3rd countries
operational coordination connected
with use of FPs supporting platform

(80-85)
EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)
EFF-TIME_RESP (-)
EFF-VIGIL (99)
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
IM-RES_HR (20-75)
IM-RES_TE (40-95)
IM-SAT_LVL (-)

OUTPUT

PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS

High level of MS/SAC participation
in JOs

PA-CTBR_HR (350-800)
PA-CTBR_TE (45-85)

RESOURCES ALLOCATION
(FTE
Euros)

- OBJECTIVES
JOU5

 Enhance operational
cooperation



9.0

Page 42 of 142





 Enhance border security





 Enhance efficiency of
border security
 Enhance efficiency of
the exchange of
information
 Identify possible risks
and threats





systematic exchange of operational
information



operational and analytical
recommendations
debriefing activities to support
migration management and gaining
intelligence (RAU)
delivering briefings, operational
meetings to participants
sharing of best practices with
neighbored 3rd countries
Temporary or permanent activation
of FPs – serving as multi-purposeplatform according to operational
needs
Structured use of the platform for
strengthening or/and intensifying
border control effectiveness




 Establish and exchange
best practices




 Support establishment of
permanent structures

Enhanced interagency cooperation
and cooperation between national
authorities of host MS
To seek involvement of 3rd
countries in operational activities
Coordinated horizontal interagencycooperation among MSs and with EU
organizations;
Effective border control at
external land borders
Intensified border checks at BCPs
Improved detection and prevention
of cross border crime,
Strengthened border surveillance at
relevant border sections to decrease
illegal border crossings



PA-HMS_COMM (10-50)
PA-HMS_REIM (20-80)
PA-PART (20-30)
EFF-ALIGN (parallel)
EFF-AVG-OPDAYS_HR
(98)
EFF-AVG_OPDAYS_TE
(80-85)
EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)
EFF-TIME_RESP (-)
EFF-VIGIL (99)

4,000,000
JO Focal Points Sea
JO Focal Points Land
3,000.000
JO Focal Points Air
1,000.000

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
IM-RES_HR (20-75)
IM-RES_TE (40-95)
IM-SAT_LVL (-)

Page 43 of 142


 Support provision of
trainings

Increased use of the FP for providing
targeted specific training, sharing of
best practices and improving
interoperability including awareness
for respecting Fundamental Rights

RETURN
INDEX

OUTPUT
- OBJECTIVES

JOU6

Assist MS in organizing
joint return operations
and ensure the
coordination of them

 Assist MSs in organizing joint return
operations by air, land or sea, and
co-financing several out of those
operations;

 Provide pre-return
assistance to MS in the
fields of identification
and acquisition of travel
documents

 Enhance cooperation with Third
Country diplomatic representations



 Enhance MS capability
for return of illegally
staying Third Country
nationals (redundancy
with Poseidon Regional
programme as center of
gravity is there)

 Intensify cooperation with the
competent authorities of the third
countries to identity best practices
on return related topics.
 35 – 45 return operations with
unchanged focus of destination
countries (e.g. South America,
Western Balkan, Asia)

PERFORMANCE
INDICATORS
PA-CTBR_HR (350-800)
PA-HMS_COMM (10-50)
PA-HMS_REIM (20-80)
PA-PART (20-30)

RESOURCES ALLOCATION
(FTE
Euros)
14.0
7,800.000

EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)
EFF-TIME_RESP (-)
(a budget allocation of
2,200.000 is shown under
Poseidon Regional
Programme)
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
IM-SAT_LVL (-)

 Further develop Code of
Conduct to apply during
joint return operations
with focus to increase
common understanding
of respecting
Fundamental Rights
Page 44 of 142

Pilot projects and
conferences

340.000

2.3.1.2. Risk Analysis Unit
FTE

Financial Means

2012

2013

Unit Management ( Project Support and Coordination

4

4

Strategic Analysis and Planning

17

18

Operational Analysis and Evaluation

18

19

FOO Intelligence Component

5

5

4817

4918

Risk Analysis Unit

17

Including FOO Intelligence Component (5 staff : 1 leader, 4 FISOs), 4 FISOs are not included in staff policy plan

18

Including FOO Intelligence Component (5 staff : 1 leader, 4 FISOs) 4 FISOs are not included in staff policy plan

2012

2013

1,400.000

1,445.000

Page 45 of 142

Resources Allocation
Index

Objective

Output & Performance Indicators

(FTE
Euros)

Annual Risk Analysis Report
(ARA 2013) issued in the first
quarter 2013;

3.0
1.0

THB Victims Risk Profiles
update
EFF-EX_CONTR (85)

RAU1

Enabling informed political and operational
decision making by providing strategic
analytical products and related advice to
internal and external stakeholders in a
timely manner.

European Document Fraud
Annual Risk Analysis (EDF ARA)
2013;
4 FRAN Quarterly reports,
reinforced with the
development of intraSchengen indicators;
Tailored Analytical Monitoring
focusing on regions of
concern, and as relevant and
requested (North Africa and
Near East Weekly, Monthly
Post Visa Liberalization
Monitoring Mechanism – if
confirmed by the Commission)

EFF-TIMELINESS (98)

0.4

EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

IM-SAT_LVL (-)

2.4

IM-USG_LVL (3.8-4.2)

0.4

Page 46 of 142

Responding to ad hoc requests
for information and analysis to
inform decision making and
policy development at EU
level

EFF-EX_CONTR (85)
1.0

EFF-EX_CONTR (85)
EFF-TIMELINESS (98)
Analytical contributions to FSC
managed products (briefings,
background notes, Mission
Awareness Reports etc)

EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

0.3

IM-SAT_LVL (-)
IM-USG_LVL (3.8-4.2)
Annual Risk Analysis on
Western Balkans region 2013
(WB- ARA), produced within
the WB-RAN;
Annual Report on Eastern
Borders region 2013 produced
within the EB-RAN;

0.4
EFF-TIMELINESS (98)
EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

0.6

4 WB-RAN Quarterly reports
Frontex contributions to
intelligence products
delivered by other
organizations and partners,
i.e. Europol, EASO, IOM,

0.4

EFF_TIMELINESS (98)

1.0

Page 47 of 142

UNHCR and including the
contribution to the joint
Threat Assessment on the
state of internal security in
the EU (SOCTA and other COSI
products);
Production of the content of
the analysis layer of
EUROSUR;

EFF_TIMELINESS (98)

0.5

EFF_TIME_RESP (-)

11.5

Analytical support to Joint
Operations, Pilot Projects and
RABIT exercises/operations,
including data collection and
analysis on THB, as relevant
through:

RAU2

Enabling informed and targeted
operational response by provision of
operational and tactical analytical
products and related advice to internal and
external stakeholders.

Design of a new type of
operational assessment
supporting the strategic
planning of joint operations
for the following year;

Appropriate Tactical Focused
Assessments supporting the
planning of the operational
activity;

IM_OBJ_ACH (-)
EFF_VIGIL (99)

Regular provision of analytical
reports during Joint
Page 48 of 142

Operations;
Weekly operational briefings
for directorate;
Provision of analytical advice
during meetings/ missions on
Joint Operations, and the
operational area
Analytical contributions to
evaluation reports, during and
after the implementation of
JOs;
Exchange of information and
expertise with the UNHCR and
IOM in the elaboration of
Tactical Focused Assessments
and during the
implementation of relevant
JOs;

RAU3

Achieving higher interoperability and
building capacity in the field of risk
analysis by developing methods, systems,
and procedures.

Management of Frontex Risk
Analysis Network (FRAN) and
European Document Fraud
Network;
Management of FRAN
Helpdesk and EDF Helpdesk to
support Frontex data
collection;

EFF-EX_CONTR (85)

0.4

EFF-TIMELINESS (98)
EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

IM_SAT_LVL (-)

0.4

0.2

Page 49 of 142

Annual evaluation report on
the development of FRAN
information exchange;
EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)
Management of Analysis Layer
User Group;

IM_SAT_LVL (-)

0.2

EFF_COM_VOL
1.0

4 regular Frontex Risk Analysis
Network meetings throughout
2013 ;1 Annual Analytical
Review meeting for the
Frontex Risk Analysis Network;
Up to 3 regular European
Union Travel Document Fraud
network meetings throughout
2013

180.000

EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

70.000

IM_SAT_LVL (-)

2 Risk Analysis Tactical
meetings, with the
participation of relevant third
country experts (USA and
Canada);
Up to 8 Analysis Layer User
Group (ALUG)
meetings/workshops with the
Member States and/or other
stakeholders throughout 2013
to deliver the impact level

0.4

0.4
50.000
EFF-QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

2.3
300.000

IM_SAT_LVL (-)

Page 50 of 142

methodology, validated user
requirements for the CPIP/ESP
Analysis Tools, support
engaging with MS/NCCs on the
collection of EUROSUR
external border sections, and
support engaging NCCs in
satellite imagery services and
products within CONOPS;

EFF_COM_VOL

Up to 8 expert meetings
and/or conferences with the
participation of Member
States, third countries and/or
regional/international
organizations, within the
networks:
Western Balkans

2.8
EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

260.000

Risk Analysis Network
Eastern Borders Risk Analysis
Network

IM_SAT_LVL (-)

Africa Frontex Intelligence
Community
THB Experts
Management of FRONBAC
2012-2014 programme,
including:

1.0
200.000

Page 51 of 142

Roll out of the CIRAM and
Guidelines for risk analysis
units to Member States and
third countries;
Risk analysis specialized
training to MS and Third
Countries collaborating with
Frontex in networks.
Continued development of
special methodologies for the
CIRAM in particular the
methodology and production
system for risk analysis
vulnerability assessment ;
Management of the Western
Balkans Risk Analysis Network
(WB-RAN);
Management of the Eastern
Borders Risk Analysis Network
(EB- RAN);

EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

25.000

IM_SAT_LVL (-)

EFF_EX_CTRB (85)

0.3

EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)
0.3
IM_SAT_LVL (-)

Further development of Africa
Frontex Intelligence
Community (AFIC);
Development of risk analysis
collaboration with Turkey

0.3

0.3

EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

0.2
20.000

Page 52 of 142

Maintenance and development
of analytical tools:
including open source
subscriptions, analytical data
collection/processing tools
and software available for
analysts and relevant
operational users in Frontex
and Member States;

EFF_TIMELINESS (98)
EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

IT- development projects
under RAU leadership to
improve analytical capabilities
within Frontex IT architecture

19

100.000

IM_SAT_LVL (-)
IM_USG_LVL (3.8-4.3)

Continuation of the
development of ESP/CPIP
analysis tools, including the
support for the purchase of
geo data19;
Management of new key
sources of information
including MS Liaison Officers
intelligence reporting, EU
Delegations reporting,
satellite imagery and related
analyses on EU borders.

0.3

1.0

EFF_TIMELINESS (98)
EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

0.5

EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)
IM_SAT_LVL (-)

0.5
60.000

The budget for this project will be contained in the EUROSUR Programme budget
Page 53 of 142

Participation of Frontex at
relevant EU working groups
(WGs Counter–Terrorism ,
False Documents Experts,
Visa) and other fora, including
the required contribution to
the development of the
Internal Security Strategy
from the side of risk analysis
and participation in
EMPACT/illegal migration
action plans and coordination
of activities;

RAU4

Enabling better targeted operational
response by developing and implementing
the systematic collection of human
intelligence for risk analysis.

Training, monitoring of,
feedback on the Debriefing
Teams and management of
intelligence gathering in joint
operations, in line with the
concepts and manuals
developed in IntellOps

Management of Frontex
Intelligence officers seconded
in operational areas20;

EFF_TIMELINESS (98)

EFF_VIGIL (98)

0.4
30.000

2.0
130.000

IM_OBJ_ACH (-)

EFF_VIGIL (98)

IM_OBJ_ACH (-)

1.5

(4.0)

20

The management of the FISOs within the new FOO model (extension) is included under this chapter. However, calculation of FTEs and financial resources required are entirely
dependent on a final decision about the model.
Page 54 of 142

RAU5

Developing Frontex capacity for processing
personal data, as per new Frontex
Regulation.

Further development of
business case for personal
data processing;
Finalization of impact
assessment analysis and
design of new system enabling
personal data processing;

EFF_TIMELINESS (98)

1.0
20.000

2.3.1.3. Frontex Situation Centre
FTE

Financial Means

2012

2013

Unit Management

1

1

Frontex Situation Centre

26

27

2012

2013

1,300.000

1,380.000

Resource Allocation
Index
Goal

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(FTE
Euros)

Page 55 of 142

EFF_TIMELINESS (98)
Development & Product Change
management
FSC 1

Product & change management (for
all FSC systems)

Provide efficient product and
change management

Coordination of change
management process

Continue to further implement the
ESP, CPIP, CONOPS components
together with other relevant
information exchange capabilities.

Operations

FSC 3

Eurosur (ESP/CPIP/CONOPS) and
other Information Exchange &
Situation Monitoring Services
Daily management of Frontex
information exchange and
situational awareness (crisis)
applications

EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

CMS extension

Finalize the development of
information exchange capabilities

Implementation
FSC 2

EUROSUR- JORA link

Establish CPIP/ ESP by
implementation of Frontex Fusion
Components supporting provision of
ESP, CPIP, CONOPS Services

2.0
80.000

EFF_TIMELINESS (98)
EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

5.0

600.000

Continue improvements to JORA
System and SDO Tools application
Maintain CPIP/ESP by extended
Information Exchange & Situation
Monitoring services, including
CONOPS combined services as
defined in service catalogue based
on requests from internal and
external stakeholders via Frontex
Fusion Centre

EFF_TIMELINESS (98)
EFF_QUALITY (3.8-4.2)

20.0
700.000

Maintain regular Information
Exchange & Situation Monitoring
services (e.g. Alerts, SitReps,
Media products, WOB,
Page 56 of 142

Correspondence Management)
Customer support, training and
access management to Frontex
Information Exchange applications
including FOSS, CMS, JORA and FMM
System business administration
and maintenance of all information
exchange systems under FSC
management

Page 57 of 142

2.3.2. Capacity Building Division
FTE
2012
Division Management (Eurosur)

Financial Means
2013

2012

2013

3

3

1,308.000.

2,244.000

Research and Development

15

15

1,032.000

1,200.000

Training Unit

19

19

4,000.000

4,500.000

Pooled Resources

11

11

1,000.000

1,000.000

Capacity Building Division

48

48

7,340.000

8,944.000

Eurosur

2,244.000

2.3.2.1. Research and Development
Index
Goal

Resource Allocation
Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(Euros
FTE)

Border Checks Development Programme
ID check

EFF-QUA (3.84.2)

2.5

Page 58 of 142

Improve capabilities to detect
identity/document fraud and perform
tactical/operational risk assessment in
the first line
Develop a method for assessing and
improving the capacity of MSs to face
upcoming challenges in identity and
document fraud and risk assessment
and disseminate information on these
challenges and potential solutions



Publication of Research Notes on
issues related to the fight against
document and identity fraud in
the first line of control and
automated document inspection
systems



Research study on existing
methodologies and guidelines to
assess operational capabilities,
vulnerabilities
and
countermeasures in countering
identity and document fraud and
risk assessment at the border



Technical
study
on
the
performance
of
existing
automated document inspection
systems



Research study on the impact of
decision support/aids for the
performance of risk assessment
and decision taking by border
guards

Support the work of the EU Document
Fraud Project
Contribute to the identification and
(further) development of best
practices and guidelines with regard to
Automated Border Control (ABC), Visa
Information System (VIS) and checks at
land and air border BCP’s
Development of a concept for
transition from Advance Information to
Advanced Risk Management (ARM)

Advanced Risk Management
 Risk Management Task Group final
report

200.000
IM-SAT_LVL (-)

EFF-QUA (3.84.2)

2.0
85.000

IM-SAT_LVL (-)

 Cooperation with IATA in API Data
Quality group
 Updated API/PNR Best Practices
with contributions from the Risk
Management Task Group and API
Data Quality external group

Page 59 of 142

 Validated API Technical
Architecture
 Test report on API CBA (subject
to interest of a MS)
 Research report on Advance Risk
Management
 ARM Model document
 ARM Roadmap document
Automated
Control (ABC)

Border

 Further update of the
best
practices guidelines on ABC
 capability tools that can be used
by MSs when making decisions to
implement new technologies at
the border developed
 Information dissemination and
validation activities
 Creation of a pool of experts to
validate the BPGs documents
and to provide expertise when
necessary included but not
limited to studies, pilots,
external validation meetings,
development
of
research
methodologies
 Organization of the 2nd Global
ABC Conference
 Organization of the 8th ABC
Workshop
 Study on ABC performance
assessment
in
operational
environment
 Common
Procurement

2.0
200.000

Page 60 of 142

Guidelines for ABC systems
 Graphical ABC roadmap and
accompanying document which
is part of a broader vision of the
border checks of the future
 ABC pilot with a Third Country
and a Virtual Border Pilot
1.5

Visa Information System
(VIS)



CheckBest Practices
Identify and contribute to the
development of best practices
guidelines

70.000

Report on roll-out plans of MS
Best practice guidelines
document including
recommendations as necessary
for improvement/full use of VIS
system
EFF-QUA (3.84.2)

 Updated report on best practices
IM-SAT_LVL (-)
in border checks at land BCPs
 Discussion paper setting out the
legal, practical and national
security implications linked to the
establishment of joint BCPs by MSs
and Third Countries and, if
possible,
proposing
recommendations in this area.
 Discussion paper setting out the
implications of the LBT regime in
relation to VIS checks.
 Discussion paper identifying
capability gaps and particular
areas of interest in relation to air
border checks.
 Creation of a Working Group

1.5
65.000

Page 61 of 142

and/or smaller Task Forces to
work on key theme(s) of interest.
 Inventory outlining the
dimensions of border checks
equipment Human Machine
Interface which are of relevance
to air border checks.
Border Surveillance Development Programme
EFF-QUA (3.8All Eyes: Aerial, Ground and Sea
Boost MS awareness concerning new
4.2)
Surveillance – sensors and Platforms
developments in the field of sensors,
and advanced system solutions
platforms and advanced system
IM-SAT_LVL (-)
solutions
 Aerial Border Surveillance Trial
with
manned
aircraft
with
Catalogue existing practices and
optionally
piloted
aircraft
identify areas where best practices
capability equipped with multicould be developed in relation to
intelligence sensors and report
border surveillance
Examine and validate the detection
capabilities and applicability of the
existing
surveillance
tools
and
technologies
in
an
operational
environment
Facilitate the deployment (try-out) of
new
technologies
for
border
surveillance as pilots in MSs and/or in
the context of JOs organized by
Frontex

3.0
450.000

 Demo of MALE Remotely Piloted
Aircraft (RPA) in an operational
environment and report
 Testing of integrated mobile land
surveillance equipment during a
JO and report
 Creation of a Working Group and
development
of
minimum
technical requirements and/or
guidelines on integrated mobile
land surveillance system
 Workshop on Persistent Wide
Border Area Surveillance and
Page 62 of 142

report
 Outsourced study on advanced
technological
integration
for
solutions
for
under
foliage
detection and their potential
impact on border surveillance
 Elaborated CONOPS for detecting
& tracking of small boats
Border Security Research Bridge
Co-ordinate and enhance the direct
involvement of the Border Guard
community in planning research
activities and shaping mid- and longterm research agenda in the domain of
border control
Improve communication and
information exchange
capabilities/channels for bringing
together all stakeholders involved in
border security research

 Creation of a Frontex Advisory
Board on Border Security Research

2.5
130.000

 Development of the first mid- and
long-term border security
research agenda, including topics
for EU FP7
 Organization of a Workshop on
Innovation in Border Control
(WIBC 2013) and report
 Organization of first edition of the
Technology Showroom and report
 Enhanced version of
BorderTechNet and evaluation of
the enhanced version of
BorderTechNet and
recommendations on its further
evolution

Page 63 of 142

1.3.2.1.1.

EUROSUR
Resource Allocation

Index

Objective

Goal

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(Euros
FTE)

Network extended to all MSs and
possibly some other EU actors (i.e.
DG HOME + EUROPOL + EMSA + EUSC
+ MAOC-N);
To establish an information sharing
and cooperation mechanism enabling
Member State authorities carrying out
border surveillance activities and
Frontex to collaborate at tactical,
operational and strategic levels

The nodes of the network are
hardened ensuring reliability of the
system;

EFF-QUA (3.84.2)

Network security increased (enabling
exchange of EU restricted
information);

IM-SAT_LVL (-)

2,244.00021

Framework contract ensuring third
level support to the network,
including system evolution in place

2.3.2.2. Training Unit
FTE
2012

21

Financial Means
2013

2012

2012

Based on the evolution and development of activities, possible savings will be used to cover financial gaps of other Eurosur projects.
Page 64 of 142

Training Unit

19

19

4,000.000

4,500.000

The work carried out is done in close cooperation with MSs and SACs, other Agencies (e.g. CEPOL, FRA) within the framework of the
ETS and NGOs (e.g. UNHCR) this ensure complementarities and avoid overlaps with trainings offered by other institutions (e.g. CEPOL).
Resource Allocation
Index
Goal

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(FTE
Euros)

Border Guard Career-Path Education / common standards for border guards education and basic training programme
TRU1

To develop and implement common
standards for the harmonisation of the
European Border Guard Officers
education within all stages of their
career: basic level, mid-level and high
level;
To contribute to the ETS regarding the
development and implementation for law
enforcement officers wit Border Guard
function

Common Core Curriculum for
EU Border Guard Basic Training
(CCC)


Continued
support
and
assistance to MS/SAC for the
implementation
of
the
updated CCC;



CCC
implementation
in
Frontex Partner Countries second phase;



Implementation of common
training materials including
an e-learning component;



Teachers’ mobility/exchange
programme enhancing the
role
of
the
Frontex
Partnership Academies;

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

1.5
280.000

Page 65 of 142



Erasmus-like
student
exchange programme:



Implementation (and further
enhancements)
of
the
Schengen
Border
Code
eLearning tools at various
levels.

Common
Core
Learning
Standards (CCLS) for EU Midlevel Border Guards


Review the Common Core
Learning Standards for EU
Mid level BG officers to
ensure alignment with the
Sectoral
Qualifications
Framework
for
Border
Guarding level 6 and Bologna
/
Copenhagen
quality
assurance principles



Develop
a
modular
programme structure for the
CCLS,
designed
to
be
integrated as a curriculum
guideline and / or as a full
award structure
for SQF
level
6
border
guard
education



Develop an European module
designed to be delivered in a
collaborative framework as a
student / teacher exchange
component at EU level

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

1.3
600.000

Page 66 of 142

Joint Degree Study Programme:
European Masters in Border
Security and Cooperation












EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

Consortium
Agreement
Signed, programme policies
finalized
and
agreed,
programme
and
award
structure
finalized
and
agreed
EU Joint Accreditation of
the programme successfully
concluded
Common Curriculum for the
certificates
(streams)
developed , teaching /
assessment
methodologies
designed
Programme administration
flow set up
Expert
boards
members
identified and engaged in
the process
High
Level
Governance
Board decision on the first
iteration of the programme
Application
launched,
screening and assessment of
fulfillment
of
entry
requirements
completed,
pool of suitable candidates
established
Arrangements for the first
iteration of the programme
carried out

Page 67 of 142

Educational Standards in line
with
Bologna/Copenhagen
principles – follow up and
support for the integration of
the SQF for BG at EU and
national level





EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

Workshops in Course Design
in line with the SQF and
Bologna/Copenhagen
principles
Translators workshops for
the SQF for BG
Quality assurance of training
products

Frontex Courses for Mid-level
and High-level Border Guard
Officers
 2 MLC courses

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)

1.3

IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

350.000

Common Standards for Further Training and Specialisation of Border Guards
TRU2

To develop and implement common
standards for the further training of
European Border Guards in various
specialized fields of work.
To contribute to the ETS regarding the
development and implementation of
training standards for law enforcement
officers with Border Guard function
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES

False
Documents
Detection
Continued
support
and
assistance to MS/SAC for the
implementation of specific
training tools:
 “Falsified Documents
Roadshow”
 Advanced Level Training Tool
for Detection of Falsified
Documents

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

1.2
330.000

Page 68 of 142

Reflecting all programme components,
the specific objectives are:
 to
contribute
to
increasing
interoperability of the European
border guard joint activities and
operations;
 to enhance BG skills and
competencies in the fight against
cross-border criminality;
 to strengthen capacities to
combat illegal immigration;
 to enhance the effectiveness of
border control operations;




Basic Level Training Tool for
Detection of Falsified
Documents
Consular Staff Training

development of a ,, Specialist
Course for the Detection of
Falsified Documents - level II”
training
Stolen Vehicles Detection


Continued
support
and
assistance to MS/SAC for
the
implementation
of
specific
training
tools:“Training Tool for the
Detection
of
Stolen
Vehicles: ADESVET - ENTRY
LEVEL” and “Training Tool
for the Detection of Stolen
Vehicles:
ADESVET
ADVANCED LEVEL”

Further development of specific
training tool focused on the
detection of stolen vessels
Anti-Trafficking in Human
Beings

 Continued support and

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)

1.2

IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
IM-SAT (-)

200.000

1.2
170.000

assistance to MS/SAC
for
the
implementation
of
specific THB training
tool

Page 69 of 142

Air-crew training
Priority is given to the support
to
MS/SAC
for
the
implementation of the common
training manual, by way of
multiplier trainings and set up
of a pool of Frontex trainer to
support the delivery of national
training activities.

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
IM-SAT (-)

1.2
430.000

standardized training
activities provided






“Multiplier Training“
activities
for
the
implementation
of
“Common
Standards
Manual for Air Crew
Training”
Standardized
Resources
and
Coordination training:
“Crew
Resource
Management (CRM)” –
“Crew
Resource
Management
(CRM)”
and
“Air-Sea
Coordination Training”
courses
Standardized Survival
Trainings
“Mountainous Survival
Training” and “Sea
Survival
Training”
Page 70 of 142



courses
Standardized trainings
for
Technical
Equipment -“Forward
Looking Infrared (FLIR)
Operator
Training”
and
“Night
Vision
Goggle
Training
(NVG)” courses

Exchange programme implementation of 2 weeks
“Crew Exchange” exchange
programme
Development of Training for
EUBG Canine Teams and
“Common Training
Standards for EUBG Dog
Handlers”




EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

1.2
280.000

Provision of a wide
range
of
training
standards
and
products aimed to
support the future
certification of EUBG
dog handlers- “Basic
Training
Tool”,
“Common
Training
Standards for EUBG
Dog Handlers” and
“Specialized Training
Tools for EUBG Dog
Handlers” courses
Implementation
of
Page 71 of 142

standards developed
for dog training
Training for Schengen
Evaluators (Scheval Training)
 Standardized training
activities provided ,,Basic Course for
Schengen Evaluators”
and ,,Course for
Leading Experts”
 Implementation of a
mechanism to evaluate
conformity with FR
provisions with support
of FRA.
A Fundamental Rights
Manual
 implementation of
activities in order to
provide the trainers in
the MS/SAC with the upto-date training
methodology specifically
tailored to increase the
knowledge and skills of
border guard officers in
the field of fundamental
rights (including data
protection) and
international protection
“Common Manual for Joint
Common Standards for
Escort Officers in Joint
Return flights
 implementation of the
developed curriculum

1.2
IM-SAT (-)
180.000

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)

1.2

IM-SAT (-)

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

180.000

1.2
200.000

Page 72 of 142

 qualification of
multipliers for the
implementation of
training standards
through national training
activities
“English language Training
 Continued support and
assistance to MS/SAC
for the
implementation of
specific training tools :
“English language
Training for
Practitioners/Languag
e Instructors” and
“The Training for
Practitioners/Languag
e Instructors at the
airports: basic and
advanced level”
courses
 further development
of the specific training
tools
Training for EBGT Members




standardized training
activities:
‘EBGT
induction training”,
EBGT seminar” and
“EBGT course”
Specialized trainings
on defined profiles
for
EBGT
pool

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)

1.2

IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
IM-SAT (-)
IM-USG (98)

230.000

2.0
550.000

Page 73 of 142



members
start-up
of
development
of
training on relevant
maritime law for BG
officers

Pre-deployment briefing for
Focal Points experts

0.5
150.000

Networking and cooperation with stakeholders programme
TRU3

National Training Coordinators
To ensure adequate implementation of
(NTC)
Frontex
Regulation
in
terms
of
 2 conferences to be
cooperation with Member States/SAC and
organized
partner countries following the orientation
Frontex Partnership Academies
set by the Stockholm Programme and the
(PA)
implementation of the related European
 2 conferences to be
Training Scheme (ETS).
organized

2.2
IM-SAT (-)
370.000

Frontex Virtual AulaActivities for further
development of the V-Aula
system
Expert boards meetings
participation
Working group meetings with
EU agencies (and common
events)

Page 74 of 142

2.3.2.3. Pooled Resources Unit
FTE

Pooled Resources

2012

2013

2012

2013

11

11

1,000,000

1,000.000

Resource Allocation

Index
Goal

Financial Means

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(Euros
FTE)

PROJECTS
PRU1
Development
and
Management of
the EBGT pool

To enhance the operational
response capacity of Frontex by
establishing and managing of a
high quality human resources
pool, in line with the strategic
goals of the Agency

 To manage and administrate PA_POOL_UTL_HR
the EBGT Pool by regular (40)
meetings
with
the
pool PA_POOL_HR (40)
members during the training
activities organised by Frontex,
taking part in the national
selection
procedures
and
exchange of information with
the internal and external
stakeholders ;
 To make use of OPERA
application with regard to the
nomination and deployment
process;
 To provide efficient support to
the MS/SACs in all the matters
related to the EBGT Pool in
order to ensure its proper

1.5
50.000

Page 75 of 142

functioning;
 To fully implement and
evaluate the SGO mechanism;
 To evaluate and assess the
operational usefulness of the
current profiles as adopted by
the Management Board (MB
decision 11/2012 of 23 May
2012)
PRU 2
Development
and
management of
the Technical
Equipment Pool
(TEP)

To enhance Frontex operational
capacity by maintaining a high
quality TEP and to manage the
deployment of resources from
the pool.

 To maintain the TEP data base; PA_POOL_UTL_TE
 To manage the deployment of EFF_OP_PLAN_TE(90)

1,5

PRU 3
Pilot Project on
lease of a
service for
border
surveillance

To lease a limited service for
border surveillance for limited
period of time and for a specific
operation.

 To

1.5

the equipment from the TEP by
using of OPERA application;
 To maintain high level of
availability of the equipment
from the pool by regular
communication
with
the
contributing MSs;
 To
implement
Frontex
reporting obligations as regard
of the deployed technical
equipment
and
the
MS
contributions to the TEP.

build on Frontex own EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
operational capacity;
 To prove the cost efficiency of
leasing
of
surveillance
equipment;
 To establish the basis for
further
acquisition
of
surveillance
equipment
or
surveillance services.

300 000

Page 76 of 142

PRU 4
OPERA stage III

To provide an upgraded
software application for the
development of pools of human
resources and technical
equipment and to manage the
deployment of resources from
these pools

 To

upgrade
the
OPERA EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
application
through
the
introduction of improvements
resulting for the testing and
using of OPERA v 1.0;
 To
introduce
additional
functionalities
to
OPERA
resulting
from
the
requirements of the amended
Frontex Regulation;
 To provide training manuals
and workshops to Member State
and Frontex users.

1.5

PRU 5
Rapid
intervention
exercise (REX)

To test the functioning of the
rapid intervention mechanism
as part of Frontex’ legal
obligation to establish
capability for adequate reaction
to sudden unexpected massive
migration flows in the
circumstances close to the real
operation.

 To

1.0

organise a full scale EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
exercise for a limited period in
a specific area and within the
frame of a specific joint
operation;
 To test and improve the
capability
of
Frontex
to
properly
coordinate
rapid
deployment;
 To test and improve the
capability of the MSs to react
adequately to an urgent call for
rapid intervention
 To test the applicability of
OPERA
system
for
rapid
deployment purposes;
 To organise a table top
exercise in order to increase
the readiness of both Frontex
and the MSs for
rapid

150 000

100 000

Page 77 of 142

intervention missions.

PRU 6
Annual Bilateral
Talks

To negotiate and agree the
contributions of each Member
State to the planned Frontex
operations during 2014.

 Identification of a common EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)

1.5

PRU 7
Development of
the business
processes within
PRU and related
documents

To identify and describe
 To establish document base EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
business processes within PRU
giving any information needed
related to the core tasks
in order PRU and non-PRU staff
including management of pools
to perform the assigned tasks,
and develop relevant documents
subsequent
to
the
(templates, SOPs and business
implementation
of
the
processes)
outputs/outcomes foreseen by
the PRU-led projects;
 Enhance
the
level
of
consistency
covering
the
activities performed by the
unit and by other internal

1.0

150 000

template for both Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs)
and Guidelines covering all
projects in PRU
 Development of management
documents for all projects in
PRU in close conjunction with
LEG and Quality Management
 Seeking endorsement of the
documents by the relevant
internal
stakeholders
and
preparation of subsequent ED
Decisions, in accordance with
the Agency’s QM Strategy

15 000

Page 78 of 142

stakeholders
 Provide a good level of detail
regarding the activities which
are regularly performed by the
organization, when dealing
with
human
/
technical
resources;
 Discourage the tendency of
developing parallel working
processes
 Promote quality throughout
consistency
Business as usual
Pooled
Resources
Network (PRN)
Pooled
Resources
Network (PRN)

The network is the main tool  To exchange information with EFF-QUA (3.8-4.2)
used by PRU to communicate
the MS’ about the activities
information regarding its future
implemented by PRU;
plans and ongoing activities to  To get the MS’ feedback about
the
Member
States
and
the effectiveness of the
Schengen Associated Countries.
implemented activities;
The feedback of the Member  To use the meetings as a
States is important as it
platform for discussion of
provides information on the
important issues and drafting
effectiveness of the activities
of any kind of documents
carried out by PRU and Frontex
related to the pools.
and provides the opportunity to
monitor the numbers in the
pools.

1.5
235.000

Page 79 of 142

2.3.3. Administration Division
FTE

Financial Means

2012

2013

2012

2013

Division Management

3

3

---

---

Human Resources and Services Unit

40

40

---

---

Information
and
Technology Unit

23

24

2,000.000

2,400.000

Finance and Procurement Unit

19

19

---

---

Legal Affairs Unit

5

5

---

---

90

91

2,000.000

2.400.000

Communications

Administration Division

2.3.3.1. Human Resources and Services Unit
FTE

Financial Means

2012

2013

2012

2013

Human Resources and Services
Management

2

2

---

---

Human Resources

14

14

---

---

Page 80 of 142

Agency Services

11

11

---

---

Security

13

13

---

---

Human Resources and Services Unit

40

40

Resource Allocation
Index

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(FTE
Euros)

HR1

HR2

HR3

HR4

To implement the new system of
appraisal and reclassification

New system in place
(implementing rules)

To increase the efficiency of the
recruitment processes in Frontex

Recruitment and selection
process run in a reasonable time

To recruit and replace staff in relation
to the establishment plan and ED
decisions

The replacement of SNE and
Frontex staff, placement of new
selected staff in the right time

To improve the payroll related processes

Payroll system done in a correct
way

3.0

EFF-QUALITY (3.94.2)
EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

4.0

3.0

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
4.0

Page 81 of 142

AS1

AS2

AS3

AS4

Based on results of tendering process for
office space for Frontex HQs –
implement the necessary actions with
the view to safeguarding of premises in
2014 and onwards

To ensure uninterrupted
functioning of Frontex in 2014
and years beyond

To provide front line service to
guarantee uninterrupted operation of
the Agency

Smooth and uninterrupted
functioning of the Agency

To provide services in the field of facility
management and logistics

Uninterrupted operation of the
premises and delivery of
logistical services

To provide services in the area of Agency
Services in order to ensure the
functioning of the Frontex’ operational
office(s) as well as Frontex Liaison Office
in Brussels

SS1

To draft and implement Frontex Security
Manual and the related security policies
and procedures in line with the EU
regulations an best practices

1.022
EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

6.0

IM-SAT_LVL (-)
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

3.023

IM-SAT_LVL (-)
1.0

Smooth operation of the Frontex’
operational office

IM-SAT_LVL (-)

Frontex security regulations in
line with the EU standards and
Frontex needs

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

0.5

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

22

Resources for project include 6 external consultants (.2 -.5 FTE) and 6 internal cross-divisional staff (.2 FTEs) over the period of the
project 2011-2014)
23

1 TA AST 4 transferred to FOO 2010
Page 82 of 142

SS2

SS3

SS4

SS5

To protect Frontex activities, assets
information and personnel

Frontex operates in a secure
environment in line with the
regulations

To ensure that classified information is
handled according to the standards. To
raise staff awareness on the matter

Handling of classified
information compliant with the
security regulations

To ensure that all security aspects have
been taken into account and planned for
implementation for the new Frontex
premises

New Frontex premises compliant
with security standards

To ensure the security of Frontex
Specialized Branches on a continuous
basis

Specialized Branches operate in
adequate security environment

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

11.0

IM-SAT_LVL (-)
1.0
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
0.25
EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
0.25

2.3.3.2. Finance and Procurement
FTE

Financial Means

2012

2013

2012

2013

Unit’s Management

2

2

---

---

Finance

9

9

---

---

Procurement

6

6

---

---

Accounting

2

2

---

---

Page 83 of 142

Finance and Procurement

19

19

---

---

Resource Allocation
Index

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(FTE
Euros)

FIN1

FIN2

FIN3

FIN4

To maintain and further develop tailored
financial management process including
committing, validating, accounting,
reimbursing, financial controlling
To ensure correct and efficient
application of procurement procedures
and provision of related advice

To keep and present the accounts in
accordance with Title VII of the Financial
Regulation and devise and validate
Frontex accounting system

Treasury management

 Creation of a manual covering
all main processes undertaken
in the Finance & Procurement
Unit


Roll out of an integrated
electronic system to
streamline the processes

 The revenue ledger and
general ledger system are
maintained and contain
updated data;
 Implementing the accounting
rules and methods and the
chart of accounts in
accordance with the
provisions adopted by the
European Commission’s
Accounting Officer;
 To implement payments and
collect revenue, following up
on debit notes, VAT and

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

10.4

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

6.5

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)
1.1
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

1.0

Page 84 of 142

recovery orders;
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

2.3.3.2. Information and Communication Technology Unit
FTE

Financial Means

2012

2013

2012

2013

Unit’s Management

3

3

ICT Activities

20

21

2,000,000

2.400,000

Total

23

24

2,000.000

2.400,00024

Resource
Allocation
Index

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(FTE
Euros)

To maintain the performance and
availability of ICT services

ICT1

24

EFF-QUALITY (3.84.25
Meeting SLA/ELSA requirements 4.2)
agreed with business units
EFF-TIMELINESS (98)

1,700,000

400,000 added for Telecommunications costs
Page 85 of 142

Less than 3 requests per week
7.25
To provide ICT end-user support for not acknowledged
EFF-TIMELINESS (98)
Frontex staff and other Frontex
End user satisfaction for Help IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
business applications users
Desk support,

ICT2

To provide support to ICT-enabled
projects25

ICT3

Each IT Enabled Project
supported by ICT Unit up to
agreed scope

255,000

3.2
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

235,000

Consistent use of ICT PM Toolkit

To manage the unit and adapt relevant
ICT best practices in the Frontex
environment

ICT4

Implement best practices in the
following
areas:
change
management, standard operating IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
procedures,
service
level
management

To sign and manage SLAs and
To manage the contracts and prepare delivery contracts with external
the tenders to acquire ICT products and contractors
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
related services.
To prepare and conduct tenders

ICT5

2.95
100,000

1.75

for ICT services and products
EFF-QUALITY (3.81.7
To provide technical support for the Provide limited support to Eurosur 4.2)
26
Eurosur network
Technical Office network
EFF-TIMELINESS (98)

ICT6

25

ICT enabled projects (2010-2012) are cited under the respective business unit. On-going technical and maintenance support provided by ICT.

26

Limited support envisioned within the available resources
Page 86 of 142

ICT7

ICT8

ICT9

Provide ICT contributions to relocation Plan
of
ICT
support
to the new premises
relocations of the HQs

Extend technical
technology

support

to

Apple

To ensure INFOSEC security in Frontex

EFF-QUALITY (3.8for 4.2)

0.9

EFF-TIMELINESS (98)

EFF-QUALITY (3.8Achieve readiness to provision of
0.5
operational support for Apple 4.2)
technologies
EFF-TIMELINESS (98)
1.5

Less than 3 ICT Security
incidents/year impacting on data

110,000

2.3.3.3. Legal Affairs Unit
FTE

Legal Affairs

Financial Means

2012

2013

2012

2013

5

5

---

---

Resource
Allocation
Index

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(FTE
Euros)

Page 87 of 142

LEG1

To further elaborate and consolidate
the capabilities to provide legal
counseling to internal and external
stakeholders on all Frontex related
issues;

To defend the interests of Frontex in
legal proceedings

Legal advices ready for decision
making;

1.0

Decisions with regard to Frontex’
positions in litigations or in the
elaboration of legal instruments
of all kind;

1.0

Legal advices ready for decision
making;
LEG2

To provide comprehensive legal
decisions and advice in a timely
manner;

Decisions with regard to Frontex’
positions in litigations or in the
elaboration of legal instruments
of all kind;

EFF-QUALITY (3.84.2)
EFF-TIMELINESS (98)
2.0
1.0

Page 88 of 142

2.3.4. Directorate and Executive Support
FTE

Financial Means

2012

2013

2012

2013

Senior Management

2

2

---

---

Executive Support

9

9

---

---

External Relations

9

10

---

---

Planning and Controlling

2

2

---

---

Quality Management

2

2

---

---

Information and Transparency

8

8

655.000

1,650.000

32

33

655.000

1,650.00027

2.3.4.1. External Relations
Resource
Allocation
Index

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators
(FTEs
Euros)

27

Page 89 of 142

RELEX 1
The overall objective is to develop the cooperation in relation to Third Countries.

REL1.1

To maintain and develop the existing
Frontex’ Relex network with a view to
building on achievements to date and
improving its accessibility, reliability
and effectiveness leading to increased
facilitation of the role of Frontex in
the external dimension of border
security management as well as
promoting operational and other forms
of cooperation with third countries in
line with the EU External Relations
Policy.

1) Maintaining and expanding the
network with external partners
being competent authorities of
third countries responsible for
border security management

IM-USG_LVL (3.84.2)

1.1

2) Continuing developing contacts
and cooperation with the
international departments of the
authorities of the MS/SAC in line
with Art. 2 of the Regulation and
Art. 16.3. of the SBC as well as
with EU institutions as regards
Relex issues

IM-USG_LVL (3.84.2)

0.3

3) Contributing to initiatives
within the framework of the
Global Approach to Migration and
Mobility.

PA-PART (20-30)

0.5

4) Developing and supporting
Frontex’ role in bringing forward
the IBPC, by facilitating third
country aspects of the Conference

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

0.3

Page 90 of 142

REL1.2

REL1.3

To develop strategies, prepare and
possibly launch the implementation of
the new assigned tasks in the area of
cooperation with third countries.

To develop cooperation between
Frontex and competent authorities of
third countries in the framework of
working arrangements, facilitation of
EU Member States’ activities involving
operational cooperation with third
countries, development of cooperation
with relevant international
organizations related to their
activities in third countries as well as
overseeing an integrated
implementation of Frontex’
operational cooperation regarding
third countries

Further preparatory work and
developing strategies for Frontex
approach towards the deployment
of Liaison Officers carrying as well
as to carry out Technical
Assistance to third countries.

0.8

1) Involvement of candidate and
potential candidate third countries
in 7 Frontex joint activities each,
and focusing on the preparation
PA-PART (20-30)
regarding full integration in
Frontex work of the relevant
Croatian authorities, as of the
date of accession to the EU.

0.3

2) Based on other partnerships,
the involvement of third countries
in 3 Frontex joint activities each.

PA-PART (20-30)

0.4

3) Conclusion of working
arrangement between Frontex and
the competent authorities of 1
country in the
Mediterranean/West African
region

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

0.4

Page 91 of 142

4) Involvement of Regional
Cooperation Initiatives (e.g.
MARRI, MTM, EULEX, EUBAM, CIS)
in at least 1 Frontex joint activity
each

PA-PART (20-30)

0.4

PA-PART (20-30)
5) Effective implementation of
existing cooperation plans
between Frontex and third country IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
authorities
IM-USG_LVL (3.84.2)

0.4

6) Renewal of existing cooperation
plans due to termination; the
conclusion of two additional
cooperation plans

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

0.4

7) Facilitating the activities of (at
least) 2 EU Member States as
regards their implementation of
operational cooperation with third
countries

PA-PART (20-30)

0.3

Page 92 of 142

8) Based on existing working
arrangements, providing impetus
to the coordination of cooperation
with the work of relevant regional
initiatives and international
organizations in the field of border
security cooperation in or with
third countries

PA-PART (20-30)

0.4

Resource
Allocation
Index

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators
(FTEs
Euros)
RELEX 2

To enhance and further develop the cooperation with Third Organisations and other Agencies as essential component of the EU
IBM Concept;

REL2.1

Implement the Stockholm
Programme, the EU /EC Internal
Security Strategies and the EU Action
on Migratory Pressures - a Strategic
Response focusing inter alia on the
cooperation between JHA Agencies.

Upgrading the existing WA with
Europol into an operational one
and developing a WA with Eurojust
enabling also the future
transmission of personal data.

Implement the EU Policy Cycle
including the 2-Year Strategies (20122013) and related Operational Action

Strengthen the cooperation
mechanism with customs.

PA-PART (20-30)
1.0
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

Page 93 of 142

Plans on THB, irregular migration and
Western Balkans.
Strengthen ties between Internal and
External Security actors.

REL2.2

REL2.3

REL2.4

Fight against trafficking (THB) and
smuggling of human beings as one of
the main priorities set by the Council
in the Stockholm Programme and in
the Priorities in the fight against
organised crime 2011-2013.

Closer cooperation with CEPOL as
regards capacity building for law
enforcement.
Closer collaboration with external
actors: EEAS CSDP missions (e.g.
EULEX), International
Organisations (e.g. Interpol,
UNODC).
Closer cooperation with EC (EU
Anti Trafficking Coordinator) and
JHA Agencies for the
implementation of the JHA
Agencies THB Declaration and the
new EU Strategy on THB.

PA-PART (20-30)
1.0

Enhanced cooperation with
International Organisations for
implementing joint operational,
capacity building or promotional
activities in the field of THB.

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

Address mixed migratory flows
safeguarding international protection
obligations and fundamental rights
including the implementation of
Frontex Fundamental Rights Strategy.

Conclude and follow up with the
working arrangement with EASO
and further enhance cooperation
with FRA, IOM and UNHCR.

PA-PART (20-30)

Implement Eurosur, in particular the
development and operation of
surveillance tools following GMES
Concept for Operations (CONOPS) in
cooperation with other EU Agencies.

provide support to the conclusion
of the SLAs with EUSC and EMSA
for the provision of services within
Eurosur for Frontex and MS.

0.5
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

0,5

Page 94 of 142

REL2.5

REL2.6

REL2.7

Implement the EU Integrated
Maritime Policy focusing on interagency cooperation in the field of
maritime surveillance and
development of CISE (Common
Information Sharing Environment) and
European Coast Guard Function.
Participate in the implementation of
the EU Information Management
Strategy for law enforcement.

Support to EU Crisis Management
Response

Establish closer cooperation with
EU (EMSA, EFCA) and National
Maritime Agencies; e.g. Coast
Guards and their parental DGs.

Establish good collaboration with
key actors EC (DG HOME), Council
WG (DAPIX), Europol.
Establish cooperation
arrangements in the field with EC
(DG HOME), EEAS (SitCen) and
relevant EU Agencies (e.g. ECDC)

PA-PART (20-30)
0,4
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
PA-PART (20-30)
0.3
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
EFF-TIMLINESS (98)
0.3
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

2.3.4.2. Planning and Controlling28
Resource Allocation
Index

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(FTE
Euros)

28

The resource of 3 Admin Assistant is shared between the Internal Audit, Planning and Controlling and the Quality Management function
Page 95 of 142

CTL1

To identify and assess internal and
external factors affecting the mid- and
long-term development of Frontex,
enabling informed decision making by
Frontex’ management;

To provide quarterly assessments
to Frontex’ senior management
and members of the Management
Board;

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)
0.3
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

Multi Annual Plan 2014 – 2017

CTL2

CTL3

To execute the Strategic Change
(Management) Cycle facilitating the
strategic management process
(planning, organizing, directing and
controlling of organizational
performance);

To apply Frontex’ Performance
Management System and roll out of
elements of management tool box;

Annual Programme of Work 2014;

0.1

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

Budget 2014;
Annual Operational Plan

0.3
0.1

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

0.1

Frontex Report of Authorizing
Officer - AAR 2012;

0.1

Yearly Risk Monitor;

0.1
EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

0.2

Monthly briefings on Performance EFF-TIMELINESS
issues;
(98)

0.3

Quarterly Evaluation Reports;

Page 96 of 142

CTL4

To manage assigned
change/organizational development
initiatives

Business Continuity Strategy
based on Impact Assessments;
Business Continuity Plans at
corporate and divisional level;

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

0.4

2.3.4.3. Quality Management29
Resource Allocation
Index
Goal

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators

(FTE
Euros)

QM 1

To improve the quality management
practices in Frontex

Identify QM actions (short-term
& Systemic) that would
facilitate achievement of
Frontex objectives & support
the implementation of selected
actions
Assess the current state of play
of QM in at least one Division &
identify actions that would
improve QM & achievement of

29

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
IM-USG_LVL (3.84.2)

0.1

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

0.2

The resource of 3 Admin Assistant is shared between the Internal Audit, Planning and Controlling, and Quality Management function
Page 97 of 142

objectives

QM 2

Design & implement a more
robust risk management
tool/methodologies to support
achievement of Frontex
To improve the quality of organizational objectives
risk management in Frontex
Increased monitoring &
response to identified risks

QM 3

QM 4

To identify the main organizational
risks of Frontex (internal & external)

To improve the implementation of
action plans

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
IM-USG_LVL (3.84.2)

0.2

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
IM-USG_LVL (3.84.2)

0.2

To identify the main
organizational risks of Frontex
(internal & external)

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

0.2

Provide input into relevant
Frontex processes for which a
risk assessment is critical, e.g.
PoW; quality assessments

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

0.2

Assessment of the internal
control system and actions
required to ensure
improvements

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

0.1

Improved compliance rate with
established deadlines

EFF-TIMELINESS
(98)

0.3

IM-USG_LVL (3.8-

Page 98 of 142

4.2)

QM 5

To contribute to the development and
implementation of performance
management framework in Frontex

Contribution to the
methodology and tools and
implementation of performance
management

IM-USG_LVL (3.84.2)

0.2

2.3.4.4. Information and Transparency

Resource Allocation
Index
Goal

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators
FTE

PR1

To promote the mission, values and
culture of Frontex to its staff members
through introduction of
communication tools and other best
practices;

1)Tailored intranet portal
available to user; 2) Internal
communication activities (two
internal days, 16 brown bag
lunches, 3 internal publications
produced

IM-SAT_LVL (-)

Euros

1.0
125.000

To provide stakeholder and European citizens with information on the Agency’s activities in line with Frontex’
external communication strategy (FGR 2009)
PR2

Media Relations

Urgent media queries addressed

IM-SAT_LVL (-)

1.2

Page 99 of 142

within one day, press visits to
operational areas arranged
within a min period of one
week, 3 press briefings
addressing media in EU
countries organized

10.000

Relations with the public

Public enquiries and
researchers’ visits organized,

Audio Video content

2 documentaries and 6 short
videos explaining specific areas
of Frontex activities to the
public are produced

0.7

New Frontex Corporate Visual Identity

development of the new CVI
update implemented

0.3

Publications

Publications policy in place, all
Frontex publications produced
according to the new CVI, 11
editions of The Border Post
published

Internet

Social media

Content update of the existing
website (usable information
architecture, important
documents and timely
publication of information).
Social media policy in place and
implementation of the first
phase

0.3

5.000
125.000

50,000
300,000

1.0

175,000
1.0

25,000
0.5

Page 100 of 142

Events

Involvement of Frontex in
Schuman Day celebrations in
Brussels and Warsaw

0.1

To create a forum for discussion,
exchange of information and best
practices for European border guard
authorities;

Organization of the annual
European Day for Border Guards
and International Border Police
Conference

1.3

PR4

To create the pool of EBGT Teams
(‘Frontex Press Officers’)

Members of FPO identified and
specific media training provided
for them

PR5

Crisis Communication Management
Plan

Crisis Communication Manual in
place

0.2

PR6

Media analysis

Qualitative media analysis in
place

0.2

PR3

5,000

IM-SAT_LVL (-)
IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

650,000

35,000
0.2
70,000
75,000

Page 101 of 142

2.3.5. Internal Audit
FTE

Internal Audit

Financial Means

2012

2013

2012

2013

2

2

10.000

10.000

Resource
Allocation
Index
Goal

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators
(FTE
Euros)

IA1

To audit the internal control system in
place in order to assess its adequacy,
effectiveness and efficiency; with a
view to bringing about continuous
improvement;
provide consulting services to the senior
management; carry out ex-post
controls.

Performance of 2 risk based
audits; and ex-post controls of
grants

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

2.0
10.000

Page 102 of 142

2.3.6. Fundamental Rights Officer (Consultative Forum)
FTE

Fundamental Rights Officer

Financial Means

2012

2013

2012

2013

1

1

---

---

Resource
Allocation
Index
Goal

Objective

Outputs & Performance Indicators
(FTE
Euros)

FR1

Carry out the duties of the
Fundamental Rights Officer as assigned
by Frontex’ Regulation and agreed with
Management Board and Senior
Management;

FR2

support of Consultative Forum to carry
out duties as assigned by Frontex
Regulation

To be agreed in employment
contract

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)

1.0

IM-OBJ_ACH (-)
IM-SAT_LVL (-)

Page 103 of 142

ANNEX 1 – CAPACITY BUILDING PORTFOLIO
General
This document presents Frontex Capacity Building Portfolio 2013. It contains an overview of
important external factors, an outline of priorities for the coming years, and a presentation of
the 2013 projects of the Capacity Building Division.

Mission
The core mission in the field of Capacity Building is to support the Member States in building
and achieving a high and uniform level of control and surveillance of their external borders and
to be a driving force in the further development of the European potential regarding integrated
border management. Further responsibilities include providing qualified expertise to support
the European policy development process in the area of border control; contributing to the
development of Frontex capabilities and supporting the actions of the Agency in providing
effective assistance to the Member States regarding the operational aspects of external border
management. This is done through the coordination of activities related to training, research
and development, and managing and developing pooled resources.
Frontex is to play a leading role in analysing future capability needs for the control of EU
external borders, as well as in supporting the Member States in their development of
capabilities to fill those needs. Furthermore, the Agency is to be the key driver for
harmonisation and standardisation, promoting greater interoperability.

Objectives for 2013
The main objectives in Capacity Building for 2013 are as follows:


Continued contributions to the successful implementation of EUROSUR by developing
Frontex capabilities and assisting Member States, in particular for the extension and
enhancement of the EUROSUR network and further development of the provided services;



Further development and Management of the European Border Guard Teams Pool in order
to increase the availability, flexibility and deployability of operational resources for joint
operations;



Further development and Management of the Technical Equipment Pool;



Further development of Frontex operational capacity by procuring services or acquiring
means for border surveillance;



Continued development and implementation of common core curricula for border guard
education, with a focus on harmonising learning standards for mid-level and high-level
border guard education and developing common modular study programmes as a basis for
the exchange of border guard students in both academic and vocational educational
frameworks; which is to support the further development of the European Training Scheme
(ETS);
Page 104 of 142



Further development and implementation of common standards for border guard training
and specialisation, focusing on fundamental rights, trafficking in human beings, and the
development of standardized training programmes for joint organized activities and joint
operations (e.g. return officers, escort leaders, interview officers, dog handlers);



Further development and identification of best practices and guidelines with regard to
Automated Border Checks, Advanced Passenger Information system and false/falsified
document detection, and contribution to the development of new tools for behavioural
analysis for border checks, in view of increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of border
checks, and supporting the development of the Smart Borders Concept;



Follow up on developments regarding remote sensing and detection technologies, and
contribute to improving the situational awareness of Member States by making use of the
existing technical tools or by the development of new tools as well as (secure)
communication between Member States, aiming at increasing the efficiency and
effectiveness of surveillance of the external borders.

Page 105 of 142

RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
The mission regarding research and development is to follow up on the developments in
research that are relevant for the control and surveillance of external borders, and then to
disseminate this information to the Commission and the Member States. Frontex also
collaborates closely with the Commission, striving to influence EU funded research to fit the
needs of border security.
The desired role in the field of Research and Development is to play a major part in supporting
the Member States and the Commission in their development of capabilities and policy, as well
as in directing relevant EU security research. Furthermore, Frontex should provide a frame for
the exchange of experiences between the MS and for an active interaction between MS and the
research community (universities, research institutions, industry). Frontex also seeks to be a
central point for launching studies related to border security.
The Research and Development activities are to provide the foundation for further
developments of EUROSUR and, connected to that, further developments of the border
surveillance capabilities of the MS, of Automated Border Control and of Advance Information,
which are the fields of priority.
Allocated budget: EUR 1,200.000

General
The year 2013 will see a continuation of the implementation of the two R&D Programmes:
Border Checks Development and Border Surveillance Development. The different projects
under the umbrella of these Programmes are a continuation of activities carried out in 2012.
These projects are based on feedback received from Member States and the European
Commission or on new developments that have been identified through R&D activities and are
of potential interest to the border guard community.

BORDER CHECKS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
Within the Border Checks Development Programme, projects and activities in 2013 will focus
on the development and implementation of effective and efficient border checks at the
external border which are of a comparable level, eliminating the existence of potential weak
spots.
The successful approach from previous years, of developing best practice guidelines, will be
further followed and extended to other areas, while the already developed best practice
guidelines will be further elaborated upon.
The further development of best practices and guidelines for ABC systems will continue in
2013.
The detections at BCPs can be further improved. Several initiatives undertaken in 2012 will be
continued, while others will be started.
The activities aimed at improving the information position of border guard services of the MS at
air border BCPs will continue.
The identification and development of a first set of best practice guidelines for VIS
implementation in the operational context will be finalized.

Page 106 of 142

Member States have expressed a need to have continued discussions on practical problems
arising at the external borders, as well as on the introduction of new equipment/systems. In
order to cater for this need, Frontex will provide the platform and facilitate the development
of common practices and guidelines.
EUR 620.000
The following projects are planned to run under this Programme in 2013:
ID check
The project focuses on technology and methods for the detection of document and identity
fraud and deceptive behaviour at border crossing points (BCPs). The aim is to help border
guards in the first line to take informed decisions in application of the entry criteria spelled
out in the Schengen Border Code: verification of the authenticity of documents, verification of
the identity of the document holder and of the purpose of travel, and the assessment of the
individual risk level of until then unknown potential threats. Activities will focus on innovation
in counterfeited/false documents detection (including the verification of electronic passports),
biometrics, and physio-behavioral analysis.
Budget: EUR 200.000
Advanced Risk Management
The activities conducted by Frontex during 2011-2012 on Advance Passenger Information (API)
have revealed that MS have many needs that cannot be fulfilled because of limitations and
ambiguities in the current API Directive. The consequences have been a limited roll out of such
systems, and a large degree of divergence between existing ones. This is currently the cause of
problems and inefficiencies, both for carriers operating into the EU and border management
authorities of MS.
The regulatory framework around API and PNR is about to undergo relevant changes. On one
hand there is a proposal for a PNR Directive being debated in Parliament, and on the other
hand there are plans for revisiting the existing API Directive. This poses a unique opportunity in
a limited time window for elevating to the Commission, Parliament and Council the challenges
and areas for improvement identified by end-users.
The main goal for 2013 is thus to gather MS needs regarding API, and disseminate them to key
stakeholders. The focus will be eminently practical, addressing the specific problems reported
by MS, and ensuring that any new/revised regulatory framework supports harmonized
implementations.
Also in 2013 the project will continue helping MS to deploy API systems and achieving greater
harmonisation levels, e.g. by providing best practices.
Another important goal for the activities in 2013 will be the development of a concept for
transition from current forms of Advance Information to Advanced Risk Management (ARM)
Budget: EUR85.000
Automated Border Control (ABC) 2013
The ABC project 2012 focused on continued development of best practice guidelines, validation
and dissemination work, as well as the development of capability tools for member states
enabling decision making regarding automated border control solutions for border checks.
Page 107 of 142

Furthermore, it started an initiative in support of harmonized/interoperable ABC solutions on a
global scale.
The ABC 2013 aims to continue further development of best practice guidelines into different
areas based on national implementations or the EC legislative proposals in connection with
Entry-Exit System (EES) and Registered Traveller Programme (RTP). Activities will focus on
dissemination and validation work, in particular focusing on cross validation with
standardisation bodies and international organisations as well as third countries to ensure
coordination in this area and the achievement of greater harmonisation/interoperability levels
on a global scale.
Furthermore, the project aims to continue developing capability tools that can be used by
member states when making decisions to implement new technologies at the borders. In 2012
Frontex generated a cost benefit analysis (CBA) toolkit for ABC which has been tested in real
cases provided by selected member states, and in 2013 such analysis is planned to be
generated by a number of Member States in support of decision making. An additional aim in
2013 is to develop common procurement guidelines for ABC.
In support of the planned legislative proposals on EES and RTP, the ABC 2013 aims to initiate a
pilot between one or two Member States and Canada regarding the use of ABC systems by third
country nationals. The exploration of this possibility started in 2012.
The work will also continue to look to shape the future of ABC.
Budget: EUR 200.000
Visa Information System (VIS)
The Visa Information System was rolled out for border guards in October 2011. The VIS 2012
project catalogued a number of challenges in the implementation of the system by border
guard services and began to identify some solutions. The VIS 2013 project aims to finalize work
on reaching an agreement on the main challenges, to identify/develop best practice guidelines
for VIS implementation in the operational context, and to assess needs for training before
completion of the system in October 2014.
Budget: EUR 70.000
CheckBest Practices
CheckBest Practices project provides a platform to Member States for discussing existing gaps
and has as its main objective the identification of those areas where the development of best
practices and guidelines, or the provision of better information, could fill or help to fill existing
gaps. After successful completion of a best practice document on land borders, the same is
now proposed for air borders.
Air borders account for the major portion of all traffic in and out of the Schengen area (around
50% according to estimates). While air BCP practice is quite similar across the EU, there are
large differences between a handful of very large hub airports and medium or small
international airports. It is proposed that a Working Group be constructed to further
investigate and catalogue practices at air borders and to evaluate the utility of available
technical measures depending on airport size.

Page 108 of 142

BORDER SURVEILLANCE DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME
In the Border Surveillance Development Programme, projects and activities in 2013 will focus
on the development and implementation of efficient and effective border surveillance. To this
end border guard services of the Member States will share relevant operational information
both at a national and international level, with other border guard/state services and with
relevant European Agencies.
Several existing gaps in surveillance will be looked into and ongoing developments of aerial and
ground system solutions for border surveillance will be followed.
Total budget for Border Surveillance Development Programme: EUR 580.000
At the same time, ways to improve the information position of border guard services of the
Member States (either directly or as an additional service of Frontex via EUROSUR) will be
studied. The following projects are planned to run under this Programme in 2013:

All Eyes: Aerial, Ground and Sea Surveillance – sensors and platforms and advanced system
solutions
This project is a follow-up to the Remote Sensing and Detection technology project (2011) and
the All Eyes 2012 project and will cover current developments of sensors and platforms,
broadband communication and data fusion systems, as well as integrated system solutions for
border surveillance. One of the objectives is to connect these activities so that they can be of
use in Frontex Joint Operations (sea and land).
The development and further operational assessment of integrated system solutions for land
borders (including mobile surveillance, control and communication systems) is another area
covered by this project. Development of guidelines based on best practices in the land border
domain will also be in focus.
Land border surveillance presents a variety of challenges, mainly driven by the different
topographical / climate conditions. Moreover, the objects of interest – vehicles and humans –
are small and difficult to detect, especially in forested areas. In order to get a better picture
of the existing technology solutions for under foliage detection, and the potential impact they
may have on the border surveillance, a study will be implemented in 2013.
Practical field tests and assessments of the most recent and effective technologies for land
border surveillance will be followed.
The project will also elaborate CONOPS for detecting & tracking of small boats, in relation with
the EU FP7 initiatives, aiming to optimise synergies with activities that are supported by other
EU funding.
Budget: EUR 450.000
Border Security Research Bridge
The activities foreseen under this project for 2013 aim at coordinating and enhancing the
direct involvement of the Border Guard community in planning research activities and shaping
Page 109 of 142

mid- and long-term research agenda in the domain of border control. This will include the
development of topics for EU FP7 Programme.
The project will also contribute to improving communication and information exchange
capabilities/channels for bringing together all stakeholders involved in border security
research.
Also the further development of BorderTechNet, an information sharing platform on bordersecurity related research and technologies, will be undertaken.
Budget: EUR 130,000

Page 110 of 142

TRAINING
Frontex Training Unit (TRU) contributes to the development of an efficient, high and uniform
level of border control in the Member States and promotes interoperability, harmonization and
a common European border guard culture with high ethical standards by developing and
implementing common educational and training standards in line with the principles defined in
the Bologna and Copenhagen processes and by carrying out training activities in border
guarding. TRU supports competent national authorities in third countries in training matters
within the framework of agreed working arrangements. The mission is accomplished by utilizing
cooperative networks.

The objectives for 2013 are:


To align Frontex training products with the SQF for Border Guarding, priority is given to
new developments, direct training and training tools.



To develop and implement common core curricula focusing on harmonizing learning
standards for mid-level and high-level border guard education and development of
common modular study programmes as a basis for exchange of border guard students in
both academic and vocational educational frameworks;



To provide training to the members of the EBGT pool,



To promote the development and the implementation of the European Training Scheme
in conjunction with other Law Enforcement agencies (EASO, CEPOL etc.);



To promote further development in all border guarding fields with increasing emphasis
on common standards and use of modern educational methods such as e-learning.

Total allocated budget: EUR 4,500.000

Frontex courses and training activities are implemented on the basis of the course
programmes and curricula designed through the joint efforts of Frontex and experts from
Member States/Schengen Associated Countries (MS/SAC).
Multiplier training, where Frontex trains multipliers who then carry out national training
activities in their respective home countries, is often used as the most efficient way to cascade
knowledge and skills to all MS/SAC. Standardized results in all MS/SAC are ensured through the
use of Frontex training tools (CD, DVD multimedia tools) and through guidelines given to
multiplier trainers. By taking an approach which includes translating the training products and
qualifying the national multipliers, all Border Guard officers can be trained to the same
training standards in their respective mother tongue.

Page 111 of 142

Border Guard Career-Path Education / Common Standards for Border Guards
Education and Basic Training Programme
EUR 1,230.000
The Common Core Curriculum for EU Border Guard Basic Training (CCC) is a curriculum
offering measurable, common standards for national BG training institutions, teachers and
students in all EU Member States. It consists of a general part and modules for sea, air and land
borders. It is the first common curriculum including common skills and competencies (as
common standards) for the basic training of law enforcement officers in the EU.
CCC has been updated by the joint efforts of Member States under Frontex’ lead.
In 2013 the CCC work includes:


Continued support and assistance to MS/SAC for the implementation of the updated CCC;



CCC implementation in Frontex Partner Countries - second phase;



Implementation of common training materials including an e-learning component;



Teachers’ mobility/exchange programme enhancing the role of the Frontex Partnership
Academies;



Erasmus-like student exchange programme:



Implementation (and further enhancements) of the Schengen Border Code eLearning tools
at various levels.
Budget: EUR 280.000

Common Standards for Mid-level and High-level BG Education
Work on common standards for Mid-level and High-level BG Education is aimed at further
developing and harmonising the educational standards and learning requirements for mid-level
and high-level border guard education, on the basis of the Sectoral Qualifications Framework
for Border Guarding according to Bologna/Copenhagen principles and the European
Qualifications Framework (EQF) as the common reference for linking with national
qualifications systems. It includes:
Common Core Learning Standards (CCLS) for EU Mid-level Border Guards aiming to
harmonise the learning requirements for mid-level BG officers according to
Bologna/Copenhagen principles. The programme design started by reviewing the former CMC
outcome (Common Core Curriculum for Mid-level Management) in order to align it with the
Sectoral Qualifications Framework (SQF) for Border Guarding (EQF level 6). The final product is
aimed at being a modular programme structure comprising a core set of learning standards for
mid-level BG education that will serve as a curriculum guideline and/or as a degree structure
for a EQF / SQF level 6 programme. The CCLS for EU Mid-level Border Guards could be used as
a guideline for a bachelor programme and/or as a set of modules that could be integrated into
existing national programmes in a flexible manner, and/or offered complementarily at the EU
level as a common European module designed as a student/teachers exchange concept.

Page 112 of 142

European Master in Border Security and Cooperation (BSC) is a European Joint Degree Study
Programme developed by Frontex in cooperation with the MS/SAC and delivered by a
Consortium of BG Academies and Universities (equal partnership) in collaboration with other
supporting institutions from the border guard training and education field. The programme
supports an integrated strategic approach to border management and shall foster a common
border guard culture within the EU. It aims to apply quality management principles to
organisational development and to promote European harmonisation and interoperability of
border guard activities at all levels. The Master’s course offers officers working in the border
guard field a European option for their professional development which is drawn from
organisational and operational needs. Studying together, the mid-level and high-level border
guards will contribute to advancing best practices in strategic border management and
European cooperation in border guarding, in the light of common European learning standards,
philosophy and values. In 2013 it is expected that the accreditation documents, the policies
around the Consortium Agreement and the Programme design will be finalized, and the Joint
Accreditation Process, which was initiated in 2012, will be concluded. The Master’s programme
is designed based on a modular approach (with the option of selectively taking a set of modules
that would lead to awarding up to two certificates and a Post Graduate diploma; recognition of
prior formal, non-formal and informal learning is envisaged for admission and module
completion). The programme concept is developed based on the Sectoral Qualifications
Framework for Border Guarding and Competence Profiles – EQF level 7 - and is designed as an
exchange programme (teachers/students exchange).
Educational Standards in line with Bologna/Copenhagen principles are a follow up to the
Sectoral Qualifications Framework for Border Guarding and will support the integration of the
SQF and Bologna/Copenhagen principles to course design / curriculum development by
enhancing the training capability and harmonising the educational standards at European and
national levels. In 2013, after completing the translators’ workshop, the focus of the SQF
follow-up will shift to the delivery of a Multipliers workshop in Course Design in the context of
the SQF and Bologna/Copenhagen principles (designed as a Train-the-Trainers concept); the
workshop will target the trainers and experts involved in curriculum / course design in all
components and all other Training projects, with priority to CCLS for Mid level border guards,
EU Master in CBS and MLC, but also programme designers / course developers as nominated by
the MS / SAC as part of Frontex support to the SQF integration at the national level. It is a
component that will serve all the other components of the programme and will ensure the
alignment of the common training products developed by Frontex with the SQF.
Budget: EUR 600.000
Frontex Course for border guard Mid-level Officers (MLC) is a five week course aiming to
enhance the understanding of border guard Mid-level Officers as to how sharing their
experience and expertise can contribute to more effective cooperation at EU borders. It also
aims to develop their leadership, management and English language skills, as well as their
knowledge of fundamental rights, thereby enabling them to participate in a greater range of
common activities. For 2013, two courses are planned to be carried out.
Budget: EUR 350.000

Page 113 of 142

Common Standards for Further Training and Specialisation of Border Guards
Programme
The specific training activities are designed based on Frontex risk analysis, lessons learnt from
Frontex coordinated Joint Operations and inputs from Member States.
.
EUR 2,900.000
SPECIFIC TRAINING ACTIVITIES: Cross Border Crime
False Documents Detection
1.

The “Specialist Course for the Detection of Falsified Documents” constitutes a two-week
course for document specialists (third line officers) aiming to enhance their knowledge of
printing techniques, common terminology and the examination of questioned documents
and their analysis.

2.

“Falsified Documents Roadshow” is a training activity providing first line border guard
officers with information on national and European level measures regarding the detection
of falsified documents.

3.

“Advanced Level Training Tool for the Detection of Falsified Documents” is the basis for
the training of first and second line officers.

4.

The “Basic Level Training Tool for the Detection of Falsified Documents” has been
developed with a view to training agents not directly involved in border guard tasks.

5.

The “Consular Staff Training” is a training activity providing basic training on false
documents detection for Embassy and Consular staff of MS/SAC in third countries.

For 2013 a specialist level II training is planned to be developed which will build on the
specialist course. This course will address experienced specialist level document experts and
officers having completed the specialist course.
Budget: EUR 330.000
Stolen Vehicles Detection
1. “Training Tool for the Detection of Stolen Vehicles: ADESVET - ENTRY LEVEL” is a uniform
format training tool for the basic training of Border Guard officers in the field of detection
of stolen vehicles.
2. “Training Tool for the Detection of Stolen Vehicles: ADESVET - ADVANCED LEVEL” is a
training tool for the follow-up training of Border Guard officers in the field of detection of
stolen vehicles.
Within the context of the training tools mentioned above, in 2013 Frontex Training will further
support EU MS/SAC and partner countries in the national implementation of the tools at
different levels. Further developments will focus on the detection of stolen vessels.
Budget: EUR 200.000

Page 114 of 142

Anti-Trafficking in Human Beings
1. “The Training Tool focusing on combating Trafficking in Human Beings” (THB) was
developed in cooperation with experts from MS/SAC, EU agencies/NGOs and international
organisations following the recommendations of the Frontex Annual Risk Analysis. It
provides a common basis for the provision of training for border guard officers in
preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and in handling victims with respect
for their dignity and fundamental rights.
For 2013, further dissemination activities (workshops etc.) are planned to ensure
implementation at the national level.
Budget: EUR 170.000
SPECIFIC TRAINING ACTIVITIES: Air-crew
The Crew Exchange activity will be closely linked to the EBGT exchange and focused on air
crew members nominated to the EBGT pool. The objectives of the aircrew training are
primarily to increase the safety and interoperability of air operations and to increase the
ability to detect and rescue migrants at sea.
1.

Manuals: the manual aims to harmonize the training of MS/SAC Air Crew members and to
ensure a common level of knowledge and competence amongst the border guards
concerned. The “Multiplier Training”, in connection to this, aims at training the multipliers
for the national implementation of the manual.

2.

Resources and Coordination training: “Crew Resource Management (CRM)” is a training
course aiming to improve the safety culture in the aviation units of the Member States
while “Air-Sea Coordination Training” is a course focused on enhancing the tactical
knowledge and proficiency of Member States’ aircrews and maritime units involved in AirSea operations, based on the experiences gained by the host Member State.

3.

Survival Training: “Survival Training” provides the participants with necessary knowledge
on how to behave and operate in emergency situations in mountainous environments. In a
similar way the course aims to provide the minimum competence standards for personal
survival techniques (for helicopter and aircraft crew members).

4.

Technical equipment: “Forward Looking Infrared (FLIR) Operator Training” aims to provide
standardized training for FLIR Operators enabling them to efficiently operate the FLIR
System when deployed to day/night Frontex missions. “Night Vision Goggle Training (NVG)”
aims to enhance the night flight competence of helicopter pilots and flight technicians
from Member State Border Guard Aviation Units; who in turn will act as multipliers and
pass on the knowledge within the MS/SAC.

5.

Exchange programme: “Crew Exchange” is a two-week exchange programme conducted by
the Border Guard Aviation of the host Member State.
Budget: EUR 430.000

SPECIFIC TRAINING ACTIVITIES: Other fields of training
Development of Training for EUBG Canine Teams
“Common Training Standards for EUBG Dog Handlers” provides, together with the “Basic
Training Tool” and the “Specialized Training Tools for EUBG Dog Handlers” (e.g. human scent,
Page 115 of 142

explosives detection, narcotics detection, use of force), a wide range of training standards and
products aimed at supporting the future certification of EUBG dog handlers. The standards
developed for dog training will be implemented in 2013.
Budget: EUR 280.000
Training for Schengen Evaluators (Scheval Training).
The Basic Course for Schengen Evaluators is a one-week training programme for nominated
experts from MS/SAC focusing on how to carry out the Evaluation Mission. The training provides
additional competence to the experts leading the Schengen Evaluation.
For 2013, it is planned to implement a mechanism to evaluate conformity with Fundamental
Rights provisions with the support of FRA.
Budget: EUR 180.000
A Fundamental Rights Manual aims to provide trainers in the MS/SAC with an up-to-date
training methodology specifically tailored to increase the knowledge and skills of border guard
officers in the field of fundamental rights and international protection. The implementation of
this is planned to take place in 2013.
Budget: EUR 180.000
“Common Standards for Escort Officers I Joint Return flights” provides standards for the
training of MS/SAC escort leaders and escort officers, with the implementation of the
developed curriculum and the qualification of multipliers to take place in 2013.
Budget: EUR 200.000

“English language Training for Practitioners/Language Instructors” is a tailored training
aimed at enhancing language knowledge specific for a certain field of border guarding.
“The Training for Practitioners/Language Instructors at airports: basic and advanced level”
is designed as a multiplier training in order to reach a large number of border guards working
at airports and to enhance their English knowledge as required for performing daily tasks at
airports, and also for joint operations at airports coordinated by Frontex.
For 2013 it is planned to further develop these tools in terms of functionality and scope. These
products shall also be adapted to other areas of operation.
Budget: EUR 230.000

Furthermore, “Tactical, Operational and Strategic Risk Analysis training” is planned, focusing
on enhancing the competences of first and second line officers in the operational area and
enabling them to understand their role in the information chain. The training will also address
the qualification of national experts on CIRAM. In 2013, CIRAM training will be developed in
close cooperation with Risk Analysis. Scope and budget will be allocated accordingly as soon as
parameters are defined.

Page 116 of 142

Finally, “Trainers update workshops” will be developed for Frontex assigned trainers in order
to provide them with methodical and didactical skills relevant for the delivery of Frontex
training. The update workshops will be financed from the respective projects.

SPECIFIC TRAINING ACTIVITIES: Training for EBGT Members
In order to ensure that the required level of training proficiency for EBGT pool members is
achieved, standard training for EBGT members will be delivered. This kind of training will
ensure that the officers deployed to Joint Operations, Pilot Projects or Rapid border
interventions have the necessary knowledge and skills to carry out their assigned duties
effectively.
The training organized by Frontex is complementary to the training carried out on national
level which shall ensure that EBGT Pool members meet the entry requirements as described in
the EBGT profiles.
The training organized by Frontex is building up on these requirements and covers the
European dimension of the competence profiles.

Members of the EBGT pool will be offered one of the following training activities for EBGT
members, depending on their previous training:


EBGT Induction Training;



EBGT Seminar;



EBGT Course.

EBGT Induction Training will be provided to those officers who are new to the pool and have
not participated in RABIT Induction Training, Frontex Course for Mid Level Officers (2010
onwards) or INTELLOPS Training (training for debriefing experts, training for Second line
Interview experts or training for screening experts).
EBGT seminar will be provided to officers who have already participated in one of the
abovementioned training sessions. The seminar takes into consideration previous training
received by participants.
EBGT course: This type of training will be organized in conjunction with any specialized
training for EBGT members. After successful completion of specialized training and the EBGT
course, pool members will meet all the eligibility criteria for selected profile.
Specialized training for EBGT pool members: In order to increase the operational
effectiveness of officers nominated for selected profiles, Frontex will organize specialized
training focused on the relevant expertise profiles. Currently, there are three profiles in the
pool where specialized training delivered by Frontex is foreseen:



“The debriefing experts training”
“The second line interview experts training”
Page 117 of 142



“Screening experts training”.

In addition, pre-deployment briefings for Focal Points experts will be carried out for air
borders, land borders and sea borders.
Furthermore, start-up activities are planned for the provision of training on relevant maritime
law for BG officers.
Total budget: EUR 550.000

Briefing for Focal Points Guest Officers




“Briefing for Focal Points Guest Officers: Air Borders” is training for the experts
deployed to air border Focal Points.
“Briefing for Focal Points Guest Officers: Land Borders” is two-day training for the
experts deployed to land border Focal Points.
“Briefing for Focal Points Offices Guest Officers: Sea Borders” is a training tailored for
the experts deployed to sea borders Joint Operations Focal Point Offices.
Budget: EUR 150.000

Networking and Cooperation with Stakeholders Programme
Cooperation with external stakeholders from MS/SAC and partner countries is key to ensuring
adequate implementation of Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 (“Frontex regulation”) in
terms of cooperation with Member States/SAC and partner countries. It also follows the
orientation set by the Stockholm Programme and the implementation of the related European
Training Scheme (ETS).
For all of the activities mentioned below, extension of the cooperation with other European
Agencies, i.e. those in the field of Law Enforcement, is envisaged.
Total budget for Networking and Cooperation with Stakeholders Programme:
EUR 370.000
National Training Coordinators (NTC) is a formal network of nominated national experts –
training counterparts from MS/SAC and Frontex partner countries. NTC contribute to all phases
of training projects and are essential for two-way direct communications with all states in
regard to training matters. Two conferences are planned for 2013.
Frontex Partnership Academies (PA) Frontex Partnership Academies is a network of national
border guard academies from Member States which support Frontex training by hosting Frontex
meetings and training activities. The scope of the Partnership Academy Network is extended
towards increasing their involvement and input to training projects. Two conferences are
planned for 2013.
Page 118 of 142

Frontex Virtual Aula is the web-based platform of Frontex Training linked with FOSS, including
information about Frontex training projects and Frontex training activities. All academies from
MS, SAC and Frontex Partner Countries are present on this platform. The aim of Virtual Aula is
to offer to Partnership Academies managers, national training coordinators, trainers, teachers
and project assistants an overall picture of what is carried out in Europe, every day, in the
field of border guard training.
For 2013, further development of the V-Aula system is planned, ensuring more interaction with
stakeholders and networks, e.g. Partnership Academies (PA, establishment of user groups). The
work will be carried out in close cooperation with MS/SAC eLearning Experts in order to
enhance the scope of the V-Aula system (for learning and training) and to implement costeffective solutions for training, ensuring broad coverage of the border guard target group. This
will also include the delivery of training via web-based conferencing tools (“webinars”)
whenever needed. For 2013, it is envisaged to synchronise relevant activities (events) with
other EU agencies, e.g. in the context of eLearning.
Furthermore, reflecting the common European interests, a Schengen Border Code, an
eLearning Module will be developed by an expert team. It will be reviewed twice a year with
the EU representatives nominated for the Schengen Border Code eLearning Steering
Committee.

Expert boards - represent a platform for training development and implementation. Boards of
Experts are bodies composed of national experts in a specific field, who meet regularly in order
to discuss the latest developments in their respective field in the context of training. The
Boards also systematically reviews the training programmes and proposes further steps for
training / education in the respective field. Expert boards meetings will be financed from the
respective projects.
Total budget: EUR 370.000

Page 119 of 142

POOLED RESOURCES
The mission of Pooled Resources is to develop sufficient availability and deployability of
operational resources, contributing to strengthening the response capacity of Frontex and the
Member States. Frontex develops the availability and deployability of sufficient operational
resources in order to perform its statutory obligations. The Agency manages and develops pools
of border guards and technical equipment of the Member States, Schengen Associated
Countries and Frontex in view of their use during joint operations, technical and operational
assistance, and rapid operational assistance. Taking into consideration the Supporting
Response Key Objectives set in Frontex’ Strategy and Multi Annual Plan 2013-2016, the projects
are aimed at further development of the EBGT and TEP mechanisms as tools for the
deployment of Guest Officers and technical equipment.
The main goal of Pooled Resources activities for 2013 is to establish and further develop
Frontex’ own operational capacity by developing the pools, building on the SGO mechanism and
acquiring or leasing technical equipment for external border purposes.
The main objectives of Pooled Resources for 2013 are as follows:


Further development of EBGT (including SGO mechanism) and TEP pools;



Further development of Frontex’ operational capacity by procuring services or acquiring
means for border surveillance;



Putting into operation the second version of OPERA system and thus ensuring the on-line
annual planning of operational resources;



Enhancing the mechanism for the management of the EBGT with focus on GOs performance
feedback in order to ensure the better quality of pool members;



Maintaining the preparedness for deployment of the operational resources from the pools
by testing the REX mechanism.
Total allocated budget: EUR 1,000,000

Development of the EBGT Pool
The project aims at enhancing the operational response capacity of Frontex by establishing and
managing a high quality human resources pool, in line with the strategic goals of the Agency.
The objectives of the project are as follows:


To manage and administrate the EBGT Pool through regular meetings with the pool
members during the training activities organised by Frontex, by taking part in the national
selection procedures and by the exchange of information with internal and external
stakeholders;



To make use of the OPERA application with regard to the nomination and deployment
process;



To provide efficient support to the MS/SAC in all matters related to the EBGT Pool in order
to ensure its proper functioning;
Page 120 of 142



To fully implement and evaluate the SGO mechanism;



To evaluate and assess the operational usefulness of the current profiles as adopted by the
Management Board (MB decision 11/2012 of 23 May 2012).
Budget: EUR 50,000

Development and management of the Technical Equipment Pool
The project aims at enhancing Frontex’ operational capacity by maintaining a high quality
Technical Equipment Pool (TEP) and by managing the deployment of resources from that pool.
The objectives of the project are as follows:


To maintain the TEP data base;



To manage the deployment of equipment from the TEP by using the OPERA application;



To maintain a high level of availability of the equipment from the pool by regular
communication with the contributing MS;



To implement Frontex reporting obligations regarding deployed technical equipment and MS
contributions to the TEP.
Budget: EUR 0

Pilot Project on the lease of a service for border surveillance.
The core idea of the pilot project is to procure a service for border surveillance for a limited
period of time and for a specific operation.
The objectives of the project are as follows:


To enhance Frontex’ own operational capacity;



To assess the cost efficiency of procuring services;



To establish a basis for further acquisitions of surveillance equipment or surveillance
services.

The Pilot Project will be launched taking into consideration the results from the Frontex LEA
study finalised in 2011, analyses of the operational needs and the MS’ capability to provide
technical equipment for aerial surveillance.
Budget: EUR 300.000
OPERA - stage III
The core idea of the OPERA project is to provide an upgraded software application for the
development of pools of human resources and technical equipment, and to manage the
deployment of resources from these pools.
The objectives of the project are as follows:

Page 121 of 142



To upgrade the OPERA application through the introduction of improvements resulting from
the testing and using of OPERA v 1.0;



To introduce additional functionalities to OPERA resulting from the amended Frontex
Regulation;



To provide training manuals and workshops to Member State and Frontex users.
Budget: EUR 150.000

Rapid intervention exercise (REX)
The core idea of the project is to test the functioning of the rapid intervention mechanism as
part of Frontex’ legal obligation to establish a capability for adequately reacting to sudden
unexpected massive migration flows in circumstances close to a real operation.
The objectives of the project are as follows:


To organise a full scale exercise for a limited period in a specific area and within the frame
of a specific joint operation;



To test and improve the capability of Frontex to properly coordinate rapid deployment;



To test and improve the capability of the MS to react adequately to an urgent call for rapid
intervention;



To test the applicability of the OPERA system for rapid deployment purposes;



To organise a table top exercise in order to increase the readiness of both Frontex and MS
for rapid intervention missions.
Budget: EUR 100.000

Annual Bilateral Talks
The core idea of the project is to negotiate and agree on the contributions of each Member
State to the planned Frontex operations for 2014.
Along with this main goal the project should also achieve:


Identification of a common template for both Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) and
Guidelines covering Pooled Resources;



Development of management documents for all projects in Pooled Resources;



Seeking endorsement of the documents by the relevant internal stakeholders and preparing
subsequent ED Decisions, in accordance with the Agency’s QM Strategy.
Budget: EUR 150.000

Development of the business processes

Page 122 of 142

The core idea of the project is to identify and describe business processes within PRU related
to the core tasks, including the management of pools and the development relevant documents
(templates, SOPs and business processes).
The objectives of the project are as follows:


To establish a document base containing any information needed for projects concerning
Pooled Resources;



Enhance the level of consistency covering the activities and the coordination between
internal stakeholders;



Provide a good level of detail regarding the activities which are regularly performed by the
organisation, when dealing with human / technical resources;



Discourage the tendency for developing parallel working processes;



Promote quality through consistency.
Budget: EUR 15.000

Business as usual
This part of Pooled Resources activities includes PRN and the revision of the accreditation
cards.
Pooled Resources Network (PRN)
The network is the main tool used to communicate information regarding future plans and
ongoing activities to the Member States and Schengen Associated Countries. The feedback of
the Member States is important as it provides information on the effectiveness of the activities
and provides the opportunity to monitor the numbers in the pools.
The PRN will meet approximately four times during 2013.
Traditionally every second meeting is hosted by one of the Member States.
The goals of the project are:


To exchange information with the MS about the activities implemented by Frontex;



To get the MS’ feedback regarding the effectiveness of the implemented activities;



To use the meetings as a platform for the discussion of important issues and for the drafting
of any kind of documents related to the pools.
Budget: EUR 235.000

Page 123 of 142

EUROSUR activities

The idea of EUROSUR Programme is to establish an information sharing and cooperation
mechanism enabling Member State authorities carrying out border surveillance activities and
Frontex to collaborate at tactical, operational and strategic levels.
EUROSUR Programme will provide Member States with a framework that increases their
situational awareness and improves the reaction capability of national authorities controlling
the external borders of the EU Member States. EUROSUR Programme foresees the interlinking
and streamlining of surveillance systems and mechanisms at the Member State level, including
the setting up in each Member State of a National Coordination Centre (NCC).
In 2012 all 18 Member States with external borders will be connected to the EUROSUR Network
and the services provided through EUROSUR will gradually be developed.
In 2013 the EUROSUR Regulation should enter into force. The aim of the EUROSUR Programme
in 2013 is to prepare Frontex and the Member States for this entry into force by:


further developing the Network, and



developing and testing tools and methods for providing the European Situational Picture
(ESP) as well as the Common Pre-frontier Intelligence Picture (CPIP).

The entry into force of the EUROSUR Regulation will mean the end of the EUROSUR programme
in this form. The operations will be managed by the Operations Division, while there will be
close cooperation between the divisions to ensure further development of the system.
Core activities in the EUROSUR Programme for 2013 are:


Extensions of the EUROSUR Network to encompass all Member States and possibly some
other EU actors (i.e. DG HOME + EUROPOL + EMSA + EUSC + MAOC-N)



Hardening of the nodes of the Network to ensure reliability of the system. Part of the
hardware already deployed will be duplicated.



Enhancement of Network Security to include EU certified crypto equipment to enable the
exchange of EU restricted information.



Establishment of a Framework Contract to ensure Third Level support to the Network,
including system evolution, once the second extension of the network is completed.



The Common Surveillance Tools Project will develop and test a Frontex capability for the
combined use of satellite imagery and ship reporting systems for border surveillance, in
order to provide surveillance based information to the EUROSUR network. This is to be done
using GMES measures (Global Monitoring for Environment and Security) and by working in
close conjunction to EUSC and EMSA.



The CPIP/ESP Project will further develop the Common Pre-frontier Intelligence Picture
and the European Situational Picture. The objectives of the CPIP/ESP Project are to
develop tools and procedures for providing the Common Pre-frontier Intelligence Picture
and the European Situational Picture to the EUROSUR information exchange. Initially the
Page 124 of 142

CPIP and ESP will be exchanged on a pilot basis and the extent of the pictures will then be
gradually developed. Geo-data for interesting regions will be acquired and tools for analysis
and visualisation will be developed. Furthermore, training will be provided to MS.
Implementation period: January 2013 - September 2013 (the Frontex EUROSUR Programme will
continue until the entry into force of the legislation)
In 2013 the assigned budget of 2,240,000 Euro will cover the Network Project and other
areas like establishment of a Framework Contract to ensure third level support to the
Network (including system evolution) once the second extension of the Network is completed
and enhancement of Network security to include EU certified crypto equipment to enable the
exchange of EU restricted information. Further EUROSUR activities with funding are found in
the Operational Portfolio.

Page 125 of 142

ANNEX 2 – ADMINISTRATION PORTFLOIO

FINANCE AND PROCUREMENT UNIT

Products and services - Finance
Finance has, as a main objective, to ensure that financial transactions (financial
commitments, payments, recovery orders, budget transfers etc) are processed in line with
the regulatory framework.
Additionally, Finance plays a role with regards to informing stakeholders about the outcome
of those financial processes in the form of budget monitoring reports, payment information
and annual financial statements.
Recurrent nature:








Produces the annual budget, in close cooperation with the Controller and business units,
to respond to the objectives/activities as laid down in the Programme of Work.
Provides monthly budget reports to the Directorate Programme Board and Management
Board, within the philosophy of ‘sound financial management’, providing transparency
and accountability on the month-to-month relationship of activities and financial means;
Carries out and documents change management of financial transactions such as transfers
of appropriations and carry-overs;30
Facilitates the auditors of the Internal Audit Service of the Commission and the European
Court of Auditors, by providing documents, reports, responses to findings and
implementing follow-up recommendations;
Manages mission orders and mission claims;
Registers all claims and invoices, legal entities and bank accounts of third parties
submitted to Frontex in the financial system; and,
Carries out financial verification of transactions as a centralized function.

New Initiatives for 2013:
Mapping of the unit’s business processes - Once all processes are mapped, an analysis will be
carried out to identify risk and quality issues. Where necessary the processes will be
redesigned incorporating improvement measures; this exercise will be carried out in close
cooperation with the Quality Manager and relevant other units at Frontex.
After the processes have been adopted by the Authorizing Officer, validation of the systems
will be carried out by the Accounting Officer. This validation has as a goal to ensure that the
30

Financial Regulation of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union, Management Board
Decision No. 29/2008
Page 126 of 142

systems in place provide sufficiently reliable data necessary for the production of accounts
which give a true image of the Agency' assets and of budget implementation in accordance
with Title VII of the Financial Regulation.
In addition, the requirements for implementing an application for an integrated approach to
the financial lifecycle of projects/activities with the Member States will be analyzed for
further action.
Outputs expected:




Creation of a manual covering all main processes undertaken in the Finance &
Procurement Unit;
Where relevant changes to the current practices are proposed; decisions on the
introduction of such changes will be undertaken in discussion with the relevant
authorizing officer; and,
Introduction of an integrated electronic system to streamline the processes.

Products and services - Procurement
Procurement has, as a main objective, to ensure that procurement procedures and contracts
are coherent, legal and in line with regulations in force and the Frontex Financial Regulation
and associated Implementing Rules.

Recurrent nature:







Provides the means and advice for efficient and effective contract management to be
carried out by the responsible business unit/sector according to the relevant rules in
place;
Produces a procurement plan in cooperation with Frontex’ business units.
Provides training and guidance to Frontex staff responsible for drawing up terms of
reference/technical specifications for goods/services.
Advises and assists staff when, due to unforeseen circumstances, regular procurement
procedures cannot be followed; and,
Provides necessary reports, statements and statistics;
Undertakes public procurement work related to tenders.

New Initiatives for 2013:
Mapping of business processes was carried out in 2012. A project to convert the processes into
an electronic system started in 2012 and will continue in 2013.
Outputs expected:



Creation of a manual of all processes for the procurement area; and,
Introduction of an electronic system and automation for streamlining work processes.

Products and services - Accounting
Page 127 of 142

Recurrent nature:








Keep the accounts in accordance with Title VII of the Frontex Financial Regulation;
Produce the annual accounts for the year.
Produce the cash-flow table showing amounts collected and disbursed during the year;
Perform treasury management;
Validate the accounting systems laid down by the authorizing officer to supply or justify
accounting information; and,
Oversee and manages the imprest31 account;
Guarantee accurate safekeeping of assets.

HUMAN RESOURCES AND SERVICES UNIT

Products and Services – Human Resources

Recurrent nature:
 Multiannual Staff Policy Plan each year from which the Establishment Plan32 is drawn up
which has to travel through the approval process.
 Development of policies, procedures and specific implementing rules for each sub-area
within the HR environment.
 Improving efficiency by closely cooperating with other EU Agencies in the development of
new systems;
 Facilitating the work done by the Internal Audit Service of the Commission and the
European Court of Auditors, by providing documents, reports, responses to findings and
implementing follow-up recommendations.
New Initiatives for 2013:
An HR Intranet page to be developed in close cooperation with the Information and
Transparency area will be launched.
Outputs expected:



To ensure that all implementing rules are in place;
To further develop the business process modeling framework, linking in with other
31

The ‘imprest account’ enables Frontex to make one-off payments which are less than €2,000.
These payments must have a commitment attached to them but do not need to be input into the
ABAC financial reporting system of the EU
32

Establishment Plan Establishment Plan lists TA positions by number and grade. The figures are
compiled from the SPP and published in the Official Journal
Page 128 of 142



initiatives in the Administrative Division providing one platform for the Division;
To implement an Intranet page for the HR Sector facilitating Frontex staff.

33

Products and services – Personnel Administration

Recurrent nature:





Administering the payment of salaries and allowances, the management of
annual/sick/special leave and flexi-time system, overtime and other working time
arrangements, all issues related to pensions whether it is payment of contributions or
transferrable rights;
Developing and monitoring working arrangements which cater to the needs of Frontex
within the rules and regulations;
Cooperation with the Payroll Master’s Office of the EU Commission.

New Initiatives for 2013:
A need has been identified to develop existing HR database with new functionalities to
facilitate and to improve HR work. In addition, a need has been identified to introduce
different work arrangements at Frontex to cater to the changing operational needs of the
Agency. A policy on harassment will also be implemented.
Outputs expected:




To carry out an analysis of the HR database to improve the reporting mechanisms,
simplifying the provision of data to projects such as the KPI Performance Management
Project;
To implement and monitor the policy on ‘Prevention of sexual and psychological
harassment’;
To introduce the standardized and legally based policy related to different working
arrangements in the Agency.

Products and services – Staff development and training

Recurrent nature:





Conducting a yearly analysis of training needs and offering of a variety of development
opportunities, enabling staff to maintain and expand the skills, competences and
experience necessary to effectively contribute to the attainment of individual, divisional
and organizational goals and expectations of Frontex;
E-appraisal system facilitating (yearly review undertaken between managers and staff);
Cooperates with other Agencies such as the European Union Agency for Fundamental
Rights (FRA) when developing training packages for Frontex staff;
33

It is to be expected that systems will be automated under one Divisional platform
Page 129 of 142




Conducting a yearly staff satisfaction survey, the analysis of which provides input for
possible areas of improvement; and,
Developing policies and procedures which are specific to Frontex within EU rules and
regulations.

New initiatives for 2013:
The new Frontex mandate stresses the need for training on fundamental rights issues. To this
end, Frontex will provide appropriate training to all staff, based on their areas of expertise
and needs.
Further development of the e-Appraisal HR module and the introduction of an e-Probation
module will take place in order to make HR processes more user friendly and automated.

Outputs expected:




To deliver new training course on fundamental rights for all Frontex staff in 2013;
To develop and improves the e-Appraisal module of HR system;
To implement the e-Probation module.

Products and services – Recruitment and selection

Recurrent nature:





Provision of human resource needs for the functional operation of Frontex within the
constraints as set down by the Establishment Plan. Ensures adherence to rules and
regulation with regard to recruitment and selection;
Provision of transparency and accountability for all recruitment/selection procedures,
audited on a yearly basis by the European Court of Auditors:
Provision of statistics/reports on recurrent basis to Directorate Programme Board for
monitoring purposes;
Provision of ad hoc reports to Management Board
.

New initiatives for 2013:
An E-recruitment system will be developed and implemented in 2013 and linked in to the
other systems on a uniform platform.

Outputs expected are as follows:


To launch the E-recruitment system and link it to other electronic system using a uniform
platform.

Page 130 of 142

Products and services - Agency Services

Recurrent nature:









Guarantee reception and switch board services;
Ensure office supplies and availability of corporate gifts;
Organize meetings and events for Frontex;
Operate the Travel Desk for Frontex staff;
Provide an expatriation service for Frontex staff;
Manage the HQ premises ensuring seamless services;
Manage Frontex assets;
Ensure health and safety at work.

New initiatives for 2013:
The largest task for Agency Services over the coming three years is the successful completion
of the Frontex HQ to be in place by 2014. In addition, documentation, which constitutes the
memory of Frontex, is presently being stored in a decentralized manner. A physical
repository was put in place in 2011/12 (impacted by zero growth). Some advances are
expected to be made in 2013 but not to the extent initially envisioned.
Outputs expected:


To ensure that the new HQ project proceeds within the set timelines and deliverables
identified;

Products and services - Security Services
The main objective of the Security Services is to ensure the safety of staff, visitors, facilities
and Frontex information whether based in Frontex HQ or in a Frontex Operational Office.

Recurrent nature:





Drafting and implementing Frontex Security Manual and other security related policies and
procedures;
Safeguarding classified information from espionage, compromise or unauthorized
disclosure;
Protecting Frontex activities, facilities and personnel;
Conducting training sessions for Frontex staff on the handling of classified information.

New initiatives for 2013:
Page 131 of 142

The Security Services are continuing the process of updating the Frontex Security Manual
reflecting the changes to the security regime as a result of the adoption of the new Frontex
Mandate as well as the new Council and the new Commission security rules.
The Security Services participate actively in the new HQ tender and evaluation processes and
consultancies.
Outputs expected:




To update the Security Manual (and corresponding policies, procedures and implementing
rules) to reflect obligations placed on Frontex with regards to the handling of classified
and sensitive information and the new EU security regulatory framework;
To ensure that all appropriate security measures are in place for Frontex Operational
Offices (FOO). (Evaluation of the FOO in Greece to take place in 2012 – a result of this
could be an increase in the number of FOOs);
To ensure that the new HQ project is aligned with the security standards.

INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY UNIT (ICT)
ICT’s responsibilities span over two main functional areas (Project and Contracts Office and
Operations Office) with close interaction. In addition to the infrastructural and service
related tasks, ICT is tasked with providing the planning, designing, developing, deploying,
implementing, managing and operating of secure and resilient information and
communications systems within an integrated engineering support mechanism for all Frontex
ICT systems. In this context, ICT will have to provide ICT services and support to Frontex
business areas for implementing projects and ICT systems. The challenge for ICT will be to
maintain a satisfactory service for systems already in place, while concurrently developing
and implementing new projects, within the constraints imposed by zero growth at financial
and staffing levels.

Products and services - ICT

Recurrent nature:








Enabling and facilitating secure communication and information exchange with
cooperation partners to include Member States, non-EU States and International
Organizations;
Providing appropriate infrastructure to ensure that ICT applications, systems and services
are possible for both internal and external stakeholders;
IT strategy, policies and procedures, as well as for IT quality management, IT security and
governance;
Reacting to requests for ICT support from both internal and external stakeholders;
Implementing standards, best practices and policies for Information and Communication
Technologies regarding hardware, software and processes;
Monitoring the compliance with these standards, best practices and policies; and,
Safeguarding the security of Frontex ICT systems in cooperation with the Security Officer.
Page 132 of 142

New initiatives for 2013:




Feasibility study for the setting up of a backup data centre;
ICT preparation for the move to the new HQ in 2014;
Provision of support to Apple equipment.

Outputs expected:
1st Level Support –

Help Desk

2nd Level Support -

Network Management;
Application Management;
System Management.

3rd Level Support – Contractor Management (application developers, maintenance and project
management)

Business applications brought into production 2011/2012 and supported by ICT in 2013;






OPERA (Operational Resources Management System)
ED4BG Website (European Day 4 Border Guards)
FMM (Frontex Media Monitoring)
JORA (Joint Operations Reporting Application)
FOSS (Frontex-One-Stop-Shop)

Business applications entering into ICT operations in 2013:






CMS (Correspondence Management System)
WebGIS (Web based Geographic Information System)
EUROSUR Technical Office
Sentinel (ESP/CPIP compilation incl CONOPS & Fusion Services)
Intranet

Overview of ICT enabled business initiatives – to be budgeted via Title 3:
Unit

Title
EUROSUR PROGRAMME: CPIP/ESP Analysis Tools
Project
Implementation of RAU Geo-portal application and
further design of RAU WebGIS applications
Enterprise Business Intelligence platform (common
business needs with FSC)
Personal data processing and analysis:
RAU – TOTAL

2013 (M E)
1.500

2014 (M E)
TBD

0.140

0.100

0.450

0.120

0.040
2.130

0.200
TBD
Page 133 of 142

ANNEX 3 – GOVERNANCE INDICATORS

Name

ID

Description

Targets

PARTICIPATION

Participation
index

Average
contribution
size (HR)

Average
contribution
size (TE)

HMS
commitment
ratio

PA-PART

“How successful is Frontex in
implementation of
integrated border
management – as measured
by number of countries,
which were involved in at
least one operation
coordinated by Frontex?".
The indicator measures the
number of countries (among
MSs, SACs and TCs) involved
in the primary and secondary
activities on operations
coordinated by Frontex.

20 – 30 MSs, SACs

PA-CTRB_HR

Participation in joint efforts
coordinated by Frontex. This
is measured by the average
contribution of European
(MSs and SACs) and third
countries to Joint Operations
in terms of man-days of each
country’s people
involvement.

350 – 800 man days

PA-CTRB_TE

Average contribution of
European (MSs and SACs) and
third countries to Joint
Operations in terms of
technical equipment.

45 – 85 machine
days

PA-HMS_COMM

Ratio of reimbursements
planned to be paid
(committed) to host member
state (HMS) with
reimbursements planned for

10 – 50 %

Page 134 of 142

guest countries (GCs)

PA-HMS_REIMB

Ratio of reimbursements
paid to host member state
(HMS) with reimbursements
paid to guest countries

20 – 80 %

PA-POOL_HR

“How many of the people
used in FX operations come
from the pool?”

40 %

Pool usage (TE)

PA-POOL_TE

“How much of the TE used in
FX operations comes from
the pool?”.

Pool utilization
(HR)

PA-POOL_UTL_HR

“To what extent is the pool
of human resources
utilized?”

40 %

PA-POOL_UTL_TE

“To what extent is the pool
of technical equipment
utilized?”

No data collected

HMS
reimbursement
ratio

Pool usage (HR)

Pool utilization
(TE)

No data collected

EFFECTIVENESS

Alignment
index

Average
operational
days ratio (HR)

EFF-ALIGN

“Is Frontex at the right time
and at the right place?” by
showing the linkage between
human resources planned
and deployed on the
operations with the number
of irregular migrants
intercepted during the
operations.

Parallel curves

EFFAVG_OPDAYS_HR

“To what extent are the
available human resources
(allocated to the operation)
utilized for direct
operational activities?” This
is shown by comparing the
number of operational mandays (spent for
implementation of the
operation) to the number of

98 %

Page 135 of 142

all man-days related to the
operation (e.g. including
also time spent in travel and
idle time).

EFFAVG_OPDAYS_TE

“To what extent are the
available TE resources
(allocated to the operation)
utilized for direct
operational activities?” This
is shown by comparing the
number of operational days
of TE (spent for
implementation of the
operation) to the number of
all days of TE related to the
operation (e.g. including
also time spent in transport
and idle time).

80 – 85 %

EFF-EX_CTRB

“To what extent is data
input received by Frontex on
time?” This is measured by
percentage of data
contributions received on
time, with acceptable level
of completeness and quality.

85 %

Operations plan
implementation EFF-OP_PLAN_HR
ratio (HR)

Assess the effectiveness of
Joint Operations planning in
the area of human resources
(HR) utilization by outlining
the difference between HR
deployment plans (in mandays, according to the raised
JO needs) with the
implementation.

98 %

Operations plan
implementation EFF-OP_PLAN_TE
ratio (TE)

Assess the effectiveness of
Joint Operations planning in
the area of technical
equipment (TE) utilization
by outlining the difference
between TE deployment
plans (in operational days,
according to the raised JO

95 %

Average
operational
days ratio (TE)

External data
contribution
timeliness and
quality ratio

Page 136 of 142

needs) with the
implementation.

Product quality
level

EFF-QUALITY

“What is the perception of
the quality of Frontex’
products in the eyes of
external customers?”

Product
delivery
timeliness ratio

EFF-TIMELINESS

“How timely Frontex
delivers its products and
services?”

EFF-TIME_RESP

Measure the average time
passed from the moment of
recognizing the unfavorable
event or trend resulting in
the recommendation to start
the operation to the actual
start of the operation which
fulfills the recommendation.

No data collected

EFF-VIGIL

Effectiveness of Joint
Operations by indicating the
ratio of irregular migrants
apprehended or denied entry
at the borders to the total
number of all irregular
migrants apprehended or
denied entry at the borders
or inland.

99 %

Time to
respond

Vigilance index

3.8 – 4.2

98 %

IMPACT

Objectives
achievement
index

Resource ratio
(HR-Host)

IM-OBJ_ACH

Effectiveness in achieving
the originally set objectives
of various Frontex projects /
operations. Set of objectives
for each operation can be
different.

Data collection
during 2012

IM-RES_HR

“To what extent are HMSs
involved in the
operation(s)?” This is related
to the level of involvement

20 – 75 %

Page 137 of 142

of human resources.

Resource index
(TE)

Stakeholders
satisfaction
level

Product usage
level

IM-RES_TE

“To what extent are HMSs
involved in the
operation(s)?” This is related
to the level of involvement
of technical equipment.

IM-SAT_LVL

Average satisfaction level of
stakeholders with the
Frontex’ activities, products
and services.

IM-USG_LVL

“To what extent is Frontex
building the interoperability
between countries through:
(i) successful introduction of
common
practices/standards? (ii)
dissemination of information
influencing the decision
making processes?”.This is
done by comparing the
number of customers, which
declare they used the
product with the total
number of customers, which
have been supplied with the
product.
The usage will be assessed
by answering the questions
regarding the influence of
the product on customers’
priorities for planning,
training and/or operational
activities.

40 – 95 %

3.8 – 4.2

PERFORMANCE
Administrative
expenditures
ratio

PE-ADM-EXP

Budget
implementation PE-BUD_IMP_C
ratio

“How much (relatively) does
Frontex spend on its
administration?”
“What is the level of the
budgetary commitments?”

EU – 37 %
FX – 18 %
98 %

Page 138 of 142

(committed)
Budget
implementation PE-BUD_IMP_P
ratio (paid)

“What is the level of the
budget paid out?”

70 %

Attractiveness
index

Employees assessment of
Frontex’ attractiveness as
the employer. Employee
satisfaction.

No data collected

PE-ATTRACT

Page 139 of 142

ANNEX 4 – PROCUREMENT PLAN 2013

No

Subject

Estimated value
in EUR

Budget line

1

Eurosur CONOPS - specific
services

3 500 000

A-3110 - FSC

2

Eurosur CONOPS - specific
services

180 000

A-3110 - FSC

3

Eurosur CONOPS - fixed
costs

300 000

A-3110 - FSC

4

Extension of JORA-Eurosur
Link

50 000

A-3110 - FSC

5

Yearly maintenance of FSC
operational rooms

121 169

A-3110 - FSC

6

Renewal of subscriptions iJET

7 500

A-3110 - FSC

7

renewal of subscriptions Meltwater

10 000

A-3110 - FSC

8

Conference facility - FSC
Product conference

20 000

A-3110 - FSC

9

Services of junior developer
(time&means)

24 000

A-3110 - FSC

10

Services of senior developer
(time&means)

30 000

A-3110 - FSC

11

Services of project manager
(time&means)

36 000

A-3110 - FSC

12

Extension of CMS application

30 000

A-3110 - FSC

13

FFC - stocktaking

100 000

A-3110 - FSC

14

Purchase of geo data

100 000

A-3110 - FSC

15

FFC_ system accreditation

100 000

A-3110 - FSC

16

Conference facility Information Exchange

20 000

A-3110 - FSC

17

Third countries Operational
Heads of Airports Forum

25 000

A-3020 - Operations and pilot
projects etc. air borders

Page 140 of 142

18

CCC for EUBG basic training
- (IAP) Interoperability
Assessment Programme
measurement tool

50 000

A-3200 - Training

19

Consultancy services for
Masters' Programme design
in line with the SQF

58 000

A-3200 - Training

20

Pilot project on leasing of
technical equipment for
aerial surveillance

300 000

21

Adding new functionalities
to the piloted Light-Weight
Version of the Border Tech
Net (RDU information
exchange platform).

50 000

A-3300 - Research and
development

22

Study on the performance of
existing automated
document inspection
equipments.

30 000

A-3300 - Research and
development

23

Study on border guards’
decision making in the first
line of border control and
the role of decision aids.

50 000

A-3300 - Research and
development

24

Study on existing
technologies for underfoliage detection

75 000

A-3300 - Research and
development

25

Study on existing
methodologies and
guidelines to assess
operational capabilities,
vulnerabilities, and
countermeasures in
countering identity and
document fraud and risk
assessment at the border.

50 000

A-3300 - Research and
development

26

Printing supplies

27

EUROSUR

28

Purchase of Proxy /
Intrusion Detection devices

60 000

29

Microsoft Premier Support

150 000

30

Internet connection

200 000

12 000 000

20 000

A-3400 - Pooled Resources
network

A-2102 - Maintenance and repair
of data processing equipment
A-3510 - IT services for
Operational activities
A-2100 - Purchase of data
processing equipment
A-2102 - Maintenance and repair
of data processing equipment
A-2110 - Telecommunications
subscriptions and charges

Page 141 of 142

25 000

A-2300 - Stationery and office
supplies

1 000 000

A-2300 - Stationery and office
supplies

31

Water

32

Office supplies with new
logo

33

Cleaning services

34

New car

35

NHQ Furniture: design &
delivery of furniture for
offices, meeting rooms,
reception

400 000

A-2210 - Furniture

36

NHQ Canteen: design & fitout, provision of canteen &
catering services

350 000

A-2090 - Other expenditure

37

Insurance technical
equipment

38

NHQ Audio-video systems &
installations

250 000

A-2200 - Technical equipment
and installations

39

Interpreters services

600 000

A-2500 - Interpretation services
and equipment

40

NHQ Relocation services:
office removal, cleaning &
waste mngt

25 000

A-2090 - Other expenditure

41

Meeting rooms

20 000

A-2510 - Other meetings and
visits

42

NHQ logo identification

30 000

A-2300 - Stationery and office
supplies

43

NHQ Gym: fit-out, provision
of equipment

30 000

A-2052 - Health and safety at
work

44

NHQ Archive, storage &
library: provision of storage
& archiving systems

50 000

A-2040 - Furnishing of premises

45

NHQ Kitchenettes: provision
of cuttlery & kitchen
equipment

90 000

A-2300 - Stationery and office
supplies

350 000

70 000

15 000

A-2030 - Cleaning and
maintenance
A-2230 - Purchases and long-term
lease of transport equipment

A-2010 - Insurance

Page 142 of 142

