Warsaw, 24 December 2015
Reg. No. 7/2016

Frontex`
Single
Programming
Document
2016 - 2019

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States
of the European Union

www.frontex.europa.eu
Plac Europejski 6, 00-844 Warsaw, Poland
Tel. +48 22 205 95 00
Fax +48 22 205 95 01

Single Programming Document 2016 - 2019

1. Contents
INTRODUCTION

4

1.1.
1.2.
1.3.

4
5
8

1.4.

Foreword
List of Acronyms
Mission Statement
1.3.1.

Mission .................................................................................................. 8

1.3.2.

Vision .................................................................................................... 8

1.3.3.

Values ................................................................................................... 8

1.3.4.

Mandate ................................................................................................ 9

1.3.5.

Tasks .................................................................................................... 9

Strategic Direction

SECTION I – GENERAL CONTEXT
2.1. Influencing Factors

10

11
11

2.1.1. Legal Framework ......................................................................................... 11
2.1.2. Political Framework ...................................................................................... 11
2.1.3. Economical/Financial Framework ...................................................................... 11

SECTION II – MULTI ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2016 – 2019
3.1. Multi Annual Objectives
3.2. Strategic Action Areas

13
13
14

3.2.1. JOINT OPERATIONS (AND PILOT PROJECTS)........................................................... 14
3.2.2. RISK ANALYSIS ............................................................................................. 15
3.2.3. MANAGEMENT OF POOLED RESOURCES ................................................................ 15
3.2.4. TRAINING .................................................................................................. 16
3.2.5. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT .......................................................................... 16
3.2.6. EUROSUR................................................................................................... 16
3.2.7. SITUATIONAL MONITORING .............................................................................. 16
3.2.8.1 EXTERNAL RELATIONS .................................................................................. 17
3.2.8.2 COMMUNICATION ........................................................................................ 17
3.2.9. FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS................................................................................... 17
3.2.10. ADMINISTRATION ........................................................................................ 18
3.2.11. ORGANISATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND OVERHEADS ................................................. 18

SECTION III – PROGRAMME OF WORK 2016
4.1. Activity Based Budgeting and the Programme of Work
4.2. Strategic Action Areas in the Programme of Work 2016

19
19
20

4.2.1. Joint Operations (and Pilot Projects) .................................................................. 20
4.2.1. Joint Operations & Pilot Projects ...................................................................... 23
4.2.2. Risk Analysis ............................................................................................... 28
4.2.3. Management of Pooled Resources ...................................................................... 29
4.2.4. Training .................................................................................................... 31
4.2.5. Research and Development ............................................................................. 32
4.2.6. Eurosur ..................................................................................................... 35
4.2.7. Situation Monitoring...................................................................................... 36
4.2.8.1. External Relations ..................................................................................... 36

4.2.8.2. Communication ......................................................................................... 39
4.2.9. Fundamental Rights ...................................................................................... 40
4.2.10. Administration ........................................................................................... 41
4.2.11. Organisational Development and Overheads ........................................................ 45

SECTION IV – BUDGET 2016
ANNEX I - Procurement Plan 2016
ANNEX II – Training Portfolio 2016

47
50
55

3/79

INTRODUCTION
1.1. Foreword
Frontex’ Strategy and Multi Annual Plan 2016 - 2019 (MAP 2015 - 2018) is the mid to long-term
strategic business plan of the agency. In addition, the structure of the MAP 2016 – 2019 is brought
in line with the joint statement of the European Parliament, the Council of the EU and the
European Commission on decentralised agencies, adopted on 19 July 2012, forming Section II of
the Single Programming Document 2016 – 2019.
It shows how Frontex’ Mission Statement is translated into multi annual objectives and linked
with strategic action areas.
The MAP 2016 - 2019 also aims at outlining the Future long term strategy regarding the activities
of the Agency1.
The purpose of the MAP 2016 – 2019 is:
-

to serve as a reference for the development of the annual programmes of work;

-

to ensure transparency, efficiency and accountability regarding Frontex’ activities;

-

to provide the Management Board with a commonly agreed framework for its
undertakings;

-

to enable the Executive Director to perform his duties within key objectives and the
strategic action areas as established by the Management Board;

The MAP 2016 – 2019 is not a static plan. It will be validated annually during the preparation
phase for the annual programmes of work.

1

Art 20/2i Frontex’ Regulation (L 1168/2011, 25th October 2011)

4/79

1.2. List of Acronyms
A/V
ABB
ABC
ABM
AOP
AFIC
API
ARA

Audio / Video
Activity Based Budgeting
Automated Border Control
Activity Based Management
Action Oriented Project
Africa/Frontex Intelligence Community
Advanced Passenger Information
Annual Risk Assessment

BG

Border Guard

C2System
CCC
CCG
CeCLAD-M
CEPOL
CF
CIRAM
CISE
CPIP
CSDP

Command and Control System
Common Core Curriculum
Core Country Group
Centre de Coordination pour la Lutte Anti-drogue en Méditerranée
European Police College
Consultative Forum
Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model
Common Information Sharing Environment
Common Pre Frontier Intelligence Picture
Common Security and Defence Policy

EAC
EASO
EB ARA
EBF
EBGT
EB RAN
EDF
EEAS
EFCA
EMSA
EPN
ESP
EU
Eurojust
Europol
EUROSUR
ETS

European Union Accession Country
European Asylum Support Office
Eastern Balkan Annual Risk Assessment
External Borders Fund
European Border Guard Team
Eastern Balkan Risk Analysis Network
European Union Document Fraud (Project)
European External Action Service
European Fishery Control Agency
European Maritime Safety Agency
European Patrol Network
European Situational Picture
European Union
European Union's Judicial Cooperation Unit
European Police Office
European Border Surveillance System
European Training Scheme

FOSS
FOO
FISO
FR
FRA
FRAN
FRONBAC
FRO
FSC
Fx

Frontex’ One Stop Shop
Frontex’ Operational Office
Frontex’ Intelligence Support Officer
Fundamental Right
Fundamental Rights Agency
Frontex’ Risk Analysis Network
Frontex and Borders Analytical Community
Fundamental Rights Officer
Frontex’ Situation Centre
Frontex

GIS

Geographical Information System

5/79

HQ
HR

Head Quarter
Human Resources

ICT
ILO
INTERPOL
IO
IOM
ISF
ISS

Information and Communication Technology
Immigration Liaison Officer
International Police Office
International Organization
International Organization for Migration
Internal Security Fund
Internal Security Strategy

JO
JORA
JRO

Joint Operation
Joint Operations Reporting Application
Joint Return Operation

MAF
MAOC-N
MAP
MB
MS

Multi Annual Financial Framework
Maritime Analysis and Operations Centre - Narcotics
Multi Annual Plan
Management Board
Member State

NCC
NGO
NTCC

National Coordination Centre
Non-Governmental Organization
National Third Country Coordination Centre

OPA
OPERA
OSINT

Optionally Piloted Aircraft
Operational Resources Application
Open Source Intelligence

RA
RAU
RPAS

Risk Analysis
Risk Analysis Unit
Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems

SAC
SGO
SNE
SOCTA
SOP
SQF
SW

Schengen Associated Country
Seconded Guest Officer
Seconded National Expert
Serious Organized Crime Threat Assessment
Standard Operating Procedure
Specific Qualification Framework
Strength and Weakness

TA
TC
TDF
TEP
TEU
TFEU
THB

Temporary Agent
Third Country
Travel Document Forgery
Technical Equipment Pool
Treaty of the European Union
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
Trafficking in Human Beings

UNHCR

United Nations High Commissioner on Refugees

6/79

VIS

Visa Information System

WAC
WB ARA
WB RAN

Working Arrangement Country
Western Balkan Annual Risk Assessment
Western Balkan Risk Analysis Network

7/79

1.3. Mission Statement
1.3.1. Mission
Frontex supports, coordinates and develops European border management in line with the
Treaties including the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the EU as well as other international
obligations.
Frontex supports the Member States2 (MS) to achieve an efficient, high and uniform level of
border control in accordance with the relevant EU Acquis in particular the Schengen Border Code.
Frontex coordinates operational and EU measures to jointly respond to exceptional situations at
the external borders.
Frontex develops capacities at Member States and European level as combined instruments to
tackle challenges focusing of migration flows, but also contributing to fight cross border crime
and terrorism at the external borders.

1.3.2. Vision
Frontex is the trustworthy European Border Agency, strengthening the European area of Freedom,
Security and Justice.
Frontex is supporting the Members States to keep up their responsibilities by providing
operational solidarity, especially to those facing disproportionate pressures at their external
borders.
Frontex applies the concept of Integrated Border Management with a balanced focus on effective
border control and fight against cross border crime. The agency uses effectively all means
including enhanced interagency cooperation and cooperation with Non EU and Third countries to
fulfil its remit.
Frontex promotes the European border guard culture with the full respect and promotion of
fundamental rights as an integral element. Special focus is applied to the right for asylum and
international protection and the principle of non-refoulment.
Frontex builds the capacities and capabilities in the Member States aiming at developing a
functioning European System for Border Guards.
Professional staff and a set of operational and administrative capabilities enable Frontex to add
value to the European Union.
Frontex is the preferred provider of operational support and expertise on border management to
Member States, the Commission and other EU Agencies.

1.3.3. Values
Within a team-work focused framework, enabled by open communication, Frontex’ staff
members share and live the corporate values. Consequently, they perform their activities in a
highly professional way. Humanity links Frontex’ activities with the promotion and respect of
fundamental rights as unconditional and integral component of effective integrated border
management resulting in trust in Frontex

2

The term ‘Member State’ includes the Member States of the European Union and the Schengen Associated Countries

8/79

1.3.4. Mandate
Article 15 Frontex Regulation defines Frontex as a body of the Union. As EU Agency, Frontex is
mandated, while considering that the responsibility for the control and surveillance of external
borders lies with the Member States, to facilitate and render more effective the application of
existing and future Union measures relating to the management of external borders, in particular
the Schengen Borders Code established by Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 (*). It shall do so by
ensuring the coordination of the actions of the Member States in the implementation of those
measures, thereby contributing to an efficient, high and uniform level of control on persons and
of surveillance of the external borders of the Member States.
Frontex shall also provide the Commission and the Member States with the necessary technical
support and expertise in the management of the external borders and promote solidarity between
Member States, especially those facing specific and disproportionate pressures.
Frontex should improve the exchange of information and the cooperation with other Union
bodies, offices and agencies, such as the European Maritime Safety Agency and the European
Union Satellite Centre, in order to make best use of information, capabilities and systems which
are already available at European level, such as the European Earth monitoring programme.
Frontex should provide the necessary assistance for the development and operation of EUROSUR
and, as appropriate, for the development of CISE, including the interoperability of systems, in
particular by establishing, maintaining and coordinating the EUROSUR framework.
Frontex build its external relations in order to facilitate the implementation of its mandate.

1.3.5. Tasks
In fulfilling its mandate, Frontex shall perform the following tasks:



coordinate operational cooperation between Member States in the field of management
of external borders;
assist Member States on training of national border guards, including the establishment
of common training standards;

9/79













carry out risk analyses, including the assessment of the capacity of Member States to face
threats and pressures at the external borders;
participate in the development of research relevant for the control and surveillance of
external borders;
assist Member States in circumstances requiring increased technical and operational
assistance at the external borders, taking into account that some situations may involve
humanitarian emergencies and rescue at sea;
set up European Border Guard Teams that are to be deployed during joint operations,
pilot projects and rapid interventions;
provide Member States with the necessary support in coordinating or organising joint
return operations;
deploy border guards from the European Border Guard Teams to Member States in joint
operations, pilot projects or in rapid interventions in accordance with Regulation (EC) No
863/2007;
evaluate the results of the joint operations and pilot projects and make a comprehensive
comparative analysis of those results with a view to enhancing the quality, coherence
and efficiency of future operations and project
establish and maintain the communication network for EUROSUR in accordance with
Article 7 Eurosur Regulation;
establish and maintain the European situational picture in accordance with Article 10
Eurosur Regulation;
establish and maintain the common pre-frontier intelligence picture in accordance with
Article 11 Eurosur Regulation;
coordinate the common application of surveillance tools in accordance with Article 12
Eurosur Regulation;

1.4. Strategic Direction
Frontex’ strategic direction is determined by a number of elements such as:
Strengthening the multi-purpose character of joint operations to better contribute to the
priorities of the Internal Security Strategy by increasing the contributions to fight against border
related crime within the priorities of the EU Policy Cycle / EMPACT mechanism;
Realisation of contingency planning – preparedness for possible emergency situations by
developing operational contingency modules used to further improve agility and flexible response
capability.
Utilisation of ‘own equipment’ and of Seconded Guest Officers (Frontex’ own resources);
Use of external funding to finance border security related initiatives (e.g. technical assistance
projects in Third Countries);

10/79

SECTION I – GENERAL CONTEXT
2.1. Influencing Factors
2.1.1. Legal Framework


Treaty on the European Union (TEU) and the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union (TFEU) as well as the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European
Union;



The Frontex Regulation and possible changes based on findings for the Art 33 evaluation;



The Eurosur Regulation;



The Schengen Border Code including the Schengen Governance Package



Other EU legal acts relevant for integrated border management;



The EU Staff Regulations;



The EU Financial Regulations;

2.1.2. Political Framework


The future enlargement of the European Union and the Schengen area;



The Internal Security Strategy;



The Global Approach to Migration and Mobility (GAMM)



The developments after the Stockholm Programme



EU Action on Migratory Pressure



The development and implementation of the Smart Borders Initiative;



Council Conclusions



Joint Statement of the European Parliament, the Council of the EU and the European
Commission on decentralised Agencies;



Common Approach on EU decentralised Agencies (including roadmap);



The political developments in Third Countries of origin or transit for irregular migration;



Conclusion of working arrangements and readmission agreements;

2.1.3. Economical/Financial Framework


The EU Multi Annual Financial Framework 2014 – 2020;

11/79



The financial situation within the public sector of Member States, within the EU, and the
subsequent austerity measures and ‘downsizing policies’;



Gradual application of activity based management (ABM) including activity based
budgeting (ABB);

12/79

SECTION II – MULTI ANNUAL PROGRAMMING 2016 – 2019
3.1. Multi Annual Objectives
The following four multi annual objectives (with descriptions) are seen in compliance with
Frontex’ Mission Statement:

AWARENESS

RESPONSE

Information management is carried out
comprehensively and all layers of the
European Situational Picture as well as the
Common Pre-frontiers Intelligence Picture on
migration and crime at EU external borders
are maintained effectively.

Targeted and protection sensitive joint
operational responses at sea-, land- and air
borders, and joint return operations in
exceptional situations are provided in a timely
and sustainable manner to assist Member States
providing border security and add value by
- strengthening the border management
capacity of Member States under specific
and disproportionate pressure assessed
through risk analysis and Eurosur impact
level assignment;
- enhancing proactive multipurpose and
protection sensitive flexible responses to
significant uncertainties at external borders
as identified by risk analysis;

MSs and SACs are supported with
comprehensive risk analysis services and
products, serving as a basis for targeted
operational cooperation and also meeting the
needs of the European institutions.

Adequately trained human resources and
technical solutions and equipment are made
available to joint operations in a timely manner
and cost effective way according to the plan.

DEVELOPMENT

PERFORMANCE

Best practices, competences and technical
capacities are harmonised at European level
according to the prioritised needs allowing
the strengthening of the Member States’
border management capacity by extensively
using Frontex’ comprehensive and integrated
portfolio of products and services.

Tasks empowered to Frontex are organised and
implemented in compliance with applicable law,
the mandate, fundamental rights and subject to
an internal control system.

Such ‘European best practices’ in border and
crisis management and training, in line with
the EU concept of IBM, are maintained,
promoted and delivered to MSs and other
stakeholders, especially in situations which
have an impact on EU border security.
Interoperability is achieved through the
implementation of standards developed in
cooperation with Member States.

Relevant
findings
of
evaluations
are
appropriately taken into account when
developing the functioning of the organisation.
Actions are prioritised during the annual
planning, and adjusted or reviewed according to
pre-defined
criteria
whenever
deemed
necessary;
Human and financial resources are managed in
line with guiding principles provided by the
legislator and political authorities.
Monitoring and reporting is continuously done by
applying the pre-set performance indicators.

13/79

3.2. Strategic Action Areas
3.2.1. JOINT OPERATIONS (AND PILOT PROJECTS)
Description
Coordinate multipurpose joint activities that sustain the operational presence in areas at the
external borders exposed to specific and disproportionate pressure as assessed by risk
analysis and Eurosur impact assessment as well as facing significant security concerns and
other uncertainties;
To provide timely, structured and protection sensitive responses at the EU and the MS in
exceptional situations having high impact on EU border management.
Further optimise the use of Frontex’ budget for operational purposes and to increase the
intensity and flexibility of operational activities by:
- prioritising the use of participating Member States’ Technical Equipment, and well
trained members of EBGT;
- better analysis of operational needs, gap analysis and identification of options to
close the gaps;
- co-financing host Member State’s additional operational activities that establish the
core infrastructure for the management of joint operations;
- co-financing host Member State’s temporary re-deployments of the “reserve” of
experts and technical equipment, in accordance with Frontex’ strategic guidelines
on co-financing during JO (e.g. unit costs);
- making full use of projects and products contribution to Eurosur implementation;
- To further enhance and sustain operational cooperation with relevant partners as
well as Third Countries through tailored JOs;
Add capacity to sound EU border management and enhance flexibility and effectiveness by
further developing the European Patrol Network (EPN) and increasingly conducting
operational activities using functional structures and platforms; furthermore promote
regional border control cooperation structures as platforms for Frontex’ activities if
appropriate; furthermore promote regional border control cooperation structures as
platforms for Frontex’ activities if appropriate;
Develop operational contingency modules in the event of emergency situations by
reinforcing/modifying ongoing operational activities or launching new joint operations thus
ensuring enhanced operational capacity adding EU value in situations of specific migration
pressure;

Priority
Level

1

1

1

1

Implement the "hotspot" approach in the front line Member States as well as provide
administrative and logistical support for the establishment and operation of the "hotspot"
European Union Regional Task Forces.

1

Further develop a system to identify, collect, elaborate and disseminate best practices by
implementing functional strategies and delivery of services contributing to significantly
enhance MS capacities;

2

Intensify the tailored concepts of different types of joint operations (land, sea, air, return
activities) and target the alignment of Frontex’ operations with the priorities of the Internal
Security Strategy (EU Policy Cycle);

2

Facilitate operational cooperation by ensuring effective coordination with any existing
Member State local or regional liaison officers (e.g. ILOs) outside the EU;
Association with the implementation of a pilot project ‘Enhanced cooperation of coast guard
functions in the EU’ and possible contributions to the discussions on the existing EU legal
framework including improved cooperation of cost guard functions in the EU.

2

2

14/79

3.2.2. RISK ANALYSIS
Description
EU Borders Risk Analysis Products, Services and Methodology
To provide and consolidate the platforms for the exchange of actionable information,
knowledge and analysis enabling Frontex, Member States, and other participating EU entities
to experience being part of the most up to date situational awareness system.

Priority
Level

1

To enhance the applicability of common risk analysis methodology across the EU, including
the development of capacity assessment component of situation awareness.
Operational Risk Analysis Products and Services
To perform reporting, analysis and evaluations including fundamental rights aspect for joint
operations and other operational purposes.

1

To further enhance the quantitative and qualitative information gathering for the purpose
of situation awareness in joint operations
Data Management, GIS and technical support to analysis
To gradually develop and implement the processing of information also containing personal
data for the purpose of risk analysis and for the purpose of transmission to MSs and EU law
enforcement agencies, in line with the agreed timeframe.

1

To provide and enhance core risk analysis tools and services for quantitative and qualitative
data analysis and visualisation;
To implement core risk analysis training thus enhancing the analytical capabilities of MS and
TC;
Support to EU Policies and Regulations
To provide analytical and other expertise to support EU institutions, in particular the
European Commission, by continuing to support the implementation of relevant regulations
and policies, contribute to the establishment of evaluation and monitoring mechanism with
regard to the application of the Schengen acquis.
Third Country Strategic Products and Services
To provide and expand the frameworks for the exchange of actionable information,
knowledge and analysis on phenomena beyond EU borders enabling the sharing of situation
awareness between Frontex, Member States and Third Countries.

1

2

To continue developing the third country monitoring services and products, including
production for the analysis layer.
To continue identifying and expanding new possible information sources.
Risk Analysis EUROSUR specific products and services
To continue providing the relevant products and services for the CPIP/ESP Analysis Layer
while keeping the internal and external stakeholders informed on developments

2

To provide relevant input for the satellite imagery services under Copernicus framework

3.2.3. MANAGEMENT OF POOLED RESOURCES
Description
To provide technical assistance in support to Frontex coordinated Joint Operations by
effectively procuring operational Technical Equipment and Human Resources, managing
additional calls for contributions, reporting and analysing of the use of operational resources.

Priority
Level

1

To strengthen the existing pooling mechanisms based on Annual Bilateral Talks, managing
Technical Equipment and EBGT pools (including Seconded Guest Officers).

1

To develop the capacity to pool resources with solutions to acquire technical equipment and
services, hence bridging identified gaps that cannot be covered by MS/SAC.

1

To increase Frontex reaction capacity by improving and exercising the Rapid Intervention
mechanism for the deployment of trained European Border Guard Teams in urgent and

15/79

exceptional cases; Contribute to enhanced interoperability and operational reaction
capabilities in case of urgent and exceptional migratory pressure.

2

3.2.4. TRAINING
Description
Educational Standards (Common Core Curricula) To establish, maintain and develop
educational standards from the basic level up to the Master degree based on the Sectoral
Qualifications Framework (SQF) for Border Guarding.
European Border Guard Team (EBGT) Training
To improve capability, capacity and performance of selected profiles listed in the EBGT pool.
Complementary Disciplines
To complement national programmes in Member States/SAC towards having specialised trained
professionals to perform border guard activities with common training tools, qualifying
national multipliers and trainers.
Training Networks
To establish, maintain and develop supporting networks for training activities.

Priority
Level

1

1

1
2

3.2.5. RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
Description
Harmonization of EU Member States’ border control capacities by developing/updating best
practices/ guidelines and by providing technical support and expertise to Member States in
applying them, as well as identification of capability gaps;
Technical assistance to the European Commission and Member States and (further)
development of border control capacities;
Assessment of border control technologies for steering their (further) development based on
end-user needs;
Innovation in Border Management

Priority
Level

1

1

2
2

3.2.6. EUROSUR
Description
To ensure the operational running of functions of the Eurosur framework, including
communication network, as integral part of Frontex’ regular business.

Priority
Level

1

3.2.7. SITUATIONAL MONITORING
Description
Provide and fuse real time and/or close to real time situational awareness and surveillance
services (via Frontex Fusion Services) and Senior duty Officers’ 12/7 situation monitoring
activities and products in support of Member States’ situational awareness and reaction
capabilities at the external borders of the EU or European Situational Picture (ESP) and
Common Pre-frontier Intelligence Picture (CPIP);

Priority
Level

1

16/79

Further develop and implement the European Border Surveillance framework (EUROSUR) and
promote the operational integration of EUROSUR into border control activities across the EU;

1

Exploring a possible follow up of the project on air border monitoring.
Develop the capacity for increased information exchange and monitoring namely through the
enhancement of existing Frontex information exchange tools, development of integrated
systems for information exchange and situation monitoring and adoption of 3rd party
information exchange tools for bilateral and multilateral communication

2

3.2.8.1 EXTERNAL RELATIONS3
Description
Support the MSs’ Border Management Services by
 strengthened effective cooperation with partners in the field of internal security and
the detection/prevention of cross-border crime (EU Policy Cycle);
 Strengthened effective cooperation with partners in the field of migration management
and return (mixed migratory flows and vulnerable groups at the EU external border);
Establish operational and capacity building cooperation, launch EU funded technical assistance
projects related to border management, promote interagency cooperation with and amongst
competent authorities of third countries; deploying Liaison Officers to third countries in
justified cases (including the option of joint deployments with other Agencies); follow,
participate in and contribute to Commission-led initiatives and other relevant activities
regarding cooperation with third countries;

Priority
Level

1

1

Enhance coordination with EU Agencies (Europol, EASO, CEPOL, EU-LISA, Eurojust, FRA, and
others) and cooperation with relevant international organisations (UNHCR, IOM, DCAF,
Interpol);

1

Encourage and promote coordinated activities between different national authorities (border
guard, coast guard, police, customs etc.) as well as national and international carriers by
involving them in Frontex’ activities;

2

Support Member States to use EU financial instruments (e.g. MAF, ISF) in a more efficient way.

2

3.2.8.2 COMMUNICATION
Description
Increase transparency and enhance Frontex’ reputation through active communication on its
activities in line with Frontex’ internal and external communication strategy; supported by
improved and streamlined production processes for publications, audio-video and multimedia
products with a particular focus on the agency’s online presence;

Priority
Level

1

3.2.9. FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS
Description

3

Priority
Level

Enhance strategic cooperation with Frontex’ Consultative Forum on Fundamental Rights;

1

Embed the respect for Fundamental Rights in the culture of Frontex

1

The split between External Relations and Public Relations (Communication) as separate Strategic Action Areas should be considered;

thus allowing better differentiation between objectives and assignment of tasks;

17/79

3.2.10. ADMINISTRATION
Description

Priority
Level

Update and align the regulatory framework in order to support adequately the implementation
of Frontex activities;

1

Carry out recruitment and reallocation of staff procedures in a uniform, transparent and
efficient way adhering to best practice guidelines. Vacancies are subjected to a rigorous
‘needs and competency-based assessment’ to respond to the flexibility and agility
requirements of the Agency;

1

Increase the awareness of performance management in different HR related processes;

1

Promote knowledge and understanding on the respect, protection and promotion of
fundamental rights within Frontex staff;

1

Improve continuously the planning, monitoring and execution of Frontex’ financial resources
in order to achieve efficiency gains;

1

Plan asset acquisition side-by-side with the Programme of Work using historical data and
inventory reports as facilitator as and when required;

1

Provide technical (ICT) support to operational and enabling areas to maintain and improve the
necessary infrastructure for operational and administrative purposes;

1

Support proactively the financial management of operational and enabling action areas aiming
at continuously improving the agency’s processes;

1

Provide support related to management of human resources to all operational and enabling
areas;

1

Provide physical security to Frontex’ premises and staff;

1

Provide security for the ICT Systems of Frontex;

1

Setting up and implementing an intranet / content management system for Frontex;

1

Setting up and implementing a document management system for Frontex;

1

Set up and implement an automated system for human resource management;

2

Explore and support the optimisation of use of complimentary EU funding in the field of
integrated border management for the agency and its stakeholders.

2

Legal Affairs

2

Consolidation of ICT systems in order to supply common components, reduce number of
systems, overlapping of functionalities and reduce costs;

2

3.2.11. ORGANISATIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND OVERHEADS
Description
Senior Management
Implement activity based management (ABM) including activity based budgeting (ABB) aiming
at improving performance and quality management to align Frontex’ products and services to
stakeholders needs;

Priority
Level
1

1

Implementation of recommendations from Art 33 Evaluation

1

Divisional Management (Operations and Capacity Building)

2

Improve the performance and overall management (culture) of Frontex;

2

Maintain a tailored project management system for Frontex;

2

Implementation of business continuity in Frontex, including ICT solutions.

2

18/79

SECTION III – PROGRAMME OF WORK 2016
4.1. Activity Based Budgeting and the Programme of Work

Activity based draft budget 2016
Direct costs
Governance Level Activities

Total
Total cost 2016
Indirect costs

Staff

Operational

Total
Direct costs

1. Joint operations

6 637 351

186 352 000

192 989 351

15 594 876

208 584 227

2. Risk Analysis

3 851 779

1 800 000

5 651 779

1 936 874

7 588 653

3. Management of Pooled Resources

1 256 100

1 100 000

2 356 100

686 386

3 042 486

4. Training

1 560 400

5 000 000

6 560 400

994 504

7 554 904

5. Research and Development

1 219 456

1 100 000

2 319 456

544 646

2 864 102

6. EUROSUR

1 940 597

11 300 000

13 240 597

1 662 681

14 903 277

7. Situational monitoring

1 786 744

1 898 000

3 684 744

969 969

4 654 714

8. External and public relations

1 771 834

1 649 000

3 420 834

840 940

4 261 774

330 089

110 000

440 089

140 774

580 863

20 354 350

210 309 000

230 663 350

23 371 650

254 035 000

91%

9%

100%

9. Fundamental Rights incl. Consultative Forum
TOTAL ACTIVITIES

* The activity "8. External and public relations" covers a mix of cooperation with third countries, international organisations, with EU institutions or agencies,
external communication, and events such as European Day for Border Guards;

In 2015 the agency launched the activity based management of its budget. In May 2014 the Management
Board had decided on the areas to be shown in an activity based budget on governance level.
The approach can be explained as follows:
Direct costs are costs directly related to operational activities. This includes operational costs and costs for
(operational) staff.
Operational costs are financial resources stemming mainly from Title 3, but also from Title 2 (e.g. for the
Consultative Forum or public relations related costs).
The number of staff shown as direct costs (see table to the left) are those staff members that are working
in the respective operational units/sectors/teams.
Depending on the grade of the staff, staff related (direct) costs may be higher or lower.
For Eurosur, as such a unit or sector does not exist, the relevant staff members are indicated from Risk
Analysis, the Frontex Situation Centre and ICT carrying out Eurosur related tasks (=30).
Indirect costs are composed of costs for support staff and administrative & support costs. Indirect staff
(‘support staff’) include the staff working in traditional administrative functions (e.g. Finance, Human
Resources, ICT, as well as the Executive Director, the Deputy Executive Director and the Division Directors
and their assistants) supporting the direct operational staff. The reason to include the Director’s group is
that they cannot be allocated to one specific activity, but their work is of horizontal nature across the
agency.
The allocation of indirect staff is done proportional to the number of staff members directly assigned to the
units/sectors/teams. Hence, 296 staff members are supported by 121 staff members working either in
administrative functions or implementing governance level activities.
In the overview above the administrative and support expenditures account for 10.13% of the total direct
costs (direct staff costs + operational direct costs), and are allocated proportionally to each governance
level activity. The administrative and support expenditure include expenditures for rent, stationary, ICT
equipment (hardware, software, contracts) and for MB meetings.

19/79

By applying an activity based approach and setting into relation total direct costs to total indirect costs, a
ratio of 91% to 9% can be established.

4.2. Strategic Action Areas in the Programme of Work 2016

Resource Allocation per Strategic Action Area
100
90

86.3

80

Percentage

70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0

24

23
14
0.8

5
0.5

52.3

30.5

75.2

5
0.3

20.2

20.5

10.0

3.3

10.0

6
0.0

The chart above shows the distribution of human and financial resources per strategic action areas (in
percent). Overall the ‘knowledge areas’ (e.g. Risk Analysis, Situational Monitoring, Eurosur) but also the
classical support areas (Administration, Organisational Development) show as work intensive, requiring a
significant percentage of staff allocation
In comparison to that the distribution of financial resources (T3) is significantly different. With 86.7% the
main share is allocated to operational activities. When including ‘other’ operational activities such as Risk
Analysis, Eurosur and Capacity Building activities the share increases to 96%.4

4.2.1. Joint Operations (and Pilot Projects)
The total estimated budget for joint operational activities (excluding ‘operational flexibility’) is 165 073
000 EUR. The further breakdown of this amount is shown in the table below. This table shows a significant
increase in financial resources allocated to operational activities. Compared to the resources available at
the beginning of 2015 this means a tripling of financial resources to scale up operational activities, mainly
within JO Triton and Poseidon. This will be used to reinforce the number of assets and extending the
territorial scope of those operations, thus allowing to increase the search and rescue possibilities within the
mandate of Frontex.

4

Setting of ration is based on rounding – small amounts e.g. 100.000 Euros = 0.14% rounded to 0% (Fundamental Rights)

20/79

Types of operational
activities

Maritime
activities

Initially
Estimated
Allocation
(EUR)

operational

Estimated
Allocation
(EUR)

Reserved
Operational
Flexibility
(EUR)

Possible
Allocation (EUR)

77 828 000

92 828 000

9 972 000

102 800 000

Land operational activities

7 345 000

12 345 000

3 405 000

15 750 000

Air operational activities

2 150 000

2 150 000

652 000

2 802 000

Return operational activities

7 750 000

57 750 000

7 250 000

65 000 000

Operational Flexibility
Sum

21 279 000
95 073 000

165 073 000

186 352 000

Approach of Operational Concepts
Despite the functional structure of the organisation, and in application of the practice applied over the last
year, the programme of work for 2016 shows the allocation of resources (human and financial) to activities
under the Strategic Action Area ‘Joint Operations’ in line with operational concepts instead. Those concepts
foresee mixed operational activities covering not just one but more types of borders. It also showed, that
this approach – besides simplification – also provides additional flexibility, enabling to better deal with
shifting operational needs due to the developments in the geographical areas of interest.
During 2016 an amount of 21.3 ME (shown in the document under ‘operational flexibility’) will be further
allocated to operational activities according to the migratory pressure. The column titled ‘Possible
Allocation’ shows the indicative allocation to the amount to different types of borders.
Based on the agreements found during the further planning process (‘Annual Bilateral Talks’) the allocation
of resources might be further specified. During and after the Annual Bilateral Talks also the ‘Assessment of
Operational Deployment and Plan of Operational Activities 2016’ will be finalised, containing a brief on the
operational scope, area, Member States involved and the allocated resources. The document are annexed
to the Single Planning Document for the adoption of the Programme of Work 2016.
Hotspot Approach
The aim of the Hotspot approach is to provide a platform for the agencies to intervene, rapidly and in an
integrated manner, in frontline Member States when there is a crisis due to specific and disproportionate
migratory pressure at their external borders, consisting of mixed migratory flows and the Member State
concerned might request support and assistance to better cope with that pressure.
The support offered and the duration of assistance to the Member State concerned will depend on its needs
and the development of the situation. This is intended to be a flexible tool that can be applied in a tailored
manner. In such a “Hotspot” approach different Agencies (European Asylum Support Office, Frontex and
Europol) will work on the ground with frontline Member States to swiftly identify, register and fingerprint
incoming migrants. The work of the agencies will be complementary to one another. An EU Regional Task
Force (EURTF) is responsible for the overall operational coordination of the work of the different teams of
experts from EU Agencies involved in the “Hotspot” approach, the information exchange among these teams
and will coordinate its efforts with national authorities.
Frontex was assigned as the service provider for the EURTF implemented in Catania, Italy and is responsible
to ensure the working conditions for the staff deployed in the EURTF by other EU Agencies. Frontex will play
a particularly active role with regard to return operations and supporting Europol's and Eurojust' work in
dismantling of smuggling networks by fully utilising the possibilities to exchange personal data for this
purpose;

21/79

Return
Primarily immediate support on return to frontline Member States (especially Italy and Greece) and
identification of best practices on the acquisition of travel documents and on the removal of irregularly
present third country nationals.
The work will focus on nationals of those third countries that are a priority to return from the frontline
Member States and would support those Member States in a number of stages (pre-return, return operations
and capacity building).
The foreseen change to Frontex’ organisational structure will allow to enhance Frontex' role in the area of
returns by stepping up efforts to make full use of its current mandate in assisting Member States in return
operations and other relevant activities.
Western Balkan
The Western Balkan will remain a main area of interest for operational response activities. Hence,
operational activities implemented at EU external land borders will be planned and coordinated in the
Western Balkan region and the South Eastern land borders; those activities will be combined in synchronised
way with “Flexible Operational Activities” organised at the same areas (at the green borders and at the
BCPs) according to operational needs.
Copernicus
On 10 November 2015 Frontex signed a Delegation Agreement with DG GROW amounting to EUR 47.5 m for
the period 2015-2020 in order to implement the Border Surveillance component of the Copernicus Security
Services. The objective of this component is to provide increased situational awareness when responding to
security challenges at the external border through detection and monitoring of cross-border security threats,
risk assessment and early warning systems, mapping and monitoring. For 2016, an indicative amount of EUR
7.503 m has been earmarked.”

22/79

4.2.1. Joint Operations & Pilot Projects
Title
Focal Points Concept

Activity ID
JOU 1

Description

Output

HR

The general aim of this concept is to further
develop and intensify the implementation of
multipurpose operational concepts, further
develop the operational activities at air, sea
and land borders as permanent platforms for
providing sustaining operational presence and
information exchange/gathering in areas
exposed to specific and disproportionate
pressure, for reinforcement at external borders
when needed by Flexible Operational Activities
and to work as a platform for strengthening the
interagency cooperation and gaining border
related intelligence.

Under Focal Points concept the following
operational activities will be implemented:

24.5

-JO Focal Points Land;
-JO Coordination Points Land;
-JO Focal Points Sea;
-JO Focal Points Air Regular officers;
-JO Focal Points Air Intermediate Managers;
-JO Flexible Operational Activities Land on border
surveillance;
-JO Flexible Operational Activities Land on border
checks;

FR
13,328.000
Land
borders
(including
the
flexible
operational
activities) 86-88%,
Air borders - 810%
Sea borders - 4%

Focal Points are selected for activation
according to recommendations resulting from
short/mid-term risk analysis reports delivered
throughout the year, in order to respond in an
effective and accurate manner to threats at the
external borders of the EU. Focal Points can
also be activated upon justification based on
the MS national risk analysis The operational
activities at external land borders will be
implemented according to risk analysis
recommendations to support MS at the external
borders.
he main focus of the operational activities to
be implemented at EU external land borders
will remain in the South Eastern and Western
Balkan region

23/79

Indic
ator
custo
mer
satisf
actio
n,
timeli
ness;
Align
ment
Index
;
partic
ipatio
n
ratio

Focal Points concept will also cover Flexible
Operational Activities focussing on the green
border surveillance, debriefing and screening
activities and additionally insuring increased
border checks capacities in BCPs.
Title
EPN Concept

Activity ID
JOU-2

Description
Joint maritime operations within the
Framework of European Patrols Network (EPN)
will be implemented according to risk analysis
priorities to support MS at the external borders
in operational areas of Central Mediterranean,
Eastern and Western Mediterranean Regions,
and Atlantic Ocean in order to control irregular
migration flows towards the territory of the MS
of the EU and to tackle cross border crime.

Output
Under EPN concept the following operational
activities are foreseen:
-

EPN Triton;
EPN Poseidon Sea;
EPN Hera;
EPN Indalo;
EPN Minerva

EPN Triton
44-46%

Indicator
customer
satisfaction,
timeliness;
Alignment
Index;
participation
ratio

EPN Hera
1,5%
EPN Indalo
5%
EPN
Minerva
0.7%

By demonstrating sustainable operational
presence and information exchange/gathering
in areas of the external borders exposed to
specific and disproportionate pressure,
substantial contribution is provided in
accordance to the EUROSUR objectives and
cooperation and coordination with other Union
agencies and bodies or international
organizations as well as Third Countries is
systematically enhanced.
Activity ID

FR
91,250.000

EPN
Poseidon
46-48%

Frontex will maintain enhanced operational
activities in the Central and Eastern
Mediterranean, by joint operations EPN Triton
and EPN Poseidon Sea, including Hot Spots
concept.

Title

HR
30

Description

Output

24/79

HR

FR

Indicator

Pulsar Concept

JOU-3

Title
Vega Concept

Title
Return
Support
Operational Concept

The operational activities at external air
borders will be implemented according to risk
analysis recommendations and identified needs
to support MS across the entire external air
borders as well as in Third Countries having
signed working arrangements with Frontex.
Focus will be given to threats and perceived
vulnerabilities/needs identified at the external
air borders.

The concept will cover following operational
activities:

Activity ID
JOU-5

1,000.000
JO Alexis
I and II
55-60%

- JO Alexis I and II
- JO Pegasus
- JO Eurocup

JO
Pegasus
25-30%
JO
Eurocup
15-20 %

Activity ID
Description
Output
Frontex will promote effective protection The Vega concept will cover
JOU-4
measures
for
vulnerable
persons/groups operational activities:
(children and victims of trafficking in human
beings) at external air, land and sea borders from - JO VEGA Children
a law enforcement point of view. Under this - PP VEGA
concept Frontex will further develop cooperation
with non-EU Countries and with EU Agencies and
International Organisations (Europol, FRA,
Interpol, UNHCR, and IOM) organizing also public
awareness session at EU airports.

–

9

Description
Frontex will enhance the practical cooperation
on return by scaling up numbers of joint return
operations where destinations will be based on
request from the EU Member States on assistance
and coordination. The Rolling Operational Plan
will be replaced by a web based platform for day
to day update of request for assistance and
coordination.

Output

Frontex under this concept will scale up prereturn assistance to the EU Member States and

25/79

following

HR
2

HR
28

FR
200.000

Indicator
customer
satisfaction,
timeliness;
Alignment
Index;
participation
ratio

FR
57,750.000

Indicator
customer
satisfaction,
timeliness;
Alignment
Index;
participation
ratio

facilitate cooperation with third countries on
identification and acquisition of travel
documents.
The activities will also cover third country
delegation visits (Task Forces) for identification
purpose and issuing travel documents.
Frontex, as part of the flexible support on
return, will provide on request capacity building
on return including training, linking screening
process with the actual identification and return
process.
Frontex will ensure the operational coordination
of an integrated system of return management
to build synergies between EU funded return
projects and Frontex.
The role of Frontex Direct Contact Points on
return (DCPs) will be further enhanced as part of
the operational coordination of return
management and for the exchanging of
operational experience and knowledge in return
matters.
Title
Additional Products and
Services

Activity ID
JOU-6

Description
Products and Services that can be delivered in
addition and more tailored to products and
services of the concepts mentioned before.
Activities under EPN General are related to
harmonization,
compatibility
and
interoperability seeking to further develop
operational effectiveness and efficiency in

Output
- Frontex Positioning System;
- Frontex Compatible Operational Image;
- EPN Staff Exchange;
- EPN Yellow Pages;
- Tailored Working Groups;
- Support to regional cooperation for in
maritime domain;
- Operational Heads of Airports Conference;
- All-in-One meeting;
- PP Reference Manual;

26/79

HR
7.5

FR
1,545.000

Indicator
customer
satisfaction,
timeliness;
Alignment
Index;
participation
ratio

Title
Operational Flexibility

Activity ID
JOU-7

coherence with the main recommendations and
conclusions of the JOs.

- Project Reference Manual online;
- Project Air Border Monitoring;
- Best practices on Land border’s
procedures.

Description
Operational Flexibility shall enable the short
term assignment of additional financial
resources based on exceptional developments of
the migratory pressure and related changes to
risk levels.

Output
Enhance joint operations at different types of
borders (indicative):

The reserved allocations for land border
operational activities may be used to enhance
green border surveillance activities and border
checks covering additional operational areas
(not included under operational concept)
affected by irregular migration flow.

-

JO Focal Points Land;
EPN Triton;
EPN Poseidon Sea
EPN Indalo
JO Alexis I and II

ICC

HR
0

FR
21,279.000
Land
borders 3,405.000
Air
borders:
652.000
Sea
borders 9,972.000
(EPN
Triton50%, EPN
Poseidon
Sea-35%,
EPN
Indalo15%)

The operational flexibility allocated to joint
maritime operations might be used to enhance
ongoing operational activities such as EPN
Triton, EPN Poseidon Sea, and EPN Indalo.
of Operational Flexibility At external air borders
the fluctuating migratory pressure varies week
by week. Such phenomena are identified often
at the last moment before activities are
launched or even in course of them. The
reserved operational flexibility budget has
therefore been distributed to the different joint
operations carried out at airports with the aim
to have resources immediately available per
each of those activities while additional budget

Return:
7,250.000

27/79

Indicator
customer
satisfaction,
timeliness;
Alignment
Index;
participation
ratio

can be later transferred between different
activities according to the need.
The use of the budget will be triggered by
emerging needs identified by Frontex or directly
by the participating Member States in course of
the year. The needs may encompass a certain
number of irregular migrants arriving at certain
airports, new connections and etc.

4.2.2. Risk Analysis
Title
Strategic risk analysis
products services and
risk
analysis
methodology

Activity ID
RAU-1

Description
To provide platforms for information exchange
and joint analytical work by Frontex and Member
States in order to generate and share in-depth
knowledge and up-to-date situational awareness
achieved also through the constant development
of methodology for risk analysis.

Output
EDF-ARA, EDF meetings, Annual Risk
Analysis
package,
Stakeholders
participation in the Annual Risk Analysis
process; 2 Risk Analysis Thematic Meetings;
Regular monthly products; Updates of
situation at the external borders;
Specialised EU MS capacity assessment;
Methodology for capacity assessment; THB
Handbook package; Thematic workshops
with THB experts

HR
13.1

FR
430.000

Indicator
participation ratio;
customer
satisfaction;
timeliness; nr of
downloads; nr of
stakeholders
consulted;
participation ratio;

Operational risk analysis
services and products

RAU-2

Operational analysis products and services are
delivered in order to provide situation
awareness and advice for the planning
implementation monitoring and evaluation of
joint operations, pilot projects and EBGT.

Risk Analysis input for JO planning, incl.
ABT planning and implementation (AOD);
Risk Analysis inputs to JO implementation
and evaluation; Risk Analysis Input to EBGT
processes; FLO GRC Intel: collection of
operational intelligence/information from
the operational areas; Support and
management of debriefing activities in JO;
AB-RAN meetings; Structured information
exchange in place; IO workshops

22.0

160.000

customer
satisfaction,
timeliness;
Alignment
Index;
participation ratio

28/79

Third
Country
Analysis Services
Products

Risk
and

RAU-3

Third Country Risk Analysis Networks, third
country monitoring and other related activities
are the platforms and means for access and
exchange of up to date information and analysis
with and on Third Countries, enabling situation
awareness on the irregular migration situation in
Third Countries affecting EU external borders.

WB-RAN ARA, WB-RAN Quarterly packages;
WB-RAN meetings and workshops; EaP-RAN
meetings and workshops
EaP-ARA and EaP Quarterly packages; AFIC
meetings and workshops; AFIC report
package; TU-RAN meetings; TU-RAN ARA
and TU-RAN Quarterly packages; Third
Country Monitoring included in regular
analytical production
Participation in relevant ILO network
meetings;

9.5

350.000

customer
satisfaction;
timeliness;
participation ratio;
customer
satisfaction
with
regular products; nr
of
meetings
attended

Data Management and
Technical Support to
Risk Analysis

RAU-5

Provision of technical services enabling and
supporting risk analysis such as data and GIS
analysis, change initiatives to develop personal
data processing and business intelligence,
building risk analysis capacity
in Frontex,
Member States and cooperating Third Countries.

Data Analysis and GIS analysis inputs;
Access to sources enabled; MS transfers of
personal data; Risk analyses prepared on
basis of personal data; Intelligence
packages to Europol; Stage Plan for Pedra
Stage II; Trainings; Data sources directly
available to analysts; automation of data
analysis;

11.6

800.000

customer
satisfaction;
increased nr of
users;
ratio
of
reports containing
personal
data;
timeliness; nr of
trainings; nr of
sources available

Informing EU policies
and regulations with risk
analysis. Support to
EMPACT

RAU-6

Analytical input and reports are provided to DG
Home and other EU institutions in the
implementation of relevant regulations and
policies.

Analytical contributions provided as
planned (incl. HIO)
Risk Analysis for presidency operations

1.8

60.000

Timeliness;
satisfaction level;
nr of missions;

4.2.3. Management of Pooled Resources
Title
Technical Assistance

Activity ID
PRU-1

Description
Provision of technical assistance aimed to secure
that appropriate resources are made available to
support operational activities.

Output
Operational assets managed and made
available for Joint Operations; Acquisition of
services and operational means; Carrying out
an operational resources gap analysis; Making
additional calls for contributions to Joint
Operations.

29/79

HR
3

FR
0

Indicator
Minimum numbers
in the pools (OMNTE
and overall number
of EBGT members)
ensured; Required
resources obtained

in due time for Joint
Operations;
Completion of the
gap analysis; To
ensure that the
required additional
human
resources
and
assets
for
operational
activities
are
available
when
required.
Maintenance

PRU-2

Maintaining the numbers and quality of the
assets in the pools to ensure they are sufficient
to meet operational needs and legal obligations.

Establishment and selection of TE for the
OMNTE; Letters of Agreement with the
MS/SAC; Additional technical equipment;

8

120.000

Open
call
for
contributions
to
OMNTE,
TE
selected; All human
resource needs are
covered by MS;
Open
calls
for
additional TE, TE
selected and agreed
with
MS;
New
decision adopted by
the MB

Development

PRU-3

Acquisition of technical equipment and/or
services, as well as the development of the
Opera resource management application.

Purchase of small items of equipment
Contract for the provision of technical
equipment and/or services
Implementation of PP on acquisition of
surveillance services
Upgraded version of Opera (Opera 3)

5

545.000

Successful purchase
of
required
equipment;
Contracts signed

Reaction Capacity

PRU--4

Carrying out a rapid intervention exercise.

Operational concept agreed with JOU and
integrated into the Frontex plan of Operations;
Conducting the REX exercise;

3

315.000

REX integrated into
the
Plan
of
Operations

30/79

Expert Networking

PRU-5

Regularly conducting the Pooled Resources
Network (PRN) meetings in order to exchange
information and obtain feedback from Member
States and Stakeholders regarding the
procedures and tools used in connection with
developing and maintaining the pools of
technical and human resources.

PRN meetings

1

120.000

Successful holding
of agreed number of
meetings

4.2.4. Training
Title
Educational Standards
(Common
Core
Curricula)

Activity ID
TRU-1

Description
From the basic level up to the Master degree,
Common Core Curricula for Border Guards
constitute the cornerstones in building
harmonised competencies within all stages of
professional careers. They are based on the
Sectoral Qualifications Framework (SQF) for
Border Guarding as overarching framework
according to Bologna/Copenhagen principles
and the European Qualifications Framework
for Lifelong Learning (EQF).

Output
Curriculum designers trained; aligned curricula
at Frontex and national level; Revision of CCC
according to CCC-IAP outcomes; CCC Mid Level
draft Study programme Year 2 Iteration 1

HR
3.5

FR
940.000

Indicator
Alignment
Index;
Quality Level

European Border Guard
Team (EBGT) Training

TRU-2

These types of training activities focus on the
specific needs of the EBGT pool members for
carrying out their duties effectively, according
to the profile defined for their deployment.
They ensure flexible and updated delivery
according to the situation and envisages direct
access to trained human resources during
operations.

Trainings

6.2

1,300.000

Satisfaction Level;
Quality Level

Thematic
Support

TRU-3

To complement national programmes in
Member
States/SAC
towards
having
specialised trained professionals to perform
border guard activities with common training
tools, qualifying national multipliers and
trainers.

Training of trainers; Update of tools and course
delivery; eLearning courses; Simulation; IBM
Pilot Training

5.2

1,270.000

Quality
Level;
Alignment Index

Training

31/79

Training Infrastructures

TRU-4

Ad hoc training, missions
and logistics

TRU-5

To promote excellence in border guard
education and training by developing and
maintaining effective cooperative networks.
An ICT platform and eLearning solutions are to
be developed to ensure cost-effective training
delivery and increase the training capabilities
of Frontex, as well as of its stakeholders.
Training solutions to support urgent
operational needs on ad hoc basis, missions of
TRU staff members and logistics.

Cooperation activities; TRU ICT platform
implemented; Annual conference; Training
Experts Certification

5.1

1,030.000

Satisfaction Level;
Usage Level

Ad hoc training, support and missions

05

460.000

Usage Level

4.2.5. Research and Development
Title
Harmonization of the EU
Member States' border
control capacities

5

Activity ID
RDU-1

Description
This activity aims to harmonize and where
needed to build up the Member States’ border
control capacities - including the harmonization
of technical equipment, where necessary, and
of working practices - in order to increase
security and enhance travel facilitation at the
borders.

Output
Report on Implementation and Operation of
Visa Information System at National Level
(to be published in 2016);
Introduction to the Passenger Analysis Model
( to be published in 2016);
Training manuals and courses to be
delivered ( in cooperation with TRU):
Intermediate Training for the First Line
Officers on Automated Border Control
(ABC);
Specialised Traning on Vulnerability
Assessment and Testing for ABC;
Common Procurement Guidelines on ABC;
Best Practices and Capability Gaps Related
to Border Checks at Air Borders;
Best Practices and Guidelines for Sea and
Land Border Surveillance - Data sharing and
operational communications;

HR
4.75

FR
300.000

Indicator
Product
Delivery
Timeliness -Ratio

No specific human resources assigned to this activity; it will be used as a financial pool to finance ad hoc training required by urgent operational needs and related activities (missions and logistics) carried out in the four

other areas of activities

32/79

Best Practices and Guidelines for Border
Surveillance - Technical equipment
acquisition process;
Best Practices and Guidelines for Border
Surveillance - Sensors for line, perimeter
and for low flying detection;
Guidelines and Technical requirements for
mobile land border surveillance systems;
Guidelines and Technical requirements for
mobile sea border surveillance systems;
Guidelines and Minimum Technical
requirements for small fixed wing RPAS;
Technical Solution for Maintaining and Using
a Masterlist of CSCA certificates (work
coordinated and led by the EC; facilitated
by Frontex).
Technical Assistance

RDU 2

Technical
Assistance
to
the European
Commission and Member States and further
development of border control capacities.

Readily deployable European migrant
registration capability;
Support to WB in building up migrant
registration capability (in the context of IPA
II project);
Pilot on the Future of Border Checks (risk
assessment based border checks (air borders)
Support to the EC in relation to the Smart
Border Package

3.25

300.0000

Product
Delivery
Timeliness –Ratio;
Alignment Index

Assessment of Border
Control Technologies

RDU 3

Assessment of border control technologies for
steering their further development at EU level
based on end-user needs.

Report on Field trial of Border Surveillance
Technology for Land Border (including
evaluation);
Report on Field trial of Border Surveillance
Technology for Aerial Surveillance;
Report on the assessment and Feasibility
Study for the sharing of data at operational
level (including a pilot);
Report on potential, challenges and risks of
utilization of open source information for
passenger risk assessment;

3.25

350.0000

Product
Delivery
Timeliness –Ratio;
Alignment Index

33/79

Feasibility Study on pleasure boats border
control information exchange (including a
pilot);
Report on Interoperable Passenger Risk
Model based on data analytics;
Innovation in
management

Border

RDU-4

The aim of this activity is to strengthen Frontex
monitoring and contribution to the European
Border Security Research and to coordinate and
enhance the activity and involvement of the
border guard community in this field.

Report on the meetings Frontex-Industry;
Report on the workshop on breakthrough
technologies/products for border security;
Report on the workshop on proper
methodologies/methods/good practices on
how to perform research
on/investigate/test/verify border security
technologies/solutions/products;
Report on the workshop on new border
security R&D projects developed by
Industry and Academia using other financial
sources than the EU financing (e.g.
Industry’s/Academia’s own funds);
Report on the workshop on the ongoing
border security related FP7 projects and
the new projects pertaining to Horizon
2020, WP 2014-2015;
Study on the setup and management of
border security related research in and
outside Europe (outsourced);
Terms of reference for a study to be
launched in 2017 on possibilities of crossborder joint procurement for border
security equipment;
Different reports pertaining to the
technical support for EC/MSs and the EU
funded research projects under H2020
programmes.

34/79

2.75

150.000

Satisfaction Level;
Alignment
Index;
Product
Delivery
Timeliness -Ratio

4.2.6. Eurosur
Title
Risk analysis Eurosur
specific services and
products

Activity ID
RAU-4

Description
To provide the risk analysis layer of the
CPIP/ESP, as required by the EUROSUR
regulation.

Output
Regular updates of impact levels for
relevant sea and land border sections as
per agreed procedure
RAU Business User inputs provided as
required

Frontex Situation Centre
EUROSUR/FFS
Situational Monitoring

FSC-2

In accordance with the EUROSUR regulation,
provision of European Situational Picture (ESP)
and Common Pre-Frontier Intelligence Picture
(CPIP)
for
enhanced
situational
monitoring based on (close-to) real time
information including delivery of surveillance
and environmental data under Frontex Fusion
Services umbrella supporting short term /
immediate decision making process and
situational awareness.

Enriched European Situational Picture;
Frontex Fusion Services delivered to
internal and external stakeholders;
Enhanced Eurosur services

Development
of
EUROSUR
capabilities
and services

FSC-3

Enhancement of services and functionalities of
Frontex Information Exchange Systems and
EUROSUR Fusion Services in order to support
situational awareness and reaction capabilities,
in accordance with EUROSUR legislation.
Further develop and implement the European
Border Surveillance Framework (EUROSUR) and
promote the operational integration of
EUROSUR into border control and surveillance
activities across the EU.
Following successful security accreditation (EU
RESTRICTED) of the Eurosur Communication
Network, development of operational layer
displaying positions of assets in Joint Operations
and in pre-frontier areas, in line with Eurosur
framework. This will be performed in
cooperation with external and internal

New and enriched EUROSUR services
delivered to users at MS and Frontex for
operational use at external borders;

35/79

HR
5

FR
200.000

6,650.000

11

7

1,700.000

Indicator
timeliness
timeliness

Product
Delivery
Timeliness
–Ratio;
Usage Level

Quality Level

stakeholders (ICT and JOU), featuring possible
use of Copernicus resources.
by

FSC-4

Provision and fusion of real time and/or close to
real time situational awareness and surveillance
services (via Frontex Fusion Services) in support
of the response activities and exceptional
situations at external borders of the EU.

Tailored services in support of MS delivered
and available

2

500.000

Quality Level

Eurosur Communication
Network

ICT-1

Support, maintenance and further development
of the Eurosur Communication Network.

ECN
availability;
Network
services
subscription; New releases of the ECN
application and bug fixes releases;

5

2,250.000

System and Network
availability;
Alignment Index

Response Support
EUROSUR FFS

4.2.7. Situation Monitoring
Title
Frontex
Centre
activities

Situation
operational

Activity ID
FSC-1

Description
Delivery of Situation Monitoring and Information
Exchange Services (e.g. Alerts, SitReps, Media
Products,
Incident
Validation,
WOB,
Correspondence Management) and related
customer
support,
training
and
access
management to Frontex Information Exchange
applications including FOSS, CMS, JORA and FMM.
Additional enhancement of some services would
also be possible through Copernicus resources

Output
Situation monitoring products and
services;
Frontex
One-Stop-Shop;
Correspondence management;

HR
21

FR
580.000

Indicator
Product
Delivery
Timeliness
–Ratio;
Usage Level

4.2.8.1. External Relations
Third Countries
Title

Activity ID

Description

Output

36/79

HR

FR

Indicator

Coordinate
and
implement
the
Instrument
for
PreAccession (IPAII) MultiCountry
Action
“Regional support to
protection-sensitive
migration management
in the Western Balkans
and Turkey”

Relex TC-1

Coordinate and implement the Instrument for
Pre-Accession (IPAII) Multi-Country Action
Programme “Regional support to protectionsensitive migration management in the Western
Balkans and Turkey” to cover the period 20152018.

Identification of mixed migration flows;
information exchange established for
operational cooperation;

46

5,500.0007

Turn Over – Ratio;
Usage Level

Coordinate
and
implement
the
EU
Funded
Eastern
Partnership (EaP) – IBM –
Capacity
Building
Project, to cover the
period 2014-2017

Relex TC-2

The main aim of the Eastern Partnership IBM
Capacity Building Project is to ensure border
security and to facilitate legitimate movements
of persons and goods in the region, while
ensuring that the fight against corruption and
respect for human rights will be given necessary
attention throughout the project.

Developing/revising the relevant core
curricula and tools as well as establishing
dedicated training; Delivery of specific IBM
training courses; these initiatives will be
performed throughout all thematic areas
and components of the project; Expansion
of the EB-RAN to a possible EaP-RAN

58

4,500.0009

Usage
Level;
Alignment
Index;
Operational
Plan
Implementation
Ratio (HR)

Deployment of Frontex
Liaison Officer (FLO) in
Turkey and a country in
North of Africa (TBC)

Relex
TC-3

According to article 14/3 of Frontex Regulation,
"The Agency may deploy its liaison officers (...)
in third countries. Within the framework of the
external relations policy of the Union, priority
for deployment should be given to those third
countries, which on the basis of risk analysis
constitute a country of origin or transit
regarding illegal migration.

Reduction of migratory flows towards the
EU; close cooperation with local relevant
authorities

1

010

Satisfaction Level

Develop
closer
cooperation with Libyan
authorities
in
close
coordination with the
EUBAM and Frontex LO

Relex
TC-4

Lybia is a transit country and a major source of
irregular migration towards the EU by sea. The
unstable situation in Lybia didn't allow a closer
cooperation with them, but we expect that 2016

Working arrangement; Cooperation plan;
EUBAM will establish a bridge with local
authorities towards a close cooperation;

0.5

6

2 FTE are funded by ad hoc grants

7

Ad hoc grant

8

3 FTE are funded by ad hoc grants

9

Ad hoc grant

10

Related resource allocation is included under operational activities

37/79

10.000

Usage Level

could be the time to develop it. This could be
done in coordination with EUBAM and FLO.

11

24th
International
Border
Police
Conference

Relex
TC-5

This event will offer an opportunity for the
Chiefs of Border Guard authorities around the
world to share best practices and experiences
on various topics of common interest related to
border management and security. In addition it
will allow to renewal of personal relationships
between the chiefs of border guard
management which were established during last
years’ events and to continue building the
international border guard community.

Implementation team;

1

410.00011

Objectives
Achievement - Index

Create conditions to
conclude
working
arrangement with the
Third Countries to which
Management Board gave
mandate

Relex
TC-6

Presently the Agency is mandated by the
Management Board to negotiate with the
following countries: Senegal, Mauritania,
Morocco, Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Brazil, and
Kosovo.

working arrangements with the countries
mentioned before

2

40.000

Satisfaction Level

Manage
the
implementation
of
existing
Working
arrangements (WA) and
Cooperation Plans (CP)

Relex
TC-7

Frontex concluded 17 WA with Third Countries
(as regards Turkey the WA was approved if the
form of a MoU) and in a few cases the WA are
developed through CP. It's Relex TC task to
manage the implementation of such instruments
in coordination with the other units of Frontex.

Tangible
benefit

2

40.000

Objectives
Achievement - Index

Counselling and general
support to Executive
Director,
Deputy
Executive
Director,
Directorate and Frontex
Units

Relex
TC-8

Relex TC has a general task for counselling and
give general support to the Agency in terms of
cooperation with Third Countries (TC).

Provide rapid counselling and support to
the Agency

0.5

0

Satisfaction Level

achievement

The amount assigned to this activity might be subject to change

38/79

to

the

mutual

International Organisations
Title
Cooperation with EU
Agencies
and
International
Organisations

Activity ID
Relex
IO-1

Description
Developing, coordinating, evaluating and
consolidating the cooperation with partner
organisations including EU Agencies and
International Organisations. Special focus will
be placed on the monitoring and evaluation of
the cooperation with partner organisations on
the basis of the existing Working Arrangements.

Output
Cooperation with EU Agencies and IOs

HR

FR
30.000

Indicator
Quality Level

Cooperate
with
EU
Institutions
and
contribute to EU policy
decision making

Relex
IO-2

Maintaining fluent relations with the EU
institutions and contribution to EU policy
decision making guided by Frontex strategic
interest and developments.

support to and cooperation with EU
institutions in policy development

1

10.000

Quality Level

Strategic advice and
support
to
Frontex
Management

Relex
IO-3

Strategic advice and support to Frontex
Management with regard to policy assessments
which include inter alia the follow-up to the
Article 33 Evaluation and recommendations
emanating from the Management Board as well
as identifying and providing guidance on
opportunities and use of EU financial
instruments in the field of Home Affairs and
External Relations.

Support to Frontex Management in terms of
decision-making and policy development;
Efficient use of financial opportunities

1.2

5.000

Quality Level

Developing the Frontex
THB Strategy

Relex
IO-4

Developing the Frontex THB Strategy by
initiating new Frontex projects and identifying
synergies with ongoing Frontex or External
Partners' activities and by building up,
strengthening and maintaining an effective
network of contacts within MS, EU bodies and
International Organisations on THB.

Management and coordination of THB
Activities

0.8

10.000

Quality Level; Time to
Respond

Description

Output

HR

FR

1

4.2.8.2. Communication
Title

Activity ID

39/79

Indicator

Encourage and promote
coordinated
activities
between
national
authorities, national and
international carriers by
involving
them
in
Frontex activities

IAT-1

Promotion of European border guard culture and
the spirit of cooperation between different
border authorities, international organisations
and civil society representatives.

Annual Press Officers meeting; ED4BG
event; 2 ED4BG on the Road seminars; the
Border Post magazine

4

Increase
transparency
and enhance Frontex
reputation

IAT-4

Increase transparency and enhance Frontex
reputation by active communication on its
activities in line with Frontex internal and
external
communication
strategy.
Provision of timely, structured responses to the
media and members of the public (researchers,
students, etc.) on all Frontex operational
activities, including exceptional and crisis
situations.
Production of publications and audio/video
materials. Organisation of press visits and
briefings

Media requests handled in a timely
manner. press briefings organised when
needed; Requests for public access to
documents handled within the required
timeframe

4

Media monitoring
analysis

IAT-5

media monitoring contract in place

2

and

420.00012

676.00013

0

Satisfaction Level;
Internal
Communication
–
Index;
Alignment
Index

Internal
Communication
Index

-

Alignment Index

4.2.9. Fundamental Rights
Title
FR Impact in proposed
JO

Activity ID
FRO-1

Description
Coordinate multipurpose joint activities that
sustain the operational presence in areas at the
external borders exposed to specific and
disproportionate pressure as well as facing
significant uncertainties; including consistent
action in line with operational reaction

Output
FR impact in JO

12

The amount (lump sum) is subject to change, dependent on the final decision on the future set up of the ED4BG

13

The amount (lump sum) is subject to change, dependent on ongoing internal reorganization and restructuring of tasks

40/79

HR
1

FR
40.000

Indicator
Internal
Communication
Index

-

mechanism
Regulation.

laid

down

in

the

EUROSUR

Monitoring FR incidents
during JO

FRO-2

Intensify the tailored concepts of different
types of joint operations (land, sea, air, return
activities) and target the alignment of Frontex’
operations with the priorities of the Internal
Security Strategy and EU Policy Cycle.

SIR reports

0.5

0

Operational
Plan
Implementation
Ratio (HR)

FR monitoring system

FRO-3

Intensify the tailored concepts of different
types of joint operations (land, sea, air, return
activities) and target the alignment of Frontex’
operations with the priorities of the Internal
Security Strategy and EU Policy Cycle.

FR monitoring system

0.5

0

Operational
Plan
Implementation
Ratio (HR)

FR analysis and research

FRO-4

Intensify the tailored concepts of different
types of joint operations (land, sea, air, return
activities) and target the alignment of Frontex’
operations with the priorities of the Internal
Security Strategy and EU Policy Cycle.

Reports on FR matters

0.5

0

Objectives
Achievement
Index

To embed a respect for the principles of
Fundamental Rights in the culture of Frontex.

FR contribution in strategic documents

To embed a respect for the principles of
Fundamental Rights in the culture of Frontex.

FR embedded in Frontex’ communication

To embed a respect for the principles of
Fundamental Rights in the culture of Frontex.

FR Strategy Revision

Description
All transactions of the agency are timely
introduced into ABAC; the revenue is timely
collected; financial initiation is supported in

Output
Relevant updated documents

FR in Frontex
FR in communication
Revision of FR Strategy
and AP

FRO-5
FRO-6
FRO-7

0.5

0

0.2

0

0.8

0

Internal
Communication
Index
Internal
Communication
Index
Objectives
Achievement
Index

-

-

4.2.10. Administration
Provision
and
services

Title
of financial
procurement
ensuring

Activity ID
FIN-1

41/79

HR
16.5

FR
0

Indicator
Quality Level

compliance
legal and
framework

with the
regulatory

selected complex areas; all commitments and
payments (above EUR 1000) are verified;
procurement procedures above a materiality
level are supported and processed; all payments
are done by the Accounting Officer and booked
in the accounts. The regulatory framework is
kept updated.

Mission Office

FIN-2

The unit hosts the financial part of the mission
office and is responsible for the financial
aspects
of
planning,
managing
and
reimbursement of mission costs to staff
members and SGOs.

Operational and administrative missions
are financially administered;

Introduction of semiautomated tools for
procurement/contract
management
and
preparations
for
eprocurement

FIN-3

Assessment and introduction of a tool for
procurement/contract management.

Tool in place

Title
Selection
and
recruitment procedures,
staff
administration,
staff
training
and
development.

Activity ID
HRS-1

Description
Supporting selection and recruitment procedures,
implementation and enforcement of the Staff
Regulations and CEOS, drafting staff policies (EU
rules and best practices), assisting Frontex
managers and staff member in all HR-related
matters: budget assigned to Title 1, staff
development related issues; training for Frontex
staff members; annual appraisal exercise; the
reclassification procedure; and entitlements of
Frontex staff (including SNEs and SGOs).

Provision
miscellaneous
administrative
to Frontex.

HRS-2

Administrative support consists of: support for
meetings and conferences, reception supervision,
library, office supplies, property management,
expatriate services, travel desk, ad hoc support
for other administrative issues.

of
support

Output

2.5

0

Quality Level

4

0

Quality Level

HR
16

15

42/79

FR
0

Indicator
Satisfaction Level

0

Satisfaction Level

Ensuring that Frontex
personnel, information,
buildings and equipment
are
adequately
protected
against
threats

HRS-3

Safety and security measures in place in
compliance with the overall internal security
regulatory framework and in line with EU rules
and best practices. This includes implementation
of the applicable rules, including EUCI, as well as
liaison with EU and the Member State security
services.

14

Title
Maintain
the
performance,
availability and security
of ICT services

Activity ID
ICT-2

Description
Ensuring ICT services availability.

Output
Report on the performance of ICT services
delivery; ICT security improvement; ICT
user support service delivered; ITSM tool
functioning

HR
12

Define architecture for
operational consolidated
systems and applications

ICT-4

To supply the architecture for consolidation of ICT
systems in order to supply common components
and reduce the number of systems; the
overlapping of functionalities; and costs.

Design of the future technical architecture
for the operational systems

1

Technical, procurement
and
contracts
coordination for the
evolution
of
both
operational and nonoperational systems

ICT-5

Technical coordination of developments made in
collaboration with other business units,
coordination of the procurement procedures and
requests in order to ensure the timely acquisition
of licenses, the execution of support and the
maintenance and development tasks for:
- the bespoke operational systems, FOSS, FMM,
Equipment of the Operations room, GIS solution,
business
intelligence
environment;
digital
asset
management;
- bespoke applications in the administrative area.

Licenses renewed and operational systems
maintained/built on time; Operational
continuity of administrative systems and
DAMS

6

Intranet / My Frontex
workspace

ICT-6

Further development of the My Frontex
Workspace (Intranet based collaboration tools)
and Record Based Document Management System
(RDBMS).

My
Frontex
Workplace
configured; functioning RDMS

platform

1.5

Implementation of ICT
Business
Continuity
Capability

ICT-7

Continuation of implementation and operation of
ICT business continuity capability (Disaster
Recovery plan and infrastructure) including the

Minimum interruption of the availability of
ICT systems - according to SLA

1.5

43/79

0

FR
2,690.000

436.000

1,300.000

1,190.000

1,524.000

Time to Respond

Indicator
Alignment Index

Alignment Index

Quality
Level;
Alignment Index

Satisfaction Level

Alignment Index

installation, running, improvement, test and
maintenance of the main ICT services in the
disaster recovery site (DRS).
Activity ID
LAU-1

Description
LAU represents Frontex in front of EU and national
courts. Furthermore, LAU plays an important role
in the internal pre-litigation phase and in the
recovery of financial amounts due.

Legal
opinions
and
advice regarding core
business , i.e. OPD, CBD

LAU-2

LAU gives support to internal stakeholders on core
business related matters (OPD, CBD). In view of
the Mediterranean crises, this activity became to
be even more significant.

Operational plans; Legal opinion; Opinions,
consultations, meetings; FPA

1

0

Core business (PAD)

LAU-3

Public
Access
to
Documents
requests
Caveat: I&T reconstruction significantly affects
LAU's workload (two persons from I&T who are
responsible for PAD matters pursuant to the MB
Decision No 3/2014 have left to other internal
entities and will not discharge PAD duties). "Core
business" staff do not always discharge their
obligations under the same MB decision (was
reported in the “risk matrix" a number of times).
The figure below for LAU is therefore
underestimated.

PAD requests are handled appropriately
and timely;

1

0

Decision-making process

LAU-6

LAU checks the legality of the internal decisionmaking process.

Decisions taken are legally correct;

0.5

0

General
support
to
Administration Division
and Executive Support

LAU-7

General support to Administration Division and
Executive Support.

Opinions issued

0.5

0

Litigation
litigation

Title
and

pre-

Procedural
registry

Output
documents logged

44/79

at

the

HR
1

FR
0

Indicator
Quality Level

Number
of
operational plans
verified
Quality
Level;
number
of
agreements
processed
number of pad
requests
completed
as
against number of
requests received

number
successfully
challenged
decisions
number
opinions

of

of

Title
Maintain
centralised
document management
system

Activity ID
ADM

Description
Ensuring full functioning of centralised document
management system

Output

HR
2

FR

FR

Indicator

4.2.11. Organisational Development and Overheads
Title
Establish and enhance
corporate
evaluation
function

Activity ID
CTL-1

Description
Internal evaluations (interim, ex ante and ex post)
are mandated and coordinated by a central entity,
involving internal and external experts.

Output
2 evaluations (ex ante/ex post) are carried
out and documented

HR
0.4

Enhance
project
management
best
practices in Frontex

CTL-2

Establish and implement a tailored project
management methodology - tools and practice,
project portfolio planning and management,
establish processes for centralised project support
function.
Ongoing process of building up a project oriented
culture.

All project initiatives are aligned with
multiannual/ annual planning processes;
All projects' documentation stored in one
central depository; One budget line for
projects

0.4

Business
Continuity
Management in Frontex

CTL-3

Set up, maintain and adjust Business Continuity
Management across Frontex; effectively response
to threats; BCM protects main business interests
of Frontex according to the adopted strategy.

BCM Strategy, policy and plan in place; test
of BCM plan

0.2

Title
Enhance organisational
risk management in
Frontex

Activity ID
QM-1

Description
Further develop organisational risk management
(Internal Control Standard 6) with particular focus
on Frontex activities.

Output
Integration of organisational risk into the
Corporate planning process.

HR
1

Strengthening Frontex'
anti-fraud controls

QM-2

In line with OLAF's recommendations for all EU
Agencies and Commission guidelines the controls
over potential fraud will be strengthened.

Anti-fraud strategy and action plan.

0.5

Process improvement

QM-3

Improve processes by strengthening process
management.

Process documentation

45/79

0.5

0

0

Indicator
Number
of
recommendations
accepted
Objectives
Achievement
Index

-

0

Alignment Index

0

Indicator
Product Delivery
Timeliness -Ratio

FR

0

0

Objectives
Achievement
Index

-

Satisfaction Level

Title
Establish and execution
of
Data
Protection
function (DPO)

Title
Coordination
Capacity Building

for

Activity ID
DPO

Activity
ID
CBD

Description
Assessment of operational and administrative
activities (planning) regarding impact on the
individuals’ right of data protection; provision
of advice.

Output

Description

Output

Coordination of
hotspots (EURT)

deployment

of

officers

at

HR
2

HR
1

46/79

FR

Indicator
0

FR

Indicator
0

SECTION IV – BUDGET 2016
Frontex
Draft budget 2016
10-12-2015

REVENUE
Title A-9

REVENUE

Chapter

Description

Article

Budget 2014 N2

Budget 2015 N3

Draft Budget
2016
Remarks

A-900

Subsidy from the Commission

A-901

Contribution from Schengen Associated Countries

A-902

Contribution from the United Kingdom and Ireland

A-90

Subsidies and contributions

A-91

Other Revenue

A-94

Earmarked Revenue

A-9

TOTAL REVENUE

86 810 000

133 528 000

238 686 000

5 640 000

8 852 000

15 249 000

900 000

820 000

0

93 350 000

143 200 000

253 935 000

60 700

100 000

100 000

p.m.

p.m.

4 534 377

97 945 077

143 300 000

Note (1)

254 035 000

Note (1): Estimated revenue for 2016 of EUR 7.5m from the delegation agreement whereby the COM has entrusted budget implementation tasks to Frontex for
Copernicus security services. According to Frontex financial regulation Art.23.2(c) this revenue is external assigned to expenditure under budget line A-4200.
These delegated funds are presented for information purposes, the discharge for these funds is given to the European Commission.

47/79

Frontex
Draft budget 2016
10-12-2015

EXPENDITURE
Chapter Description

Total use of
commitment
appropriations
2014

Total use of Budget 2015 N3
payment
appropriations
2014

Draft Budget
2016

Title

A-1

A-11

Staff in active employment

STAFF
18 801 881

18 795 455

21 222 000

28 350 000

A-12

Recruitment

122 524

87 490

108 000

286 000

A-13

Administrative missions

250 000

217 814

374 000

500 000

A-14

Sociomedical infrastructure

3 400

1 439

40 000

70 000

A-15

Other staff related expenditure

898 653

800 950

1 020 000

1 410 000

A-16

Social welfare

2 157

2 157

4 000

20 000

A-1

TOTAL STAFF RELATED EXPENDITURE

20 078 614

19 905 305

22 768 000

30 636 000

Title

A-2

A-20

Rental of building and associated expenditure

5 900 016

4 136 676

2 967 000

5 355 000

A-21

Data processing & telecommunications

4 057 195

2 440 404

4 260 000

6 890 000

A-22

Movable property and associated expenditure

738 715

270 971

206 000

163 000

A-23

Current Administrative expenditure

1 041 843

553 614

841 000

825 000

A-24

Postal expenditure

46 500

40 362

60 000

80 000

A-25

Non-operational meetings

410 320

345 374

504 000

515 000

A-26

Information & Transparency

420 944

311 874

466 000

674 000

A-2

TOTAL OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE

12 615 532

8 099 276

9 304 000

14 502 000

Title

A-3

A-30

Joint Operations

46 196 007

27 696 348

92 009 000

119 795 000

A-31

Risk analysis, Situation Center & EUROSUR

6 598 243

4 300 501

11 305 000

13 680 000

A-32

Training

4 050 000

2 551 798

4 320 000

5 000 000

A-33

Research and Development

731 595

469 407

930 000

1 100 000

A-34

Pooled Resources

935 154

554 530

1 400 000

1 100 000

A-35

Miscellaneous Operational Activities

553 768

394 915

857 000

1 070 000

A-36

Supporting Operational Activities

388 973

284 122

407 000

40 000

A-37

Return Support

(1)

0

0

0

66 557 000

A-38

Third countries and EU cooperation

0

0

0

555 000

A-3

TOTAL OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES

59 453 740

36 251 621

111 228 000

208 897 000

Title

A-4

A-41

External Relations

3 838 147

506 199

p.m.

p.m.

A-42

Copernicus

0

0

p.m.

p.m.

A-4

TOTAL EARMARKED EXPENDITURE

3 838 147

506 199

p.m.

p.m.

95 986 033

64 762 401

OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENDITURE

OPERATIONAL ACTIVITIES

EARMARKED EXPENDITURE
(2)

GRAND TOTAL

(1)

(1)

143 300 000

254 035 000

New budget chapters "A-37 Return support" and" A-38 Third countries and EU cooperation" have been created in the budget structure for 2016 to reflect the ED decision on the

changes to Frontex organisation.
(2)

Delegation agreement signed whereby the COM has entrusted budget implementation tasks to Frontex for Copernicus security services. These appropiations correspond to the

external assigned revenue made available.

48/79

Frontex
Draft budget 2016
10-12-2015

ESTABLISHMENT PLAN
Grade

Establishment plan
2014
TA

Establishment plan Draft Establishment
2015
plan 2016

Perm.

AD16

TA

Perm.

TA

Perm.

0

0

AD15

1

1

1

AD14

1

1

1

AD13

4

4

4

AD12

11

11

13

AD11

8

8

8

AD10

6

6

6

AD9

8

8

8

AD8

43

55

55

AD7

8

29

29

AD6

6

21

19

AD5

2

13

Sub-total AD

98

0

12

157

0

156

AST11

0

0

AST10

0

0

AST9

0

0

AST8

5

5

5

AST7

11

11

11

AST6

13

15

15

AST5

17

20

25

AST4

4

14

9

AST3

4

5

4

AST2

0

0

AST1

0

Sub-total AST
GRAND TOTAL

0

0

54

0

70

0

69

0

152

0

227

0

225

0

TA = Temporary Agent; Perm. = Officials of the EC
Proposal of reclassification is based on the rates described in Annex 1b of Staff Regulations.
This draft does not take into account the implications recalssification 2014 and 2015

Contract agents
Authorised under
Authorised under Draft request 2016
the EU Budget 2014 the EU Budget 2015
FGIV

18

20

26

FGIII

46

48

57

FGII
FGI

10

10

10

13

13

13

Total CA

87

91

106

Seconded National Experts
Authorised under
Authorised under Draft request 2016
the EU Budget 2014 the EU Budget 2015
SNE

78

86

86

49/79

ANNEX I - Procurement Plan 2016

FRONTEX PROCUREMENT PLAN 2016
The Procurement Plan includes purchases with an estimated value higher than EUR 15.000 EUR, which are not covered by framework contracts already in place
No

Estimated
initiation of the
procedure

Description of the product(s)/service(s) to be purchased

Estimated value in EUR

1

January

Framework contract for earth observation services - the funding for this framework contract will be done via a
Delegation Agreement signed with DG GROW under the Copernicus Programme.

2

January

Project plan development for the future of border checks pilot for an end-to-end facilitation concept between
Member State(s) and (a) third country/ies).

30 000

3

January

Maintenance of the Frontex website.

15 000

4

January

Framework contract for leasing vehicles.

1 000 000

5

January

Framework contract for the acquisition of multi purpose containers.

2 500 000

6

January

Subscription of security software (Kaspersky).

7

January

Framework contract for visual intelligence analysis environment for processing of personal information.

8

February

Framework contract for SharePoint software development services.

11 000 000

15 000
400 000
600 000 - 1 000 000

50/79

9

February

Training / educational information systems development services / products (e.g. e-Learning instructional
design).

10

February

Refurbishing and painting services of Frontex headquarters.

11

February

Framework contract for technical support services.

12

February

Provision of editorial/writing services.

25 000

13

February

Purchase of automatic transfer switches for the Frontex Data Centre.

25 000

14

February

Purchase of laptops.

150 000

15

February

Consultancy services: Support the further improvement of risk analysis data architecture and quality maturity
levels.

100 000

16

February

Risk Analysis GIS portal - functional enhancement and capabilities expansion.

300 000

17

March

Medical services for Frontex staff (pre-recruitment checks, annual medical checks).

400 000

18

March

Development of an e-recruitment system.

100 000

19

March

Subscription Factiva.

40 000

20

March

Interoperable passenger risk model based on data analytics.

60 000

21

March

Project management support for the implementation of the future of border checks pilot.

60 000

800 000
96 000
150 000

51/79

22

March

Framework contract for chartering aircrafts for Frontex coordinated return operations.

50 000 000

23

March

Servers and Storage devices, maintenance and service.

300 000

24

March

Software licenses (VMWare, VEEam, etc.), maintenance, support and other services.

400 000

25

March

Satellite communication service.

45 000

26

March

Personnel radio system for live video streaming from bullet camera.

30 000

27

April

Consultancy services: Capacity assessment across EU Member States.

75 000

28

April

Acquisition of Geo-special data.

29

April

Study on the potential, challenges and risks of utilisation of open source information for passenger risk
assessment.

30

April

Sensor Network Pilot - Phase 2 (subject to successful completion of Phase 1).

200 000

31

April

Pleasure boats information exchange for border control - Technical Pilot.

100 000

32

April

Framework contract for video production services.

270 000

33

April

Maintenance services for software for media monitoring and information databases.

400 000

34

April

Framework contract for services related to the implementation and maintenance of analytical software SAS and
Microsoft BI.

500 000

400 000

52/79

75 000

35

April

Enterprise architecture services.

50 000

36

April

Development of mobile applications on XenMobile platform.

37

May

Development of additional surveillance capabilities in hotspots.

38

May

Purchase of application's load balancer and related services.

39

May

ESRI - Enterprise License Agreement.

40

May

MS Premier support service.

150 000

41

May

Maintenance service for KABA software.

120 000

42

May

Maintenance services for room booking system.

120 000

43

May

Maintenance service for the Frontex Data Centre.

800 000

44

June

Lease of office space for the Frontex Liaison Office in Brussels/Belgium.

45

June

Development of a new Frontex website.

150 000

46

June

Data Centre: Enhancement of DC monitoring.

100 000

47

June

Disaster Recovery: infrastructure housing services.

160 000

48

June

Disaster Recovery: link between sites.

500 000

200 000
1 000 000
180 000
1 000 000

28 000

53/79

49

August

Development of training tool ("Frontex Quiz").

20 000

50

August

Holographic film and lamination for accreditation cards.

20 000

51

September

Telecommunication services (GSM).

52

September

Servers and storage maintenance contract.

53

September

DMS - Document Management System.

1 100 000
500 000
1 000 000

54/79

ANNEX II – Training Portfolio 2016
This part of the document is a self standing product presented and discussed and endorsed by the
Management Board in its 54th meeting in May 2015.
It presents the competencies and planned activities of Frontex Training Unit. Operational training
organised by other business units are for information listed in the annex. Corporate training of staff
members are not included.

1. Scope of Work and Basic Principles
Frontex training activities contribute to the long-term mitigation of multiple risks at EU level, through
development and implementation of common educational standards, training for members of the European
Border Guard Teams, thematic training support, and the development and maintenance of networks and
infrastructures for education and training. The scope is defined by actions identified in Frontex’s MultiAnnual Plan, Programme of Work, and Training Strategy.
The activities of the Training Unit are carried out on the basis of regular activities and training projects.
Regular activities refer to the continuous process of training implementation and delivery in the context of
curricula and course programmes, which are designed through joint efforts of Frontex and experts from
Member States supported by other EU Agencies and international organisations. The outcomes are (common)
curricula, courses/course programmes, manuals, and any other type of tools supporting the scope of work,
such as computer-based simulations, software for self-directed learning or reference tools.
Planning, development, and further revision of training activities are linked to prior needs assessment,
carried out together with Member States and partner countries. During or at the end of a regular activity or
project, evaluation will be carried out and will lead to a periodical report circulated and discussed to all
relevant stakeholders concerned. Indicators and methodologies are currently under development.
Courses are mainly targeted towards training of multipliers, who carry out national training activities in
their respective home countries, and are often used as the most efficient way to cascade competences to
all Member States. Standardised results in all Member States are ensured through the use of Frontex training
tools and through guidelines given to multiplier trainers. With this approach to translate the training
products and to qualify the national multipliers, all Border Guard officers can be trained to the same training
standards in their mother tongue.
All training activities aim at having a positive impact on the development of an efficient, high, and uniform
level of border control at the external borders, and an evolving common European border guard culture
with high ethical standards.
The training activities aim at building capacity in four main areas:
A. Educational Standards (Common Core Curricula)
B. European Border Guard Team (EBGT) Training
C. Thematic Training Support
D. Training Infrastructures
The scope of work of Frontex’ training activities is described in the diagram below:

55/79

Fig. 1. Scope of work of Frontex’ training activities

2. Activity Areas, Activities and Priorities
A. Educational Standards (Common Core Curricula)
The educational standards constitute cornerstones in building harmonised competencies within
the border guard education and training. They promote the quality assurance principles for
learning development and recognition at national and European level. The educational standards
are based on the Sectoral Qualifications Framework (SQF) for Border Guarding as overarching
framework according to Bologna/Copenhagen principles, and the European Qualifications
Framework for Lifelong Learning (EQF). The educational standards support the integration of the
SQF at national and European level, including the curriculum review and alignment process, as
well as the integration of the quality assurance principles for course design, delivery, and
certification. The common educational standards are integrating fundamental rights in training
design as an underpinning orientation. The area includes the various sets of common core
curricula and courses for border guard education and training which are competence driven and
learning outcomes based, covering all stages of the career development, as presented below.
2016 Priorities: The first iteration of the European Joint Master's in Strategic Border Management
Programme will continue in 2016, with the stage II of the taught component and the beginning of
the dissertation stage.
A1. SQF for Border Guarding - Training Standards in Line with Bologna/Copenhagen
Principles: The SQF contributes to the harmonisation of the Border Guard education and
training, and supports the national integration of all common curricula, as it offers specific
reference points for all border guard learning requirements, at all levels, consistent and
aligned with the European Qualifications Framework for Life Long Learning. Being specific
to the Border Guard sector, the SQF for Border Guarding creates synergies within the
European Law Enforcement Training Scheme (LETS) and facilitates inter-agency cooperation
and coordination in the field of law enforcement training. The national integration of the
SQF will be monitored by the SQF Expert Board, who collects feedback, share experiences
56/79

and best practices, and request support as necessary. A panel of Bologna/Copenhagen
experts will continue to certify the compliance of Frontex training products with the
European standards. This will enable Frontex to offer courses and curricula to the Member
States for national implementation that can easily be accredited at national level, as well
as training certificates for the graduates of Frontex courses, based on the recognition of
prior learning principles and practice.
The focus of the SQF follow up in 2016 is set on:
i.

ii.

the delivery of the Course in Course Design, in line with the Bologna/Copenhagen
principles in the context of the SQF (designed as a Train-the-Trainers concept). The
workshops will target the trainers and curriculum design experts nominated by
the Member States, as part of Frontex support to the SQF integration at national level.
curricula review, QA and certification of the compliance of the aligned Frontex training
products (common curricula, training tools, courses etc) with the European standards.
The development of a technical support in the form of an interactive electronic template
for course design is expected to be developed in 2016, to support the curriculum review
and alignment process and the harmonisation of the design process, based on the QA
principles.

Further activities will be related to the SQF Expert Board, to the development of a new
concept for the Board QA related, and to the Bologna/Copenhagen expert meetings.
A2. Common Core Curriculum for Border Guard Basic Training (CCC Basic): the CCC Basic
offers measurable common standards at SQF levels 4-5 for law enforcement officers in the
EU. Implemented by national BG training institutions and teachers for students in all EU
Member States, it encompasses a general part and different modules for sea, air, and land
borders operations. The current version was updated in 2012. An Interoperability Assessment
Programme (CCC-IAP) has been carried out. This programme assesses the extent to which
the CCC 2012 has been integrated into the national curricula of border guard basic training.
It also provides information on the students’ achievement of the expected competencies.
The study constitutes the basis for the further development of the CCC Basic.
A3. Common Core Curriculum for Border Guard Mid-level Education and Training (CCC Midlevel) aims at harmonising the learning requirements for mid-level Border Guard officers.
The final product will be a modular curriculum structure, comprising a core set of learning
standards on SQF level 6. It will serve as a curriculum guideline and/or as a degree structure.
The CCC Mid-level is closely linked to the Mid-level Course (MLC) for EBGT Pool members
(See B8). The MLC modules have been designed for being integrated in the existing national
programmes in a flexible manner, in order to facilitate the national integration of the
common educational standards developed at European level.
The CCC mid-level, conceptualised as a modular curriculum structure, comprising a core set
of learning standards on SQF level 6 will serve as a curriculum guideline and/or as a degree
structure. In 2016 the development work is expected to start, based on an initial needs
assessment within the stakeholders’ community.
A4. European Joint Master's in Strategic Border Management: The European Joint Degree
Study Programme will be delivered by a Consortium of border guard Academies and
Universities, in collaboration with other supporting institutions from the border guard
training and education field. This 1,5 years programme includes 10 modules and a
dissertation with 12 contact weeks in different Universities. It guarantees access to rich online resources and a virtual learning environment. Experienced border guard professionals
57/79

from all EU and high profile academics guide the students throughout this learning adventure
close to operational realities. Based on the Master’s curriculum, a set of postgraduate
courses may be developed and implemented at national level as common core curricula level
7, to reach out to a wider audience.
After its launch, the European Joint Degree Study Programme will continue in 2016, with
the stage II of the taught component and the beginning of the dissertation stage.

58/79

B. European Border Guard Team (EBGT) Training
This type of training activities focuses on the specific needs of the EBGT pool members for
carrying out their duties effectively, according to the profile defined for their deployment. The
EBGT Profile Training improves capability, capacity, and performance of the explicit group of
member of European Border Guard Teams, foreseen for deployment to Frontex coordinated joint
operations. The courses are highly interactive, and enable trainees to gain practical experience
of applying best practice techniques and a proper professional behaviour. During the training,
every individual participant conducts several role-plays that covers examples specific to the
respective profile. This approach has proved to be a very effective way to prepare officers for
their coming duties.
2016 Priorities: Special focus will be put on the delivery of profile training courses for: screening
experts, debriefing experts, second-line interview experts, and maritime border surveillance
officers.
The profile training courses are addressing selected groups of EBGT profiles:
B1. Debriefing expert: A course in which participants learn how to debrief migrants by
systematic extraction of information, for intelligence purposes, from migrants willing to
cooperate. Participants will learn how to prepare for an interview, how to select the
interviewee and how to gain his/her trust. Understanding of cognitive interviewing
techniques and psychological aspects is essential. As debriefing interview is considered to
be one of the most challenging interviews. It includes both facts and emotional responses.
During this intensive course trainees are supported by trainers, practitioners and
psychologists.
In 2016, up to three courses are foreseen: 2 courses for debriefing experts and 1 national
course for debriefers.
B2. Screening expert: A course that focuses on assumption of nationality and identity of
undocumented migrants. The topics covered during the course include e.g. different ways
of assumption of nationality and identity, work with interpreter and ways of identification
of vulnerable persons during a screening interview.
Considering the current need of trained experts, 1-2 courses for screening experts and also
up to 2 national courses on nationality assumption are planned.
B3. Second-Line Interview Expert: This course is focusing on interviewing as the major fact
finding method. It equips participants with the necessary knowledge and skills to interview
persons crossing all types of EU borders and to conduct fair and objective interviews. Officers
learn how to conduct a structured and comprehensive interview, using effective questioning
and probing techniques. They also get the necessary psychological background and gain
awareness of how psychological biases and filters can influence perception of others.
Up to 2 courses are to be held in 2016, open for 16 participants. Additionally, course updates
will continue in the form of evaluation/planning meetings and trainers meeting for trainers
involved in activities B1 – B3.
B4. Second-Line Airport Officer: This course enables participants to effectively fulfil the role
of second-line airport officers, helping them to interact appropriately and respectfully with
passengers. The course provides the opportunity for officers to gain, update, and
demonstrate acquired skills and knowledge, and to become competent and motivated to
perform the complex tasks while deployed to joint operation, but also in their daily duties.
During the year 2016, up to 3 courses are foreseen, each for 16 participants. Activities are
planned for the development of an e-learning tool.

59/79

B5. Land Border Surveillance Officer: The central aim of this course is to provide the learners
with the competences needed to be able to react effectively and lawfully at land borders.
It also aims at tackling organised crime by adopting their own tactical and behavioural
standards.
The EBGT Land Border Surveillance Handbook will be further developed as common
reference for participants and trainers. After the pilot phase in 2015 and training content
fine-tuning, five courses are to be conducted in 2016. Each course is open for 18 participants.
B6. Maritime Border Surveillance Officer: The central aim of this profile training is to provide
the learners with the competences needed to be able to react effectively and lawfully in
Joint Operations in the maritime domain. It includes modules on the legal framework,
surveillance and maritime search and rescue.
After piloting the course, the implementation phase is foreseen to start in first quarter of
2016. Two courses are foreseen to be organized on 2016, each for 16 participants.
B7. Advanced Level Documents Officer: This course targets border guards and other officers of
national authorities with experience in carrying out thorough examination of travel
documents. It provides support to frontline officers. The definition of the target group refers
to a framework for harmonised programme for the training of document examiners in three
levels (Council Doc. No. 9551/07).
This course is linked to the pyramid hierarchy of document expertise. Two specialist courses
on the Detection of falsified documents are planned to be carried out in 2016. In addition,
the Advanced Level training tool will be developed into an internet-based eLearning tool as
a reference material.
B8. Operational Training for mid-level officers (EBGT MLC) is a newly-designed educational
mobility programme, piloted in 2015, and offered by Frontex to mid and high-level officers
of European Border Guard authorities. It promotes a common EU approach to the integrated
border management, which facilitates interoperability, harmonisation, and mobility in
Border Management and Cooperation across the EU. The course comprises four modules and
lasts for 18 weeks in total, out of which five weeks are organized as contact weeks.
The course is open for 16 participants. 1 course is envisaged to be carried out in 2016.
B9. Support for EBGT Operational Briefings: These activities aim at supporting harmonisation
and enhancing quality of operational briefings carried out in connection to deployment. This
includes further improvements of the briefing material used during general briefing, but it
also provides assistance to the national briefers.
After finalising the production of video-based training material activities will focus on
support to national briefers and 8 training activities to be carried out.

60/79

C. Thematic Training Support
Frontex’ training activities contribute to complement national training programmes by offering
thematic training support in specific areas based on prior needs assessment. The national
implementation of common standards for specialised training of border guards is achieved
through the development of common training tools and by qualifying national multipliers.
2016 Priorities: Priority will be given to the following thematic training activities: Return
operations, anti-trafficking in human beings and Schengen evaluators.
C1. Fundamental Rights: Frontex Fundamental Rights Trainers’ manual raises awareness and
provides harmonised guidelines on respecting fundamental rights. It is structured around the
core functions of the border guards. Frontex facilitates the implementation of the
fundamental rights training on national level by providing expert support and training of
national trainers.
In 2016, Frontex will continue to facilitate the implementation of the fundamental rights
training on national level, by providing expert support and training of national trainers. The
training will be delivered in two phases: independent phase (eLearning) and contact phase
(train-the-trainers course).
C2. Anti-Trafficking in Human Beings: Frontex Anti-trafficking Trainers’ manual is in line with
the latest international and European standards, emphasising that the fundamental rights of
the trafficked person are at the centre of all efforts addressing trafficking in human beings.
It is structured around the core functions of the border guards. Frontex facilitates the
implementation of the anti-trafficking courses on national level by providing expert support
and training of national trainers.
In 2016, national trainers will be trained by Frontex, based on the methodology of the
manual, with a practical approach focused on the functions of the border guards. The
training will be delivered in two phases: independent phase (eLearning) and contact phase
(train-the-trainers course).
C3. Schengen Evaluators: The aim of this course is to ensure the highest standards of evaluation
missions on external borders and in the field of return operations. This one-week training
programme focuses on how to objectively carry out evaluation missions.
The courses will continue in 2016 and will be further developed, taking into account the new
Schengen Evaluation mechanism, and the policy of the EC. A new training module on return
has been integrated in the course structure as a fourth module. The curriculum will be
finalised by the first half of 2016 and updated guidelines for the Schengen Evaluators training
will be made available.
C4. False Documents Detection: The basic level course is targeted at officials not directly
involved in border guard tasks, while the training on advanced skills for detection of falsified
documents is designed for first and second line officers. It aims at enhancing knowledge of
printing techniques, common terminology and the examination of questioned documents.
Commonly called “Road shows”, and provided directly at airports, these courses raise
awareness amongst front-line officers of the latest trends in the design and abuse of secure
identity documents and emphasise their vital role in detecting false documents, raising their
profile as the ‘eyes-and-ears’ of the central document fraud units. Training for Visa section
staff of EU MS/SAC embassies and consulates is delivered to raise awareness amongst visa
officers of the latest trends on the design and abuse of secure identity documents.
In 2016, the road shows for first line border guard officers and courses, providing basic
training on false documents detection for embassy and consular staff of member states in
Partner Countries, will be organised based on risk analysis. In addition, it is envisaged that

61/79

a level II specialist course will be developed. This course is designed for experienced
specialist level document experts who have completed the specialist course. The Level II
course will maintain an emphasis on the foundational elements of document and identity
security and, in addition, will add an extra focus on new technology and new perspectives
in authentication of identities, documents, and Identity Fraud.
C5. English Communication for Border Guards: The English Language Tools for Border Guards
are meant to improve the English language skills of the border guards when performing their
daily tasks at the air, land, or sea external borders of the EU, or when participating in Joint
Operations coordinated by Frontex. The tools are designed to meet the specific language
needs of the target group.
In 2016, the development of the English Language for Border Guards eLearning Tool will
continue. Specific activities will include developing of video and audio scenarios for air,
land, and sea border, as well as developing vocabulary, language exercises, and assessment.
C6. Risk Analysis Training: This training focuses on providing the learners with the knowledge
and skills required to make use of the Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model (CIRAM),
following the development of the CCC for risk analysis.
As a result of the 2015 training development, a set of training activities in the field of risk
analysis are planned to be carried out in 2016.
C7. NCC (EUROSUR) Operators Training: This modular training programme aims to harmonise
the competences of the NCC operators at European level with the EUROSUR framework.
As a result of the 2015 training development, a set of training activities for NCC operators
are planned to be carried out in 2016, aiming at harmonisation of training and SQF alignment
of the NCC operators’ competences.
C8. Return Operations: The standardised escort leaders’ course is designed for supporting
standards/procedures on joint return flights coordinated by Frontex, as well as on return
flights organised at the national level. The Training for National Multipliers for returns aims
at qualifying Member States instructors to deliver the Escort Officers’ training at the national
level, on the basis of the curriculum for Escort Officers on Joint Return Flights.
Courses for escort teams and certain Partner Countries return officers will be provided in
cooperation with Frontex Return Operations Sector, in the framework of specific return
working arrangements, and based on their training needs, in order to have an adequate
number of qualified return officers available for national and joint return operations by air.
In 2016, additional training will be provided, based on Member States training needs, and
the operational needs of Frontex Return Operations Sector.
C9. Schengen Borders Code eLearning Tool: This tool simulates an airport border checking
point, where the border checks are performed on passengers entering the Schengen area. It
offers border guards a possibility to improve their competences in carrying out border
checks.
The fully functional tool will be further developed and integrated into the Training Unit ICT
platform. After implementation, the tool will be reviewed once a year by the experts
nominated for the Steering Committee. The Quality Management process for operational
briefings provides supportive feedback to host Member States for conducting the national
briefing part. In 2016, further activities are envisaged.
C10.Training on Integrated Border Management: A new project aiming at developing a
curriculum for a course on Integrated Border Management for mid-level officers and a
trainer’s manual will be launched. The material already developed in the framework of the

62/79

European Joint Master's in Strategic Border Management (see A4.) and the operational
training for mid-level officers (see B8.) will be utilised mutatis mutandis.
The training concept will be drafted during 2016 based on the results of a workshop carried
out with experts from the Member States in the first half 2016.
C11.Air Crew Training: The purpose of the aircrew training is to improve flight safety, to
enhance the level of competence of aircrews, and to develop common training standards of
MS/SAC border guard aircrew, thereby strengthening the opportunities for operational
cooperation during joint operations.
No air crew training activities are planned to be carried out in 2016.
C12. Canine Teams: The Common Core Curriculum for Dog Handlers is intended to be used for
the basic training of dog handlers. By implementing these training standards, dog handlers
will have a high level common reference system, which will ensure the interoperability of
canine teams.
No canine team training activities are planned to be carried out in 2016.

63/79

D. Training Infrastructures
The activities in the training infrastructures area aim at promoting excellence in border guard
education and training by maintaining effective cooperation with European stakeholders in Law
Enforcement education and training. An ICT platform and eLearning solutions are considered of
strategic importance, as they are targeting cost-effective ways to increase training capabilities
of Frontex, as well as of its stakeholders.
2016 Priorities: Priority will be given to the development of a new integrated ICT system for
training, including e-learning solutions, which is considered of strategic importance, as it is
expected to significantly increase the training capabilities of Frontex, as well as of its
stakeholders. Priority will further be given to the implementation of the new Partnership
Academies Network concept.
D1. Training Needs Assessment: In order to ensure effective training activities and high impact
at the European level, training needs are identified, in a structured way, for both Frontex
joint operations as well as for other activities. The assessment is focused on supporting
Border Guard performance, while taking into account the needs of partner countries where
working arrangements are in place. Such measures are to be agreed annually with
cooperating stakeholders, after prior collaborative assessment, with support of National
Training Coordinators.
In 2016, training needs analysis will play a crucial role in the annual planning process of the
training activities to be organised or coordinated by Frontex. Activities will be launched in
February 2016, and a report will be available by autumn 2016.
D2. National Training Coordinators (NTC) Network: The NTC Network provides Frontex
counterparts with a formal platform for continuous dialogue on training matters for the
relevant Member Sates representatives to share information and to cooperate on the
development and improvement of Frontex training activities.
The network will be consulted to enable Frontex to develop a tailored training offer
comprising quality training products which reflect the national needs, on one hand, and the
European dimension of the border management, on the other hand. The annual NTC Network
Meeting will be carried out during the Frontex Annual Training Conference, in addition to
possible ad hoc working group meetings.
D3. Partnership Academies (PA) Network: This network of national border guard academies
supports Frontex by hosting meetings and training activities and by promoting the share of
expertise in education and training projects. The concept of the PA network has been revised
in 2015, and a new structure with an extended scope of activities will be implemented in
2016.
The PA network of national border guard academies will continue to support Frontex by
hosting Frontex meetings and training activities. In addition, the new scope of activities will
include students and teacher mobility and support to PA cooperation projects. The annual
PA meeting will be be carried out during the Frontex Annual Training Conference, in addition
to possible ad hoc working group meetings.
D4. Cooperation with partner countries: Frontex promotes cooperation in the field of training
with those partner countries where working arrangement agreements are in place, specifying
training as a relevant area for cooperation.
Frontex will make available to Partner Countries access to Frontex Training products.
Frontex maintains limited readiness to carry out training projects in non-member states
financed from external sources.

64/79

D5. ICT development: The objective of the future integrated ICT platform is to assure the
management of the training activities in an information system based on optimised training
business processes and extended management capabilities. It will implement a blended
learning educational model with the introduction of online learning activities, in all areas of
competence, in order to optimise the training delivery methods, increase the educational
quality level, facilitate the learner centred teaching approach, use certification methods,
and extensively broaden the learners’ community. The replacement of the current version
of the Virtual Aula platform is foreseen by the end of 2016.
Starting in mid 2016, TRU will manage its training activities lifecycle in a state of the art
information system, and will be able to implement a blended learning model for training. In
the first part of the year, the system will be in its development stage, followed up by a
service transition period from Virtual Aula platform. Post-implementation review will be
performed after entry into operational state.
In addition, a variety of web-based conferences (“webinars) will be organised on emerging
trends and subject-area-related matters.
D6. Frontex’ Training Annual Conference: The Annual Conference is held in connection to the
network meetings for the Partnership Academies, the National Training Coordinators and the
partner organisations of the Law Enforcement Communities. The event focuses on a thematic
area relevant for education and training in the Border Guard Community.
The event is scheduled in connection with the PA/NTC Annual Network Meeting (4-6 October
2016), focusing on a thematic area relevant for education and training in the Border Guard
Community.
D7. Training Experts Certification Programme: With this project, Frontex aims at establishing
a quality assurance mechanism for development and delivery of training. A new system of
certification of Frontex external training experts will be introduced.
The development activities will continue in 2016, with expert workshops and development
meetings foreseen. The Certification handbook and the Trainers` toolkit will be available
for Frontex external training experts. Furthermore, a trainers’ conference will be carried
out in spring 2016, targeting external training officers of Frontex’ Training Unit. An
important part of the conference will address the future certification system and offer
thematic train-the-trainer activities.
For all of the activities mentioned above, extension of the cooperation with other European
Agencies, i.e., those in the field of Law Enforcement, is envisaged.

65/79

3. Multi-Annual Plan
In order to achieve the objectives set by the Frontex Training Strategy, multi-annual planning
and monitoring is essential. Training products need to follow a cycle of development,
implementation, review, and update, which is to be done by an annual planning of activities. The
intended timeline for activities related to the development, update and/or revision is presented
below:
Activities/Products
A1.

SQF (ver. 2.0)

A1.

Course in “Course Design”

A2.

CCC IAP (revision and implementation)

A2.

CCC basic (ver. 3.0)

A3.

CCC mid-level

A3.

CCC Level 7 courses development

A4.

EJMSBM book release

A4.

EJMSBM re-accreditation

B.

Online learning modules for EBGT

B6

Maritime Borders Surveillance Simulation Tool

B6.

Maritime Borders Surveillance Manual

C1.

Fundamental Rights Manual and Course

C2.

Anti-trafficking Training Manual

C3.

Training for Schengen Evaluators

C4.

False Documents Trainers Manual

C4.

False Documents Advanced Skills

C4.

False Documents Visa Officer Training Tool

C6.

Risk Analysis Training

C7.

NCC Operators

C10.

Integrated Border Management

C11.

Air Crew Training Manual

C10.

Electro-optical and Infrared systems operator

C10.

Mountain Operation training procedures

C10.

NVG standard training procedures

C11.

Dog handlers curriculum

C11.

Canine instructors curriculum

D.5

Quality Assurance System

D5.

ICT Platform/Development

D5.

Instructional Design for all TRU Products

D7.

Trainers Certification

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

66/79

= Development/Update/Revision

4. Action Plan 2016
a.

Development Actions

No.

Activities/Products

Planned Actions

A. Educational Standards (Common Core Curricula)

S01/16

A1. SQF for Border Guarding

Development of an interactive electronic
template for course design, curriculum
review and alignment process with the SQF

S02/16

A2. Common Core Curriculum for Border
Guard Basic Training (CCC basic) (A2)

CCC alignment with the SQF

S03/16

A3. Common Core Curriculum for Border
Guard Mid-level Education and Training
(CCC Mid-level)

CCC for Mid-level development

B.
S04/16

European Border Guard Team (EBGT) Training
B4. Second-Line Airport Officer

Development of the Second-Line Airport
Officer eLearning tool

C. Thematic Training Support
S05/16

C3. Schengen Evaluators

Training update (curriculum, guidelines,
modules)

S06/16

C4. False Documents Detection

Development of a level II Specialist Course

S07/16

C5. English Communication for Border Guards

Development of the English Language for
Border Guards e-learning tool

S08/16

C6. Risk Analysis Training

Development of a curriculum

S09/16

C9. Schengen Borders Code eLearning Tool

Implementation, QA process and ICT
platform integration

S10/16

C10. Training on Integrated Border
Management

Production of IBM training concept and
curriculum development, production of a
trainer’s manual and delivery of pilot
training

D. Training Infrastructures
S11/16

D1. Training Needs Assessment (TNA)

Training Needs Report and Analysis

S12/16

D5. ICT Development

Instructional design, QA, replacement of
Virtual Aula

S13/16

D7. Training Experts Certification Programme

Development of a new certification system

67/79

b.

Courses
No.

Planned Actions

SQF
Level

3 Courses in course design, review and
alignment
4 Trainers Workshops
3 Workshops: Reviewing and Aligning Fx
Tools

4-7

Activities

A. Education Standards (Common Core Curricula)
T01/16
T02/16
T03/16
T04/16
T05/16
T06/16
T07/16
T08/16
T09/16
T10/16
T11/16

A1. SQF for Border Guarding

A4. European Joint Master's in
Strategic Border Management
(A4)

Contact Weeks (4 modules, 6 weeks)

7

B. European Border Guard Team (EBGT) Training
T12/16
T13/16

B1. Debriefing experts (B1)

2 Profile Courses for Debriefing
Experts, 1 National Course for
Debriefers

6

T14/16
T15/16

B2. Screening experts

2 Profile Courses for Screening Experts,
1 National Course on Nationality
Assumption

5

T16/16

B3. Second-Line Interview Experts

1 Course for 2nd Line Interview Experts

5

T17/16
T18/16
T19/16

B4. Second-Line Airport Officer

3 Second-Line Airport Officer Courses

5

T20/16
T21/16
T22/16
T23/16

B5. Land Border Surveillance
Officer

4 Land Border Surveillance Officer
Profile Courses

5

T24/16
T25/16

B6. Maritime Border Surveillance
Officer

2 Maritime Border Surveillance Officer
Profile Courses

4-5

T26/16
T27/16

B7. Advanced Level Documents
Officer

2 EBGT Specialist Course for Advanced
Level Documents Officer

6

T28/16

B8. Operational Training for midlevel officers (EBGT MLC)

1 Operational course for Mid-level
officers (EBGT MLC), 5 MLC Contact
Weeks

6

T29/16
T30/16
T31/16
T32/16
T33/16
T34/16
T35/16
T36/16

B9. Support for EBGT Operational
Briefing

8 Training Activities for National
Briefers (upon request)

4-5

68/79

No.

Activities

Planned Actions

SQF
Level

C. Thematic Training Support
T37/16
T38/16
T39/16
T40/16

C1. Fundamental Rights

2 train-the-trainer activities (ToT)
courses
2 on-line sessions

6

T41/16
T42/16
T43/16
T44/16

C2. Anti-Trafficking in Human
Beings

2 train-the-trainer activities (ToT)
Courses
2 on-line sessions

6

T45/16
T46/16

C3. Schengen Evaluators

2 Courses for Schengen Evaluators

5-6

T47/16
T48/16
T49/16
T50/16
T51/16
T52/16

C4. False Documents Detection

6 Courses

5-6

T53/16

C7. NCC (EUROSUR) Operators

Course (3 modules and exams)

4-5

C8. Return operations

4 Courses: Frontex Joint Return
Operations
2 Courses: National Multipliers
3 Courses: Standardised Training for
Escort Leaders
1 Course (tbc): Third Countries Escort
Teams on collecting Joint Return Flights

5-6

T54/16
T55/16
T56/16
T57/16
T58/11
T59/16
T60/16
T61/16
T62/16
T63/16

D. Training Infrastructures
T64/16

D3. Partnership Academies (PA)
Network

PA Teacher Exchanges, PA Student
Exchanges

na

T65/16
T66/16
T67/16
T68/16

D5. ICT
Infrastructure/Development

4 Web-based Conferences (“webinars”)

na

69/79

c.

Workshops/Meetings/Conferences
No.

Activities/Products

Planned Actions

A. Educational Standards (Common Core Curricula)
M01/16
M02/16

A1. SQF for Border Guarding

1 expert board meeting, 1 Frontex SQF
Expert Panel Meeting

M03/16
M04/16
M05/16
M06/16
M07/16
M08/16
M09/16

A2. Common Core Curriculum for Border
Guard Basic Training (CCC basic)

7 WG sessions CCC alignment with SQF

M10/16
M11/16
M12/16
M13/16
M14/16

A3. Common Core Curriculum for Border
Guard Mid-level education and training
(CCC mid-level)

5 CCC for Mid-level development WG
Sessions

A4. European Joint Master's in Strategic
Border Management

1 Governing Board Meeting
1 Programme Board/Programme
Coordinators Meeting
1 Quality Assurance Committee Meeting
1 Dissertation Supervision Groups Meeting
1 Meeting of the Board of Examiners

M15/16
M16/16
M17/16
M18/16
M19/16

B. European Border Guard Team (EBGT) Training
M20/16
M21/16
M22/16
M23/16
M24/16
M25/16

B3. Second-Line Interview Expert

6 Evaluation/Planning Meetings

M26/16

B4. Second-Line Airport Officer

1 Evaluation and Preparatory Meeting

M27/16
M28/16

B5. Land Border Surveillance Officer

2 Evaluation/Planning Meetings

M29/16
M30/16
M31/16
M32/16

B6. Maritime Border Surveillance Officer

1 Preparatory Meeting/site visit
3 Evaluation and Preparatory Meetings

M33/16

B8. Operational Training for Mid-level
officers (EBGT MLC)

1 Evaluation and Planning Meeting

70/79

No.

Activities/Products

Planned Actions

C. Thematic Training Support
M34/16
M35/16

C1. Fundamental Rights

1 Preparatory Meeting
1 Reviewing Meeting

M36/16
M37/16

C2. Anti-Trafficking in Human Beings

1 Preparatory Meeting
1 Reviewing Meeting

M38/16
M39/16

C3. Schengen Evaluators

4 Development Meetings
2 Preparatory Meetings

M40/16

C4. False Documents Detection

1 Development Meeting

M41/16
M42/16
M43/16
M44/16
M45/16

C5. English Communication for Border
Guards

5 Reviewing/development Meetings

M46/16
M47/16
M48/16
M49/16
M50/16
M51/16
M52/16
M53/16

C6. Risk Analysis training

2 Preparatory meetings
6 Development meetings

M54/16
M55/16

C7. NCC (EUROSUR) Operators Training

1 Preparatory Meeting
1 Evaluation Meeting

M56/16
M57/16
M58/16

C8. Return Operations

1 Workshop: Third Countries Escort Teams
for CJRO curriculum dev./ SQF alignment
1 Workshop: MS Escort Leaders curriculum
development / alignment with SQF
1 Workshop: Nat. multipliers training dev.

M59/16
M60/16
M61/16
M62/16

C9. Schengen Borders Code eLearning Tool

3 Development/update Meetings
1 Steering Committee Meeting

M63/16

C10. Training on Integrated Border
Management

1 Workshop

71/79

No.

Activities/Products

Planned Actions

D. Training Infrastructures

d.

M64/16
M65/16
M66/16

D1. Training Needs Assessment

3 Workshops/focus groups

M67/16
M68/16
M69/16

D2. National Training Coordinators (NTC)
Network

1 Annual Meeting
2 Meetings / working groups

M70/16
M71/16
M72/16

D3. Partnership Academies (PA) Network

1 Annual Meeting
2 Meetings / ad-hoc workshops

M73/16

D6. Frontex’s Annual Training Conference

1 Conference

M74/16
M75/16

D7. Training Experts Certification
Programme

1 Expert Meeting
1 Conference

Products/Deliverables
No.

Activities

Products

P01/16

B1. Debriefing Expert

Trainers handbook

P02/16

B5. Land Border Surveillance Officer

LBS on-line manual

P03/16

B7. Advanced Level Documents Officer

P04/16

B9. Support for EBGT Operational Briefings

Advanced Level training tool will be
developed into an internet-based eLearning
tool as a reference material.
Training support material

P05/16

C3. Schengen Evaluators

Course Manual

P06/16

Online tool

P07/16

C5. English Communication for Border
Guards
C9. Schengen Borders Code eLearning Tool

P08/16

C10.ICT Development

P09/16

D8. Training Experts Certification
Programme

eLearning ICT platform – fully functional
by the end of year; Instructional design
solutions
Trainer’s toolkit

Online tool

72/79

Training Organised by Other Business Units
1. Joint Operations Unit
Sea Border Sector


EPN Concept / EPN General

Topic
EPN Meetings/Workshops

EPN Staff Exchange
Supporting regional maritime cooperation
fora


Activities
Workshops,
operational meetings
and field visits
Exchange/mobility
Programme
Regional meetings

Location
tbd

EU MS

Joint Operations

Topic
JORA reporting

Operational Briefing
Operational Debriefing
Screening Activity: Checking belongings
Debriefing Advisor Support
Planning / Evaluation Meetings

Activities
Workshops,
Operational Meetings
and Field Visits
Induction Training
Induction Training
Training
Awareness Session
Meetings

Location
tbd

EU MS

Air Border Sector

Topic
VEGA Children Best Practices

Activities
Awareness Sessions

Location
EU MS

Land Border Sector

Topic
Exchange Project for BGP Coordinators

Activities
Exchange Activity

Location
tbd

Return Operations Sector

Topic
Standardised Training for Escort Leaders
National Multipliers Training for GR, LV, LT,
LU, MT, and CH
Third Countries Return Officers (Multipliers,
Escort Leaders, Escort Officers), for Serbia,
Georgia, and Albania
National Training seminars for Screeners

Activities

Location

2-3 Trainings
1 Seminar

tbd
tbd

2-3 Seminars

tbd

2-3 Seminars

Bulgaria

73/79

2. Risk Analysis Unit
Topic
Risk Analysis for Border Security
Concepts Structure and Tools in
(version A)
Concepts Structure and Tools in
(version B)
Selected Techniques for Risk Analysis
Selected Techniques for Risk Analysis
Strategic Risk Analysis for Managers

Activities

Location

Risk Analysis

Training
Training

Frontex
Frontex/EU MS

Risk Analysis

Training

EaP

(Version A)
(Version B)

Training
Training
Seminar

Frontex
EaP
Frontex

3. Frontex Situation Center
Topic

Activities

EUROSUR Fusion Services and other Information
Exchange products

Training

Location
tbd

4. Information and Communication Technology Unit
Topic
EUROSUR Training

Activities
Course

SQF
5-6

Location
tbd

5. Relex-TC


EAP (Objectives: Facilitate the movements of persons and goods across the borders in
the six EaP countries, and maintaining secure borders at same time, cooperation
project.)
Border guard/police training

Topic

Activities
5

EaP/EU

Crisis Management at the strategic level
Capacity building in Border Management
Anti-trafficking Training for Border Guards
False Document Detection for Border Guards

1 Regional train the
trainers course
1 Regional Workshop
2 Regional Workshops
1 Regional Workshop
2 Regional train the
trainers courses
3 National Courses

5-6
5
5
5

EaP/EU
EaP/EU
EaP
EaP

4

EaP

2 regional workshops
2 workshops for AZE,
ARM, GEO
1 Regional Workshop
2 Regional workshops

5
5

Frontex HQ
Frontex HQ

4-5
4-5

Frontex HQ
Frontex HQ

1 Regional train the
trainers course
1 Regional Workshop
1 Regional Workshop

5

EaP

5
5

EaP
EaP

Second Line Check

English Language Course for Border Police at
airports
Analysis Techniques
Setting up of a Regional Information
Exchange Capacity
Creating EaP regional RAN
Maintaining EaP network of the six partner
countries
Fundamental Rights Training for Border
Guards
Inter-agency cooperation
PR Regional Training Session on open and
transparent
communication
for
law
enforcement agencies

SQF

Location

74/79

Customs training

Topic

Activities

Convention on a Common Transit Procedure (CTC),
including IT in Customs and New Computerised
Transit Systems (NCTS) for GEO, MD and UA
WCO Revenue Package
WCO Organisational Development Package
Authorised Economic Operators– principles
EU customs regulation - Union Customs Code
Origin of goods, rules of origin
Customs debt, deferred payments, guaranties
Authorised Economic Operators– principles
X-ray Scanning Images Interpretation
Study visit



1
Regional
Workshop

Location
train

1 Regional Workshop
1 Regional Workshop
1 National training
1 National Training
1 National Training
1 National Training
1 National Training
1 National Training
1 Study Visit for BG and
Customs officials from 6
EaP countries

EaP

EaP
EaP
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Georgia
Moldova
Ukraine
Azerbaijan
EU

WB IPA II (Objectives: Provide support to protection sensitive migration management to the
Western Balkans and Turkey, 36 months, cooperation project with IOM, EASO and UNHCR)
Topic
Screeners Training
Debriefers Training
Second-line Interview Officers Training
Advanced Skills in Detection of Falsified Documents Training
Courses in the area of Return, including Escort Officers
Training
Fundamental Rights and Anti-trafficking in Human Beings (in
cooperation with implementing partners)

Activities
1 Training
1 Training
1 Training
1 Training
1 Training

SQF
5
6
5
5
5

Location
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd
tbd

1 Training

4, 5

tbd

6. Information & Transparency
Topic
Media Training Sessions

Roadshow

Activities
Media
Training
Sessions for EBGT (1020 participants)
Awareness Sessions

Location
EU

EU MS airports

75/79

Selected Outcome of Annual Bilateral Talks 2015 – Schengen Associated Countries

Table 1 - HR offered by SAC & offer confirmed by Frontex

Participating SAC

Joint Operation

Resources
offered by SAC

Resources
confirmed by
Frontex

Days of deployment /
per 1 GO

CH

Alexis I

1

1

65

CH

Alexis II

1

1

57

CH

Eurocup 2016

1

1

40

CH

Focal Point/Coordination Points Regular

2

2

30

CH

Focal/Coordination Points Air – Intermediate Managers

5*

2

10

CH

Vega Children I

1

1

36

CH

Vega Children II

1

1

43

CH

Focal Points 2016 Land

6

6

Min.29 – Max.85

CH

EPN Minerva 2016

1

1

47

CH

EPN Triton 2016

1

1

91

20

17

Total
IS

Alexis I

1

1*

TBC

IS

Alexis II

1

1*

57

IS

Eurocup 2016

1

1*

40

IS

Focal Point/Coordination Points Regular

1

1*

30

IS

Focal/Coordination Points Air – Intermediate Managers

1

1*

10

IS

EPN Triton 2016

1

1*

61

76/79

Total

6

6

NO

Alexis I

1

1

65

NO

Alexis II

1

1

57

NO

Focal Point/Coordination Points Regular

1

1

30

NO

Focal/Coordination Points Air – Intermediate Managers

2

2

10

NO

Vega Children I

1

1

36

NO

Vega Children II

1

1

43

NO

Focal Points 2016 Land

4

3

29

NO

EPN Indalo 2016

2

2

61

NO

EPN Minerva 2016

1

1

47

NO

EPN Poseidon 2016

5

3

Min.195 – Max.320

NO

EPN Triton 2016

3

2

325

22

18

Total

Note: * confirmation still pending

77/79

Table 2: Additional HR offered by SAC, OFFER NOT YET CONFIRMED BY FRONTEX

Participating SAC

Joint Operation

Resources
offered by SAC

Resources
pending
confirmation by
Frontex

Days of deployment /
per 1 GO

NO

EPN Poseidon 2016

2

2

TBD

NO

EPN Triton 2016

1

1

TBD

NO

-

5

5

TBD

8

8

Resource Type

Resources
offered by SAC
and confirmed
by Frontex

Days of deployment /
per 1 unit

Total

Table 3: TE offered by SAC, offer confirmed by Frontex

Participating SAC

Joint Operation

CH

Focal Points 2016 Land

Service dog

1

29

CH

South Eastern Borders

Patrol car

1

85

CH

Western Balkans

Patrol car

2

Min.57 – Max.197

Total
IS

EPN Triton 2016

4
FWA

78/79

1

59

Total

2

NO

EPN Minerva 2016

Service dog

2

47

NO

EPN Triton 2016

OPV

1

123

NO

Focal Points 2016 Land

Service Dog

2

TBC

Total

3

79/79

