Guide
for Joint Return Operations
by Air coordinated by Frontex

Warsaw, 12 May 2016

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Acknowledgements
This document, coordinated by Frontex, is a result of a consulted effort with valuable contributions from Return Support
Unit, Fundamental Rights Officer and Legal Affairs Unit of Frontex who collected, selected and edited the information and
guidance offered herewith.
Frontex is grateful to the participating Member States and their representatives in the network of direct contact points in
return matters, as well as to Frontex Consultative Forum and to the Council of Europe Committee for the Prevention of
Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT) for their essential contributions and support in the
development of the publication.

Copyright (2016) Frontex All rights reserved.

The European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6, 00-844 Warsaw, Poland

Tel. +48 22 205 95 001
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu
© Frontex, 2016

Page 2 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

CONTENT
1. List of abbreviations

6

2. Terms and definitions

7

3. Introduction

9

4. Legal Framework
4.1 Legal basis of activities coordinated by Frontex
4.2 Obligations of Frontex
4.3 Obligations of persons participating in Frontex coordinated activities

10
10
11
11

5. General Rules
5.1 Communication during the organisation of JRO
5.2 Escorts / Escort leaders
5.3 Back-up team
5.4 Medical staff and interpreters
5.5 Working language
5.6 Coercive measures
5.7 Information for returnees
5.8 Seeking cooperation from returnees
5.9 Dress code & distinction of JRO participants
5.10 Consumption of alcoholic beverages
5.11 Non-smoking flights
5.12 Recording
5.13 Monitoring
5.14 Serious Incident Reporting
5.15 Presence of external representatives during a JRO
5.16 Travel & health documentation

13
13
13
13
14
15
15
16
16
16
16
16
16
17
17
17
18

6. Operational Procedures for JRO by Air

19

6.1 The pre-return phase
6.1.1 Destination of the joint return operation
6.1.2 Date and time of the JRO
6.1.3 Choice of airport
6.1.4 Total number of seats
6.1.5 Number of seats available for PMS
6.1.6 Selection of an aircraft
6.1.7 Flight schedule
6.1.8 Catering & cutlery
6.1.9 Costs of the aircraft
6.1.10 Luggage
6.1.11 Local transportation expenses
6.1.12 Means of transport and arrival time of PMS
at an embarkation airport

19
19
19
19
19
20
20
21
21
21
21
22
22

Page 3 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.1.13 Offer of a joint return operation
6.1.14 General interest & distribution of seats
6.1.15 Concrete interest & participation and passenger list
6.1.16 Risk assessment
6.1.17 Fitness to travel and medical examination
6.1.18 Information to the competent authorities
6.1.19 Advance party
6.1.20 Crisis focal point 24/7 and Contact list
6.1.21 Overnight stay & accommodation
6.1.22 Transportation to the aircraft
6.1.23 Designated airport special areas
6.1.24 Seating plan
6.1.25 Meeting with airline
6.1.26 Aircraft check
6.1.27 Plan B
6.1.28 Meeting with escort leaders
6.1.29 Implementation Plan
6.1.30 Estimated budget

23
23
23
23
24
24
25
25
25
26
26
26
27
27
28
28
28
28

6.2 The pre-departure phase
6.2.1 Checks of designated special areas
6.2.2 Briefing of escorts
6.2.3 Briefing of the crew and authorisation by the captain
6.2.4 Checks
6.2.4.1 Body search of returnees
6.2.4.2 Luggage search
6.2.4.3 Document check
6.2.4.4 Check and preparation of an aircraft
6.2.5 Personal belongings & labelling and loading of luggage
6.2.6 Final passenger list
6.2.7 Transportation of PMS
6.2.8 Executive powers of escorts during transit
6.2.9 Briefing of all relevant JRO participants
6.2.10 Boarding process
6.2.11 Guarding of the aircraft doors

29
29
29
29
29
29
29
30
30
30
30
31
31
31
31
32

6.3 The in-flight phase
6.3.1 Fulfilment of agreements
6.3.2 The OMS’ EL
6.3.3 Vigilance of escorts
6.3.4 Deployment of coercive measures
6.3.5 Movement on board
6.3.6 Returnees’ personal belongings

33
33
33
33
33
33
34

Page 4 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.4 The arrival phase
6.4.1 First contact with local authorities
6.4.2 Hand-over of returnees
6.4.3 Guarding of the aircraft doors
6.4.4 Transport for returnees
6.4.5 Overnight stay in a third country

35
35
35
35
35
36

6.5 The return-flight phase
6.5.1 Unaccepted returnees
6.5.2 Headcount
6.5.3 Debriefing

37
37
37
37

6.6 Final Return Operation Report

37

Annex 1: “Fit-to-travel” form

38

Annex 2: Positional asphyxia

39

Annex 3: Restraints forbidden on joint return operations
coordinated by Frontex

43

Annex 4: Examples of the List of recommended medical equipment and
medication for a medical doctor taking part in a JRO

44

Page 5 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

1. List of abbreviations
CoR

Country of return

EL

Escort Leader

EURLO

European Return Liaison Officer of a Member State

FJRCC

Frontex Joint Return Coordination Centre

FOSS

Frontex One-Stop-Shop1
https://foss.frontex.europa.eu

ILO

Immigration Liaison Officer of a Member State

JRO

Joint Return Operation

MS

Member State

OMS

Organising Member State

PMS

Participating Member State(s)

1

FOSS is accessible for registered users.

Page 6 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

2. Terms and definitions
For general terms and definitions see the Frontex Code of Conduct for Joint Return
Operations2, the Frontex Code of Conduct3 and Council Decision 2004/573/EC.
Specific terms, with their definitions, are listed below.
Advance party

Representative(s) of the OMS/PMS who
travel(s) either to the country/countries of
return or to another MS in order to make
preparations for the realisation of a JRO.

Collecting Joint Return Operation

JRO initiated by an OMS, with escorts
provided by a country of return and returnees
handed over to them by the OMS/PMS on the
territory of a Member State.

Dynamic risk assessment

An ongoing risk assessment.

Embarkation airport

An airport where OMS/PMS passengers
embark on a joint return flight, not an
airport where a connecting flight is boarded
to reach the embarkation airport

Joint Return Operation by Air

An operation aimed at the removal of
illegally present third-country nationals by
air. The initiative for such an operation is to
be taken by one MS, which will invite the
participation of others.

Local transportation expenses

A given amount of money handed out to the
returnee prior to arrival in the country of
return. It is aimed at covering immediate
expenses that the returnee may have on his
arrival, in particular transportation from the
airport to his/her final destination.

Plan B

Contingency plan(s) which should be
prepared in case a JRO fails, or to deal with
the refusal of a returnee(s) in a country of
return.

Rolling Operational Plan

A rolling forecast for JRO drawn up by
Frontex on the basis of Member States’ needs
for assistance or coordination in order to
provide the requesting Member States with
the necessary operational support.

2
3

The Code of Conduct for Joint Return Operations coordinated by Frontex adopted by the Decision of the Executive Director of 7 October 2013
(ED Decision 2013/67)
The Frontex Code of Conduct for all Persons Participating in Frontex Activities, adopted by Decision of the Executive Director No. 24/2011, 21
March 2011

Page 7 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Seating plan

Distribution of seats on a specific type of an
aircraft between all Member States taking
part in a specific JRO.

Transit country

A country via whose airport the JRO
passengers transit to connect to with the
next flight.

Common Guidelines

Common Guidelines on security provisions for
joint removals by air, which is annexed to
Council Decision 2004/573/EC.

Council Directive 2003/110/EC

Council Directive 2003/110/EC of 25
November 2003 on assistance in cases of
transit for the purposes of removal by air.

Return Directive

Directive 2008/115/EC of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 16
December 2008 on common standards and
procedures in Member States for returning
illegally staying third-country nationals.

Council Decision 2004/573/EC

The Council Decision of 29 April 2004 on
the organisation of joint flights for
removals from the territory of two or more
Member States of third-country nationals
who are subjects of individual removal
orders.

Tokyo Convention

The Convention on Offences and Certain
Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft,
concluded in Tokyo on 14 September 1963,
which entered into force on 4 December
1969.

Chicago Convention

The Convention on International Civil
Aviation, known as the Chicago Convention,
signed on 7 December 1944 in Chicago. It
established the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO), a specialised agency
charged with coordinating and regulating
international air travel.

Page 8 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

3. Introduction
The purpose of this document is to provide operational guidance for Frontex
coordinated joint return operations by air in order to standardise procedures and to
simplify the organisation of JROs. This Guide has been developed and updated4
pursuant to Art. 2(2) of the Code of Conduct for Joint Return Operations. This
document is a tool to provide support to the authorities responsible for the
organisation of joint return operations.
However, this document is not intended to replace or alter in any way Council
Decision 2004/573/EC; this document complements such Decision by providing a
practical, experience-based approach.
This document does not aim at creating new legally binding obligations of Member
States. It collects best practices relating to the performance of the duties of
national authorities competent for carrying out return-related tasks in the
framework of joint return operations coordinated by Frontex.
This document also takes into account the principles contained in the specific “Best
Practices on the Organization of Charter Flights for Illegal Immigrants’ Repatriation”
of 2009, on the implementation of joint return operations among G8 members.
As regards Collecting Joint Return Operations, a separate document, titled
“Guidance for Collecting Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex”,
will be developed.
In order to clarify the general responsibilities in the realisation of joint return
operations, it should be mentioned that the Frontex Consultative Forum and the
national authorities of the Member States responsible for organising and/or
participating in joint return operations coordinated by Frontex have been invited to
share their knowledge and experience for this guide. In addition, Frontex has
coordinated the updating of this document and, on behalf of the above-mentioned
authorities, has completed some formal aspects of this document.

4

The original title was “Best Practices for the Removal of Illegally Present Third-country Nationals”

Page 9 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

4. Legal Framework
4.1

Legal basis of activities coordinated by Frontex

Frontex was established by Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 of 26 October
20045 on the basis of the provisions of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union (TFEU) establishing an area of freedom, security and justice.6 In this
area the free movement of persons and the abolishment of internal border control
among EU Member States require high and uniform levels of control at the external
borders of the EU Member States. Frontex was thus established to improve and
facilitate that task, although the responsibility for the control and surveillance of
the external borders lies entirely with the Member States.
In its operational coordinated activities Frontex is subject to EU law and its
objectives, tasks and responsibilities are formulated in the Frontex Regulation,
which includes cooperation with regard to return.
The legal basis of the removal of illegally present non-EU nationals has been
enhanced by the Council Decision of 29 April 2004 (2004/573/EC) on the
organisation of joint flights for removals from the territory of two or more Member
States of third-country nationals who are the subjects of individual removal orders
and the Common Guidelines on security provisions for joint removals by air, which
is annexed to the aforementioned Decision.
Frontex assumes that all return decisions which are executed via JROs are in
compliance with fundamental rights, including the non-refoulement principle, and
other provisions of EU, international and national law.
In addition, Article 9 of the Frontex Regulation stipulates several obligations in
return cooperation. Firstly, Frontex provides the necessary assistance and, at the
request of the participating Member States, ensures the coordination or the
organisation of joint return operations of Member States. Secondly, Frontex develops
a Code of Conduct for the return of illegally present third-country nationals which
applies during all joint return operations coordinated by the Agency. Thirdly, this
Code in its Article 2 stipulates that technical and detailed instructions for the
practical implementation of Frontex coordinated JROs are included in separate and
relevant Best Practices for operations.
Different national legislation on coercive measures lead to a variety of applications
during JROs. Frontex highlights the necessity and proportionality principles with
regard to the use of coercive measures.

5
6

Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 of 26 October 2004, published in OJ L 349, 25.11.2004, as last amended
Articles 74 and 77 (2) (b) and (d) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).

Page 10 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

4.2

Obligations of Frontex

Frontex is required to carry out its tasks in full compliance with relevant EU law,
including the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union (the Charter),
relevant international law, including the Convention Relating to the Status of
Refugees approved at Geneva on 28 July 1951, obligations related to access to
international protection, in particular the principle of non-refoulement, and
fundamental rights. Frontex further takes into account the advice of the Frontex
Consultative Forum, as referred to in Article 26a of the Frontex Regulation.
The Frontex Regulation requires Frontex to put in place an effective mechanism to
monitor the respect for fundamental rights in all of its coordinated activities. The
Frontex Fundamental Rights Officer monitors and reports on a regular basis and as
such contributes to the monitoring mechanism.
During JRO coordination the Agency must assure return is carried out in a humane
manner and with full respect for Fundamental Rights as enshrined in the Charter and
any other relevant international instruments, as stated in Article 4 of the Code of
Conduct for Joint Return Operations.
Furthermore, Frontex has the obligation to interrupt or terminate its operational
activity in the event of serious or persistent violations of fundamental rights or
international protection obligations.
If an alleged violation is committed by a person assigned by a Member State, Frontex
communicates information regarding this allegation to the competent national
authority concerned, which provides an effective and independent investigation. The
authorities of the MS are expected to inform Frontex of the conduct and results of
such investigation. Frontex’s Executive Director may request information on the
conduct and results of the investigation and may decide to inform the Management
Board accordingly. The returnee may request information and should be informed of
the measures taken and his/her possible right to compensation.7
4.3

Obligations of persons participating in Frontex coordinated activities

All persons participating in activities coordinated by Frontex, including joint return
operations, have to carry out their tasks with respect for human dignity and
fundamental rights, to meet the obligations imposed upon them by the provisions of
the Frontex Code of Conduct and the Frontex Code of Conduct for Joint Return
Operations and are required to comply with the rules of their mandates.
The Frontex Code of Conduct sets out principles and rules which guide the conduct
of all persons participating in Frontex activities, namely Frontex staff, officers of
border guard services of a Member State and other staff performing any actions. It
aims to guarantee the principles of the rule of law and the respect for, and
protection, fulfilment and promotion of, fundamental rights, with a particular focus
on accompanied and unaccompanied minors and other vulnerable persons, as well as
7

Article 17 of the Code of Conduct for JRO

Page 11 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

on persons seeking international protection, including the obligation of referral to
national authorities competent for receiving asylum requests.
This code is complemented by the Code of Conduct for JROs, which sets out common
principles and the main procedures to be observed during joint return operations
coordinated by Frontex. This code addresses specific issues and situations that may
occur during joint return operations. Each Implementation Plan drawn up and
distributed by Frontex prior to each JRO contains links to both the aforementioned
codes. These codes are available on the Frontex One-Stop-Shop information platform
and on Frontex’s website.
All persons involved in activities coordinated by Frontex are required to maintain the
highest standards of integrity, ethical conduct, professionalism and respect for
fundamental rights. While taking part in activities coordinated by Frontex they are
required to comply with European law, international law, Fundamental Rights and
the national law of the organising Member State or the transit country. Furthermore,
the Member State of each relevant JRO participant must provide appropriate
disciplinary, criminal or other measures in accordance with its national law in cases
of violation of applicable national and international legal provisions in the course of
an operational activity.
All persons involved in activities coordinated by Frontex must avoid any kind of
discrimination. They are expected to treat every person with courtesy, respect and
due consideration for the nature of any legitimate activity in which they are
engaged.
The specific needs of vulnerable groups, such as minors, persons with disabilities,
elderly people, pregnant women, single parents with minor children and persons
who have been subject to torture, rape or other serious forms of psychological,
physical or sexual violence, as well as persons with a serious health condition,
mental disabilities or any other vulnerabilities, as defined in the EU acquis, should
be taken into account and particularly observed during all the phases of the
operation.
All persons participating in Frontex coordinated activities are required to report any
incidents involving suspected or alleged violations of fundamental rights or the
Frontex Codes of Conduct via the appropriate reporting channel, for example via the
Frontex Serious Incident Reporting system. They should receive in advance
appropriate training (including on fundamental rights) provided by national
authorities responsible for their deployment or by Frontex.
Moreover, all tasks and objectives must be performed in full compliance with
international law, i.e. the Tokyo Convention and the Chicago Convention.

Page 12 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

5. General Rules
5.1 Communication during the organisation of JRO
Information exchange is a precondition for successful cooperation. For this reason,
the communication8 between the OMS, the PMS and Frontex is organised via the
FJRCC (fjrcc@frontex.europa.eu) and the standardised templates stored in the FOSS9
are to be used.
Operational communication, related to the specific operation, with the country of
return is made directly by the OMS.
5.2 Escorts / Escort Leaders
Escorts from both the OMS and the PMS should be carefully selected. JRO can be
carried out with escorts who are police/immigration officers or private companies’
staff, for whose actions the responsibility remains with the MS. In all cases the
escorts should be adequately trained for the activity in physical techniques and in
accordance with fundamental rights, international and national law, and relevant
Frontex standards (national multiplier training for escorts).
All escorts participating in a JRO should be informed of their specific task/role via a
briefing by their escort leader.
Escorting to the embarkation airport and during the pre-departure phase may be
carried out by the same officers who subsequently carry out the escorting on board
or by other officers.
The number of escorts should be determined by an appropriate security risk
assessment by each MS taking part in a JRO and in consultation, if necessary, with
Frontex, the OMS and the relevant PMS. The gender and age of the returnees, as
well as experience and communication skills (both interpersonal and language skills),
of the escorts should be taken into account when appointing the escorts for an
operation.
Each MS should nominate an EL responsible for the whole team. It is highly
recommended that these leaders have attended Frontex’s standardised training for
JRO escort leaders.
5.3 Back-up team
An appropriate back-up team of escorts (depending on the circumstances involved),
with a high level of control and restraint techniques and knowledge of English,
should be provided by the OMS. The gender and age of the returnees should be also
taken into consideration when designating the back-up team. Such a team provides
assistance to all of the escorts (those from the OMS and the PMS) during the
following phases of the operation, in particular during emergencies:
 The pre-departure phase on the OMS territory including
- Transport from the place of arrival to a waiting area and or to the main
charter
8
9

The communication includes in particular offer of the operation, Member States’ interest in participation, a number of returnees, escorts and
their updates, information on embarkation places, means of connecting transport, time schedules, overnight stays, etc.
A web-based and secure portal designed to provide situational awareness and to share operational-related information. Close-to-real-time
and up-to-date information is available to multiple users, simultaneously.

Page 13 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

- Support in the transit zone (especially in any smoking area and toilets)
- Embarkation procedure
 The in-flight phase (e.g. movements on board, access to toilets)
 The disembarkation phase
 The return-flight phase, in the event that that some returnee(s) are not
accepted by the country of return
Members of the back-up team should provide assistance
 Upon an order from the OMS’ escort leader
 Upon the request of the PMS’ escort leader
 Upon own initiative (if immediate assistance is required)
During embarkation in one of the PMS, that PMS should have ground staff assisting
other PMS boarding as follows:
 Transport to the main charter
 Embarkation procedure
The PMS may also provide their own back-up team if deemed necessary, in particular
during the (joint) connecting transport to the embarkation airport.
5.4 Medical staff and interpreters
The OMS provides appropriate medical staff during the whole operation (the predeparture phase, ground procedures on the OMS’ territory, and the in-flight and
return-flight phases). The relevant PMS arranges for the presence of medical staff on
the ground during the pre-departure phase when embarkation of any other PMS
takes place on its territory.
At least one medical doctor should be present during a JRO.
The OMS must consider the need to have an interpreter on board to help the medical
staff and escorts communicate with returnees.
PMS may bring their own interpreter(s) and/or medical staff during the connecting
transport and also during the joint return flight, if they consider that necessary.
However, they should seek the prior agreement of the OMS to provide their own
medical staff and/or interpreter.
The administration of medication to the returnees should be based on a medical
check by and the decision of the medical staff and takes place with the consent of
the returnee, except in emergency medical situations. During the JRO medication
should not be within the returnees’ direct reach.
The relevant MS ensures that the necessary amount of medication prescribed is
available for returnees who are under medical treatment. Moreover, the MS should
consider the possibility of providing an advance supply of medication (e.g. for
several weeks) in order to prevent any interruption of treatment in the country of
return (please see 6.2.4.2. with regard to the need to leave behind in a MS any
medicines prohibited in a CoR).

Page 14 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

5.5 Working language
During joint return operations coordinated by Frontex the working language is
English and at least the escort leaders are required to have adequate knowledge of
the English language. This is to facilitate quick and efficient communication
between different stakeholders.
5.6 Coercive measures
JRO participants must respect the principles of strict necessity, proportionality, and
respect for the dignity of the returnee, as well as the right to physical integrity and
the prohibition on inhuman or degrading treatment or torture in relation to all
aspects of the use of force in JROs, and not only to measures of restraint.
A list of authorised restraints and equipment permitted during the JRO is decided by
the OMS together with Frontex in accordance with its national legislation,
international law and EU law, in particular the Charter of Fundamental Rights and
communicated by the OMS in a standardised form: “Offer of Joint Return Operation
by Air – Information Sheet”. It is then included by Frontex in the Implementation
Plan for each specific JRO. However, no PMS should use coercive measures that its
legislation does not allow, even if those measures are accepted by the OMS for that
particular operation.
The use of force is always a last resort and must be the minimum level required to
achieve the legitimate objective. The use of force must be reasonable and necessary
in the circumstances and proportional to the assessed risk of harm. Every case has to
be assessed individually.
Returnees must not be physically assaulted or threatened to force them to board a
means of transport or as a punishment for not having done so.
The use of coercive measures must not be systematic and must be justified in each
case by an individual dynamic risk assessment.
The relevant EL periodically reviews the continuing necessity and proportionality of
deploying coercive measures, and particularly of applying means of restraint, when
these are used for prolonged periods, based on a dynamic risk assessment.
In the event of a flight emergency, while the plane is airborne the rescue of
returnees must not be impeded. Any means restricting the freedom of their
movement must be removed.
The use of coercive measures takes appropriate account of the individual
circumstances of each person, such as their vulnerable condition (e.g. children if
present in a JRO with their families, persons with physical or mental disabilities,
etc).
The use of sedatives to facilitate a removal is forbidden, without prejudice to
emergency measures to ensure flight security.
Weapons are prohibited.

Page 15 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

When using handcuffs, handcuffing returnees behind the back during transportation
should be prohibited, given the potential for discomfort to the person concerned and
the risk of injury in case of accident.
Bringing a returnee into a position preventing him/her from breathing adequately
may cause positional asphyxia (see Annex 2) and must not be used.
5.7 Information for returnees
The competent persons should communicate with returnees in a language they can
understand, in a calm, clear and detailed manner, ask them for cooperation and try
to put them at ease. No later than at the point of collecting returnees from their
place of stay (e.g. a detention centre) the competent person from the OMS and PMS
explains orally or in writing to the returnee the removal procedure (e.g. reason,
phases of travel and procedures, the necessity for body and luggage searches, the
possibility of using coercive measures when deemed necessary, etc) and answers
their questions.
5.8 Seeking cooperation from returnees
In order to avoid or minimise as much as possible the use of force, the escorts
designated to each returnee must seek their cooperation. The escorts must treat the
returnees with respect. They should keep the returnees informed, maintain
communication and answer their questions.
5.9 Dress code & distinction of JRO participants
The dress code for JRO participants during the operation depends on their tasks,
each MS’ national rules, the JRO duration and circumstances. Smart casual dress is
preferable for the OMS’ EL and the PMS’ ELs. When wearing a necktie, the one with
a Velcro closure is recommended. Uniforms or military-style clothes are not
permitted on board the aircraft.
The JRO participants should be identifiable and fully distinguishable from returnees.
To this end, official vests with “national logo” in clear letters, armbands, badges or
some other distinguishing signs are required to be worn on duty; vests are
preferable, as they are easily recognisable. They will not be worn if disembarking
from the aircraft in the country of return, unless required during the hand-over
procedure.
5.10 Consumption of alcoholic beverages
The consumption of alcoholic beverages is not allowed during the entire joint return
operation coordinated by Frontex. Catering must exclude alcoholic beverages. The
airline must be informed about this policy (see 6.1.25).
5.11 Non-smoking flights
Both legs of any joint return flight coordinated by Frontex are non-smoking flights.
5.12 Recording
Any kind of recording during all JRO phases is forbidden, unless specifically agreed
with the OMS, the PMS, Frontex and the company operating the means of transport,
and carried out in compliance with applicable data protection legislation.

Page 16 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

5.13 Monitoring
Frontex strongly encourages the OMS as well as the PMS to organise the presence of
a monitor, as set forth in Article 8 (6) of the Return Directive, during all JRO phases.
As the OMS monitoring is sometimes limited to the pre-departure phase, and in order
to ensure the entire flight is monitored, Frontex actively recommends the PMS to
also provide a monitor.
The Frontex Fundamental Rights Officer has the mandate to monitor any JRO as part
of the overall support to the Frontex monitoring system of fundamental rights, and
the FJRCC notifies the Frontex FRO as soon as possible of each JRO that is likely not
to be monitored. In any event, FRO monitoring activities do not replace the MS’
obligation to monitor forced return operations.
The OMS and each PMS advise FJRCC whether a monitor(s) is/are planned or not,
using standardised forms, i.e. “Offer of Joint Return Operation-Information Sheet”
in the case of OMS and “General interest-Email” and “Participation in Offered Joint
Return Operation-Concrete Interest” in the case of each PMS.
The participation of more than one monitor from the same MS is possible, to support
national monitors’ training and experience. However, this has to be agreed in
advance with Frontex and the OMS.
The monitoring of a JRO aims at gathering information and observing whether a JRO
is conducted in compliance with fundamental rights, paying specific attention to the
treatment of vulnerable persons.
Monitors must be allowed the freedom to carry out their monitoring function; they
may inform relevant officials of any perceived irregularities, but they may not
interfere with the JRO procedures. They must have access to all relevant and up-todate information concerning the JRO prior to the implementation day of the
operation and during the operation, including information on the current mental and
physical state of the returnees, except for confidential medical documentation,
which is only to be shared between medical personnel. Monitors may observe the
briefings, take part in the debriefing and provide a brief account of the main
findings.
A Frontex representative is also on board to observe that the operation is performed
in line with EU standards.
5.14 Serious Incident Reporting
Any incident of a sensitive or public interest nature, including any fundamental
rights violation, as defined in the JRO Implementation Plan, which occurs during the
course of an operation has to be reported according to the instructions described in
the plan. Frontex can adapt future JRO after evaluating these reports, therefore it is
crucial to ensure reporting of incidents.
5.15 Presence of external representatives during a JRO
The OMS informs the PMS and Frontex, via the FJRCC when external representatives
(e.g. from embassies / ministries / international organisations / NGOs) intend to be
present during a joint return operation.

Page 17 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

When external representatives from a PMS intend to be present during a JRO, the
PMS should obtain the prior agreement of the OMS and Frontex.
The OMS or a PMS, as appropriate, should notify Frontex as soon as possible
whenever they receive a request to participate in a JRO from external
representatives and provide a justification for the requested participation.
5.16 Travel & health documentation
Each MS (OMS/PMS) is responsible for obtaining appropriate documents for its
returnees (e.g. national passport, emergency travel certificate, EU-letter).
In addition, each MS must provide any additional documentation to speed up the
hand-over procedure, e.g. fingerprints, forms required by a country of return.
Each MS is also responsible for the documentation of its JRO participants; they all
must have the required travel and health documentation (e.g. valid passport/visa/
vaccination certificate) and be made aware of entry restrictions that may potentially
affect them.
Both the OMS and the PMS should check if any vaccination is required by the country
of return as an entry condition, e.g. in case of a planned overnight stay. It is
recommended that JRO participants are vaccinated in case of an unexpected
overnight stay in a third country. The OMS and the PMS are responsible for the
health-care of their own JRO participants.

Page 18 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6. Operational Procedures for JRO by Air
6.1 The pre-return phase
6.1.1 Destination of the joint return operation
The OMS should select and specify the country/countries of return of the JRO
according to:
 its own needs, i.e. the presence of irregular migrants of a given nationality;
 acceptance of the flight and conditions applied by third country/countries;
 return needs of other MS expressed via the Rolling Operational Plan.10
It is preferable to have only one country of return. No more than two countries
should ever be considered. They should be as near to each other as possible, or
along the most direct flight route, and they should be approached at an appropriate
time in advance of the JRO. Special arrangements, such as two simultaneous flights
to different destinations with a common stopover, must be agreed with Frontex.
The planned routing, including an overnight stay, must be agreed with Frontex too.
6.1.2 Date and time of JRO
When choosing a date and time for a JRO the OMS should:
 take account of public holidays and/or other national, political, security
related, cultural and religious circumstances in the country of return;
 take account of serious public health circumstances;
 have the acceptance of the country of return for a given date and time;
 take into account the journey(s) for the PMS to transfer returnees to the
embarkation airport;
 check with the Frontex database whether any other MS plans a return flight to
the same country of return in the intended period.
6.1.3 Choice of airport
The embarkation airport must be an international one. The operational hours of the
airport must be taken into consideration.
The airport must have sufficient ground staff available, along with the possibility of
arranging an operational area without public access, in the event that is needed.
The choice of the arrival airport is decided by the OMS in cooperation with the
competent authorities of the country of return.
6.1.4 Total number of seats
This depends on actual needs (number of returnees from the chosen
country/countries of return, number of escorts) and on possible restrictions on a
number of returnees by the country/countries of return. The OMS decides on the
total number of returnees to be removed on any one flight.

See more: Article 9 (1c) Frontex Regulation & Management Board Decision No 21/2012 of 27 September 2012 adopting the content and the
modus operandi of the rolling operational plan for Joint Return Operations
10

Page 19 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

In addition, the OMS must make provision for seats for medical staff, interpreters,
monitors and Frontex’ representatives. The seats for observers and external
representatives should be also considered.
6.1.5 Number of seats available for PMS
During a JRO coordinated by Frontex the OMS is entitled to occupy up to 50% of the
available seats. The OMS decides the number of seats it needs and advises all or
selected MS of the number of seats available for use by their escorts and returnees
(using the standard form “Offer of Joint Return Operation by Air - Information
Sheet” to be found in the FOSS, see point 6.1.13).
6.1.6 Selection of an aircraft
In order to select an aircraft the OMS will contact a broker, or make a direct
approach to an airline, depending on national administrative procedures.
The aircraft must be EU registered and should comply with the operational needs.
The country of return, number of seats needed, security measures, costs, safety
requirements and conditions, etc are factors to be considered during the selection of
the aircraft/airline.
The use of two staircases, closed on the sides and covered by a roof for security
reasons, in the front and rear parts of the aircraft is recommended to facilitate
boarding procedure in a safe manner.
Double aisles are preferable for long flights and operations with high numbers of
passengers.
The space between the seating rows should be according to international standards
and allow comfortable seating, particularly during long flights. It is preferred that a
seat pitch distance between two seat rows is 32 inches or more, but it should not be
less than 30 inches.
The extreme sensitivity of JRO makes it advisable to select airline with a reliable
history. It is recommended that an airline and preferably also a crew with previous
experience of either carrying out return operations or flying to the specific country
of return is selected whenever possible.
The OMS should ensure a guaranteed response time in case the aircraft becomes
unavailable or develops a technical fault at any time prior to the scheduled
departure or during the flight is included in the contract. The OMS should also obtain
a further guarantee of a replacement aircraft within the shortest timescale possible,
preferably within a maximum of:
 12 hours if the incident is at a third country’s airport.
 6 hours if the incident is at an EU airport.
For any JRO with two CoR and refuelling at the airport of the first CoR, the OMS
should include a special clause in an agreement between the airline and the
refuelling company requesting refuelling with passengers remaining on board.

Page 20 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.1.7 Flight schedule
This should be prepared by the airline following the OMS’ instructions and will be
based on such factors as the departure point of the charter or the airport in the
country of return and time, number of collection points, need for technical
stopovers (for refuelling and/or crew changing), etc.
6.1.8 Catering & cutlery
The type of catering has to be agreed with the airline. Finger food (cold or warm),
but of a high quality, is recommended during the flight to the country of return. No
distinction may be made between the food served to JRO participants and returnees.
However, cultural and religious considerations should be taken into account, as well
as the presence of babies or young children on board. Hot food is not excluded,
subject to the OMS’ national rules. During the return leg it is highly recommended to
serve hot meals.
Due consideration should be paid to the quantity and quality of catering served
during both legs of the flight. The length of the operation has to be taken into
account, as well as the fact that some contingents undertake a long journey before
reaching the place of embarkation.
Catering should be arranged for all the passengers in the waiting area(s) prior to the
embarkation if the flight’s departure is significantly delayed, e.g. when an aircraft
experiences technical problems, either in the OMS or in one of the PMS during the
stopover.
If cutlery is provided during the flight to the country of return, it should be plastic
and without a knife and a fork.
When possible, it is recommended that crew members hand over food and drinks to
returnees via escorts in order to avoid direct contact with the returnees.
6.1.9 Costs of the aircraft
Frontex decides on the operations to be financed from its budget and on the
conditions for any JRO.
Frontex reserves the right to finance only the OMS or only the PMS, or to finance
only some of the eligible costs, as well as to request the OMS to provide a price
comparison for various aircraft types or flight routes in accordance with the
principle of sound financial management.
6.1.10 Luggage
The weight of luggage allowed per returnee should not normally exceed 30 kg. MS
need to be aware that airlines require information on the number of pieces of
luggage and, if possible, the total weight, because it affects the seating on board in
connection with the number of passengers. Member States, according to their
national rules and procedures, can send the rest of returnees’ luggage later.
It is recommended that one escort, preferably from the OMS back-up team, is
assigned to deal with luggage handling.

Page 21 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

The returnees’ luggage is not to be treated as hand luggage, but should be stored in
the aircraft hold. Sealable firm bags are required to carry returnees’ belongings.
Luggage stored in the aircraft hold needs to be clearly labelled with a name tag.
When more than one destination is involved, luggage to different destinations should
be marked with different colours, e.g. the flag of the country of return, and/or a
flight tag-with an IATA code. The airline should be advised to use different
compartments for different destinations.
JRO participants usually take little luggage or no hold luggage. In the event that
their luggage is stored in the aircraft hold, it should be marked with a different
colour, blue being recommended.
The PMS should inform the OMS if there is an exceptional situation regarding
luggage.
6.1.11 Local transportation expenses
Both the OMS and the PMS should plan the handing out the allowance for local
transportation expenses in line with their national law/policy.
It may be the case that some MS provide such an allowance, while others do not. To
avoid potential disruption, PMS should agree arrangements in advance.
Consideration should be given to the distribution of any allowance immediately prior
to the commencement of the operation.
6.1.12 Means of transport and arrival time of the PMS at an embarkation airport
The PMS must inform the OMS via Frontex of the time of arrival, and the means of
transport to the embarkation airport, etc, using the standardised form “Participation
in Offered Joint Return Operation by Air-Concrete Interest”.
The PMS should aim to bring their returnees to the embarkation airport before the
departure of the joint return flight according to the instructions provided either by
OMS in the standardised FOSS form “Offer of Joint Return Operation by Air Information Sheet” or bilaterally by another PMS when embarkation there is
planned, unless agreed otherwise.
If a PMS has no option but to bring their returnees to the OMS or another PMS earlier
than instructed, because of a lack of timely connecting transport, the PMS
concerned will ask the OMS or another PMS, in writing, to issue a specific transit
authorisation in accordance with Articles 4 and 5(3) of Council Directive
2003/110/EC, in order to be provided with appropriate assistance with
accommodating and guarding returnee(s), e.g. in a transit area, separate premises,
a detention centre. The PMS should send additional escorts to guard returnee(s).
The PMS must notify the OMS and Frontex of the time and method of arrival at the
embarkation airport.

Page 22 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.1.13 Offer of a joint return operation
As soon as all preparatory steps are in place, the OMS is required to provide Frontex
with an offer using the standardised form “Offer of Joint Return Operation by Air Information Sheet” to be found in the FOSS, with deadlines for MS to express
general and concrete interest in the JRO. Frontex will forward the Offer to other MS.
6.1.14 General interest & distribution of seats
All MS interested in a JRO are required to send their responses to Frontex, within the
deadline set by the OMS, using the standard form “General interest-Email”. Frontex
informs the OMS accordingly. Frontex also gathers the PMS’ requests and, after the
deadline for general interest, Frontex reviews them and shares the number of seats
amongst the PMS.
6.1.15 Concrete interest & participation and passenger list
The PMS should report their concrete interest to the OMS and Frontex within the
deadline by providing:
 the standardised form “Participation in Offered Joint Return Operation by AirConcrete Interest”, which includes general information about returnees (total
number, nationality, numbers of non-compliant cases and medical cases) and
JRO participants, connecting transport, embarkation airport, contact persons,
escort leader, etc); and
 annex “Passenger List in Offered Joint Return Operation”11 (more details
regarding the JRO passengers).
Frontex, together with the OMS, plans the carrying out of the operation according to
the information received.
In the event of cancellations, Frontex, at short notice, informs the OMS and each
PMS about free seats in order to give them a chance to increase the numbers of
returnees, making the operation as efficient and cost effective as possible.
The OMS must prepare and forward at least two different types of lists of all
passengers, both from the OMS and the PMS.
One list is sent to the airline and includes names, surnames and dates of birth. The
second list is for the internal use by the OMS. The PMS should provide the
information in the relevant FOSS form “Annex to Participation in Offered Joint
Return Operation Concrete Interest”.
For handover in a country of return the OMS is required to prepare a list containing
the personal data of returnees only. This list includes returnees of the OMS and all
PMS.
6.1.16 Risk assessment
The OMS and each PMS carry out an individual risk assessment of their returnees
(based on factors such as previous behaviour and removal history). Such assessment
should be used to determine the number of escorts and ground staff and the size of
the back-up team in order to ensure security during all the JRO phases, as well as
for the determination of the possible use of coercive measures.
11

To be filled in by a country interested in participation in an offered return flight.

Page 23 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

The risk assessment of returnees must be provided by the PMS in the format
specified in the FOSS form “Participants List in Offered Joint Return Operation”.
Any changes to the risk assessment must be communicated by the PMS to the OMS
and Frontex as soon as possible.
Each PMS informs the MS which has offered embarkation on its territory, in advance,
about any special requirements concerning returnees, e.g. any need to provide a
wheelchair and/or a baby carriage at the airport, etc.
6.1.17 Fitness to travel and medical examination
The OMS and each PMS must ensure that all returnees are in an appropriate state of
health to travel. The returnees are to be removed only as long as they are “fit-totravel” at the time of the JRO.
The OMS’ medical doctor on board must be informed by the PMS’ medical doctor as
soon as possible prior to a joint return flight about any pre-existing medical
condition affecting a returnee and/or medical treatment required. Only medical
staff have access to the medical information of returnees.
In such cases the PMS must send the required information using the “fit-to-travel”
form (for the recommended template, see Annex 1). The form must be issued by a
medical doctor and be transmitted from the PMS’ medical staff to the OMS’ medical
staff.
After an evaluation, by the medical personnel available, of those individual(s) from a
PMS whom the OMS considers are not “fit-to-travel”, their participation in a joint
return operation coordinated by Frontex must be refused if their unfitness to travel
is confirmed. If there is any doubt, the returnee(s) should not be accepted on the
flight; it is the PMS that should document the fitness to travel.
The processing of medical information must be carried out in line with applicable
and relevant personal data protection legislation.
6.1.18 Information to the competent authorities
After receiving all replies from the PMS, the OMS is required to inform its own
diplomatic mission in the transit country (when applicable) and country/countries of
return as well as the diplomatic mission of the country/countries of return
responsible for the OMS’ territory, of the following issues: the number and names of
PMS, the flight schedule, and the number of returnees and escorts. The OMS should
also notify EURLO/its own ILO in the country/countries of return or transit.
Each PMS is required to inform the competent authorities in the country/countries of
return or/and the relevant diplomatic post of the country/countries of return in the
stipulated term in advance about the return of their citizens who are being removed
from the national territory of MS according with the EU or bilateral readmission
agreements and existing practice. They should also inform their own diplomatic
representations/ILO/EURLO in country/countries of return.
The OMS and the PMS should at this stage request any necessary diplomatic
assistance at the airport of arrival, as well as information/support in the event that
an overnight stay in the country of return is necessary.

Page 24 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.1.19 Advance party
The deployment of an advance party, travelling either to the country/countries of
return or to another MS, may help to finalise details and enhance the potential for
the operation to succeed. An advance party should consist of no more than three
people.
An advance party organised to go to the country/countries of return should arrive a
few days before the flight, in order to meet the competent authorities in the
country/countries of return, provide information about the returnees and agree the
details of disembarkation/processing by the competent authorities on arrival.
The members of the advance party de facto become the contact persons for the
foreign authorities in case of problems with the returnees and the joint return flight.
The OMS should provide information about all the returnees to the advance party
(e.g. personal data and information about travel documents). The OMS and the
advance party stay in close contact with each other and regularly exchange updates
on the developments of the JRO organisation.
A delegate or delegates from the PMS may form part of the advance party, if
required. Frontex reserves the right to take part in an advance party.
An advance party to another MS is usually arranged by the OMS in a case that the
main charter starts from the PMS. The purpose for that is to ensure the appropriate
security check of the aircraft, briefing with the crew and direct communication with
the relevant PMS.
6.1.20 Crisis focal point 24/7 and Contact list
Both the OMS and each PMS must nominate a person responsible for the preparation
of the operation, and/or a crisis focal point to be contacted round-the-clock in order
to contribute to solving possible technical/operative needs which might arise during
the operation.
The PMS informs the OMS and Frontex of their nomination(s).
The OMS and the PMS provide Frontex with a list of their relevant contacts (phone
numbers and email addresses), also in a country of return and any transit country, in
particular EL, crisis focal points, medical doctors, monitors, ILO, EURLO, hotels,
handling agents, etc.
Frontex compiles a list of all the provided contact details, including the Frontex
representatives dealing with the concrete JRO. Frontex distributes the list, together
with the Implementation Plan, to all relevant stakeholders.
6.1.21 Overnight stay & accommodation
Where an overnight stay either in the country of return or the transit country is
required, the OMS and each PMS are responsible for arranging their own
accommodation. However, the OMS can offer the PMS assistance with finding, or
advice on, suitable accommodation.
When the OMS arranges accommodation for any other MS, the PMS should inform the
OMS of the number and type of rooms they will need, copying the FJRCC. Afterwards
the PMS should be informed by the OMS, prior to the implementation day of the

Page 25 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

operation, about the hotel, e.g. contact details, location, method of payment, etc,
and also about arrangements concerning airport-hotel-airport transportation.
It is recommended that the whole operation is conducted so as to avoid overnight
stays outside the territory of Europe; however, where that is unavoidable, it is
preferable for all JRO participants to stay in one hotel.
If any PMS arranges accommodation and/or transport on its own, it communicates all
the relevant information listed above to Frontex and the OMS.
Where several hotels arranged by the OMS have to be used, lists of those staying in
the respective hotels should be prepared in advance. A responsible person should be
nominated for each hotel group.
National groups should not be divided unless there is no alternative. In this case, a
responsible person should be also nominated for each group.
6.1.22 Transportation to the aircraft
A MS offering embarkation to any other MS on its territory arranges vehicles for the
transport of all returnees and JRO participants.
Such transport might be arranged either from any special operational / waiting area,
directly from detention centres or from a plane to another one.
6.1.23 Designated airport special areas
These areas may be required based on the needs of both the OMS and the PMS.
The MS arranges a secure waiting area at the airport if the JRO participants and
returnees have to wait at the airport for a period of time before the departure of
the flight.
Such area should include space to facilitate checks, medical examination, toilets, a
smoking area, catering, meetings, etc.
Sufficient privacy within the secure waiting area to proceed with fitting body cuffs,
other means of restraint, or to separate out any returnee who has put up physical
objections to his/her removal is recommendable, in case these are the identified
means based on the principles of necessity and proportionality.
It is highly recommended to provide a separate area for families with children and
people with special needs.
6.1.24 Seating plan
In designing a seating plan for the main charter, the OMS should first request the
aircraft layout from the airline. The OMS should then be conscious of the following
guidelines:
 Seats for all JRO participants and returnees should be clearly marked (e.g.
different colours, flags, countries codes, etc) in the seating plan.
 No returnees should be placed next to emergency exits, the cockpit and/or
aircraft equipment.
 The returnees who pose high security risks should be placed at the rear of the
aircraft.

Page 26 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex
















Those who need special health care can be isolated in a separate area, e.g. in
the first rows of seats that are allocated for the returnees.
One (or more, depending on the aircraft) of the toilets should be designated
and labelled for the sole use of returnees. For security reasons the crew
should not use the same toilet as returnees. Some aircrafts are big enough to
reserve a toilet cabin for the sole use of the crew.
The aircraft should be divided into different national sectors, separated, if
possible, by one free row.
Specific area(s), usually at the front of the aircraft should be reserved for
ELs, official representatives, medical personnel, etc. Two or three adjoining
seats, where a doctor is placed, should be reserved for medical consultations.
In order to allow monitors to exercise their duties in line with their mandate,
they should have good visibility of the returnees from their seats.
It is recommended that two seats are reserved for the ELs, one in front, with
the OMS’ EL, and one within his/her national area.
If there is a back-up team, it should be spread out on board the aircraft e.g.
between the rows for the OMS’ EL, external representatives, etc, and the first
section for returnees at the front of the aircraft, in the middle and at the rear
of the aircraft. The seats for the back-up team should be clearly indicated on
the seating plan.
Consideration should be given to families with children (families should not be
separated on board), people in need of special care, etc.
Consideration should be given to reserving some seats for the crew to rest
during long flights; if so, this should be taken into account when designing the
seating plan.
Before boarding the proposed seat plan must be coordinated with the captain
of the aircraft. Requirements for weight distribution and aircraft trim might
require changes, especially if only a part of the seat capacity is used.

Each EL is provided with one copy of the seating plan.
6.1.25 Meeting with the airline
The OMS needs to have a meeting with the airline at this pre-return phase,
especially if the airline has no previous experience in this type of operation. The
company should be briefed about the confidentiality of the JRO, in-flight and returnflight procedures, such as the catering (meals, food customs related to the
returnees’ religion, beverages, including policy on alcoholic drinks), schedule, rules
concerning contact with returnees, movements on board, the seating plan, onboard
entertainment (music, films), etc.
It is recommended that the airline should be asked to provide an experienced and
cooperative crew.
6.1.26 Aircraft check
The OMS should identify in advance the staff responsible for carrying out an aircraft
security check prior to the commencement of the operation.

Page 27 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.1.27 Plan B (failure to return a person in the event of, for example, an overnight
stay)
The OMS and the PMS must have in place contingency arrangements (a “Plan B”) in
the event that one or more returnees are refused entry to the country of return by
the relevant local authorities.
In such circumstances, the relevant MS assumes responsibility for the transport of its
own returnees to its territory (see point 6 of the Common Guidelines).
Taking into account the JRO flight schedule, each MS should check in advance:
 the availability of commercial flights for the returnee and the escorts,
departing either directly from the CoR or after the return leg from the MS of
arrival (in the latter case a transit request pursuant to Council Directive
2003/110/EC would be needed);
 the possibility of an immediate return of the joint charter flight from the CoR,
where an overnight stay is organised. The OMS needs to take account of
factors such as, for example, clearance, the duty times of the crew, catering,
technical issues, etc.
In the event of an unplanned overnight stay in the CoR or other MS as well as of an
unforeseen return to the MS by a commercial flight(s), the following matters have to
be considered:
 possible visa or entry requirements, security levels, technical issues, etc;
 the need to guard the returnee(s) at the airport (premises, food, security,
possible shift rotation of escorts according to their duty time, need to rest);
 various assistance to be requested from the local authorities.
6.1.28 Meeting with escort leaders
It is recommended that a meeting is convened with the EL, medical personnel,
monitors and other significant JRO participants prior to the boarding. All important
issues, in particular an update regarding the passenger list, seating plan, boarding
procedure, returnees’ mental and physical state, and management of any
noncompliant returnee(s), should be discussed at such a meeting, which should be
held in the embarkation airport to enable the responsible personnel to check the
premises.
6.1.29 Implementation Plan
Frontex draws up an Implementation Plan in cooperation with the OMS and
distributes it to the PMS prior to the implementation day of the JRO.
The OMS and all PMS escort leaders are responsible for informing each JRO
participant in his/her contingent about the content of the Implementation Plan, as
well as the annexes, and for ensuring that they comply with the plan. This obligation
is specified in each Implementation Plan.
6.1.30 Estimated budget
Based on Frontex decision on the financing for a given JRO and its conditions, each
Member State entitled to receive reimbursement must submit an estimated budget
(a standardised form is available in the FOSS) no later than three working days prior
to the implementation day of the JRO.

Page 28 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.2 The pre-departure phase
6.2.1 Checks of designated special areas
When designated special (waiting and/or operational) areas have been arranged in a
MS which has offered embarkation to any other MS on its territory, it is required that
such areas are subjected to a security and technical check prior to the
commencement of the operation.
6.2.2 Briefing of escorts
Prior to the operation the OMS’ EL should brief his/her own escorts. The PMS should
similarly brief their escorts before leaving for the departure point.
At this stage, information and process should be discussed relating to the
requirement not to take any medicines or substances prohibited in the CoR.
6.2.3 Briefing of the crew and authorisation by the captain
The OMS’s EL introduces himself/herself to the captain and the crew as the main
point of contact. This escort leader should discuss and agree with the captain the
operational details for returnees’ boarding and the procedures to be adopted on
board for flight security, in particular the use of coercive measures.12
The OMS is required to inform the crew also about the seating plan, the number of
passengers, their risk assessment, the weight of luggage, the catering schedule, etc.
6.2.4 Checks
6.2.4.1 Body search of returnees
Body searches of returnees should be carried out in a designated area according to
relevant national regulations, in order to remove objects that might be harmful to
them or other persons.
In the event that the body search is carried out in the detention centre, it is
advisable to check the returnees once again before their boarding following a
transfer, in particular on a connecting commercial flight, to the airport of
departure, as they might have come into possession of dangerous objects.
The aforementioned search must be conducted in full respect for the returnees’
personal dignity. Any body search must only be conducted by personnel of the same
gender as the returnee.
6.2.4.2 Luggage search
Searches of returnees’ luggage should be carried out either in the detention centre
or in the operational area. Appropriate airline security rules should be followed.
Special attention should be paid to returnees’ personal belongings and valuable
items (e.g. laptops, mobile phones, jewellery, money, etc). An official list of such
items should be created and verified by the signatures of both the Member State’s
12

In accordance with the Article 6 (2) of the Convention on Offences and Certain Other Acts Committed on Board Aircraft signed at Tokyo, on
14 September 1963 (the 1963 Tokyo Convention), the aircraft commander may request or authorise the assistance of passengers to restrain
any person whom he is entitled to restrain.

Page 29 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

person(s) performing this search and the returnee. In the event that the returnee
refuses to sign this list, the reason should be noted down on the document.
Returnees should be advised to leave behind in a MS any documentation about their
asylum procedure.
They should be also informed about the need to leave behind in a MS any medicines
or substances prohibited in a country of return. MS should consider the possibility of
providing the returnee with a substitute, in line with the relevant medical
recommendation, which is allowed in the CoR.
Searches must be conducted in full respect for returnees’ personal dignity.
6.2.4.3 Document check
Although document preparation is part of the pre-return phase, a responsible
person/team should be appointed to check the travel documents for both returnees
and escorts immediately prior to boarding.
PMS should carry out similar checks before boarding in their country.
6.2.4.4 Check and preparation of an aircraft (see also 6.1.26)
Security checks of the cabin, including the toilet area, must be conducted
thoroughly, looking for explosives, dangerous items, etc, prior to the embarkation.
After such checks have been completed the aircraft must remain under guard.
Where special equipment for sanitary purposes or safety is needed, it should be
placed in the aircraft at this stage.
The seating plan should be checked, so as to confirm that it matches the plane’s
configuration and the required weight distribution.
6.2.5 Personal belongings & labelling and loading of luggage (see also 6.1.10)
Returnees’ personal belongings and valuables must not to be treated as hold
luggage, but instead kept by the respective escorts/EL. They should be stored in a
sealed envelope or a transparent plastic bag and marked with the name of the
returnee. Access to the hygienic items for babies and female returnees should be
ensured during the entire operation.
6.2.6 Final passenger list
Each PMS escort leader reports any changes in numbers of returnees and JRO
participants prior to the departure from their respective home country according to
the instructions in the Implementation Plan.
A definitive list of all JRO participants need to be completed by the OMS
immediately prior to boarding and provided to the airline (to the responsible
handling agent and the aircraft commander). For take-off weight calculation the
airline requires a breakdown on the number of male and female passengers, as well
the number of infants.

Page 30 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.2.7 Transportation of PMS
A MS offering embarkation to any other MS on its territory should assist with the
transport of the returnees and JRO participants to the waiting area or to the plane.
A separate vehicle should be on standby, e.g. close to the secure waiting area, to
transport any noncompliant returnees.
PMS connecting charters are required to wait at the embarkation airport of the OMS
or the PMS until the joint return charter has departed.
6.2.8 Executive powers of escorts during transit
As a general rule, escorts operating outside their own national territory cannot
exercise the same powers13 that they have in their respective countries.
The detailed information on this topic can be found in the Common Understanding 14
uploaded to the FOSS.
6.2.9 Briefing of all relevant JRO participants
The OMS provides all relevant JRO participants, in particular EL, observers, medical
staff, interpreter(s), monitor(s), Frontex representative(s), with the latest updates,
e.g. information about embarkation and in-flight procedures, movements on board,
access to toilets, safety belts, hand-over of personal belongings and valuables to
returnees prior to disembarkation, etc. Each PMS EL provides the OMS’ EL with
information on the current mental and physical state of the returnees.
Each PMS EL should subsequently brief their escorts with this latest information.
6.2.10 Boarding process
Boarding takes place in a secure area.
The embarkation process is always monitored by the OMS’ EL.
It is recommended to do this MS by MS and one returnee at a time, in order for the
PMS EL to control the embarkation.
Boarding should be arranged so as to ensure that the seats furthest from the point of
access are occupied first. However, returnees, escorts and other JRO participants
are seated as directed by the OMS’ escorts. Once on board, all passengers take their
seats and remain seated.
Special attention must be paid to the embarkation of families with children in order
to avoid exposing children to possible violent behaviour of other returnees (e.g.
separate transport for families with children and pregnant women from the waiting
area to the plane).
Pregnant women (single or with families) and families with children shall board the
aircraft separately and shall be seated separately from other returnees.
Family members should not be separated on board, except in exceptional cases
when extreme non-compliance takes place and in order to shield the children’s view
See Article 7 of Council Directive 2003/110/EC
Common Understanding of Frontex LEGNET of 4.2.2013 on the executive powers of escorts at airport outside their own home Member State
(https://foss.frontex.europa.eu/OperationalActivities/ReturnOperationsSector/Legislation/tabid/771/Default.aspx)
13
14

Page 31 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

or ensure their physical integrity. Children should not be exposed to violent and
aggressive adults. Therefore, if a family member acts in a violent or aggressive way,
such a person may be separated for as long as necessary.
6.2.11 Guarding of the aircraft doors
To ensure orderly embarkation, and to prevent returnees from escaping from the
aircraft during the boarding, designated escorts from the back-up team should guard
the aircraft’s doors.

Page 32 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.3 The in-flight Phase
6.3.1 Fulfilment of agreements
All of the listed procedures and preparations are to be followed by all of the
participants during this operational stage.
6.3.2 The OMS’ EL
Generally the OMS’ EL has the overall responsibility/command authority 15 in this
phase.
The OMS’ EL should regularly monitor the situation on board.
Each PMS EL should regularly monitor the situation within their national group.
6.3.3 Vigilance of escorts
The escorts in general pay full attention to guarding the returnees. Activities such as
reading and listening to music depend on national rules, the judgement of the
national EL, as well as the dynamic risk assessment of the current situation by the
escorts themselves. When two or more escorts are designated to a returnee, at least
one stays fully vigilant.
Escorts are required to remain with the returnees unless they are relieved or a
dynamic risk assessment indicates otherwise.
6.3.4 Deployment of coercive measures
When coercive measures are needed, the OMS’ EL and the PMS’ EL make a decision
based on advice from the escorts.
PMS escort leaders should inform the OMS’ EL, who has the responsibility for making
the final decision.
6.3.5 Movement on board
The movement of escorts with returnees is limited (e.g. visit to a toilet, consultation
with a medical doctor). Only one returnee at any time is to be allowed to move from
his/her seat under the supervision of the back-up team and the national escort(s). In
order to avoid a blockage in an aisle, a back-up team member regulates the
movement of the escorts with the returnees.
Returnees and escorts should remain seated unless they have permission to be out of
their seat. Returnees standing or sitting in the aisles should be avoided at all times.
The JRO participants should not hinder the clear view for either the crew members
or the back-up team. It is essential that the crew is not hindered from carrying out
their own security measures on board.
Security instructions given by the crew members must be followed (e.g. seat belt
fastening, etc).

15

Command authority delegated by the captain according to Art. 6(2) of Tokyo Convention

Page 33 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.3.6 Returnees’ personal belongings
Personal belongings and/or valuables transported in the cabin must be returned to
the returnees before disembarkation, according to the instructions from the OMS’ EL
provided during the briefing of all relevant JRO participants. Other personal
belongings will be returned after disembarkation.

Page 34 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.4 The arrival phase
6.4.1 First contact with local authorities
The OMS (assisted by an interpreter, if needed) is responsible for making initial
contact with the competent local authorities in the country of return. Where an
advance party has been arranged, or if there is an appropriate diplomatic
representation/ILO/EURLO in that country, they should also be present.
The OMS’ EL should follow the instructions of, or reach an agreement with, local
authorities on the disembarkation procedure.
6.4.2 Hand-over of returnees
The returnees should be handed over without restraints, and usually through the
front exit of the aircraft. Restraints should be removed no later than when the
aircraft comes to a complete standstill at the final parking position.
Each MS shall hand over its own returnees, together with travel documents.
Usually the MS seated in the first rows designated to returnees hands over its
returnees first, followed by MS seated behind. Returnees are escorted individually
or in small groups to the exit door of the aircraft. If required, returnees are
escorted to the immigration counters.
When a hand-over procedure takes place on board, it is worth using a microphone
to announce returnees’ names.
If a returnee does not want to leave an aircraft:
 Measures should primarily focus on convincing the returnee via verbal
communication.
 The OMS’ EL may request the assistance of the officials of the country of
return (to talk to the returnee).
 If the returnee does not disembark the aircraft, the OMS’ EL (together with a
PMS EL, when applicable) decides with the officials of the country of return
how to proceed.
When the escorts leave the aircraft during the hand-over procedure, it is
recommended to either bring their hand luggage, or to keep a back-up team
member on board.
6.4.3 Guarding of the aircraft doors
It is recommended that designated escorts of the OMS, for example from a back-up
team, guard the aircraft’s doors during the hand-over procedure in order to ensure
orderly disembarkation and to prevent returnees from possible re-entry to the board
of the aircraft, as well as observe the unloading luggage procedures.
6.4.4 Transport for returnees
Where deemed necessary, it is recommended to organise, as a part of the handling
arrangements, transport by buses for the returnees from the aircraft to the airport
building in the country of return.

Page 35 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.4.5 Overnight stay in a third country
The OMS’ EL or a person acting on his/her behalf should contact transport
companies, hotels, etc, in order to advise them of the arrival and should, in
agreement with the PMS EL, plan and coordinate the operations of re-boarding of all
the JRO participants onto the joint charter flight after the overnight stay.
Each JRO participant is responsible for compliance with immigration regulations of a
country of return during their stay there.

Page 36 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

6.5 The return-flight phase
6.5.1 Unaccepted returnees
If one or more returnees are not accepted by the authorities of the country of
return, the returnees involved should be taken back to departure Member State on
the same charter flight or – possibly – on scheduled flights accompanied by escorts
from the relevant MS.
6.5.2 Headcount
When the boarding is completed, the OMS’ EL should ask the crew for a headcount
so as to confirm that all JRO participants foreseen to be on board are there and to
detect any possible stowaways.
6.5.3 Debriefing
During a return leg of a JRO a debriefing meeting is held on board with the
participation of the escort leaders, the back-up team leader, monitors, observers
and the Frontex representative. If the space on the aircraft allows, a crew member
and medical personnel may be invited as well.
The OMS and PMS escort leaders are requested to complete the “JRO Debriefing
Form”, usually distributed and afterwards collected by a Frontex representative
onboard. The feedback provided in the forms will be utilised during the debriefing
and by the OMS for the preparation of the “Final Return Operation Report”.

6.6 Final return operation report
The OMS is responsible for issuing a detailed report on the operation and sending it
to Frontex (FJRCC@frontex.europa.eu) within 14 days of the end of a JRO. The
OMS’ EL will describe the JRO, highlighting any exceptional events, the actions
taken to solve any problems that may have arisen, remarks of the PMS and
observation of the monitor. The standard form stored in the FOSS should be used
for this purpose. The completed report is uploaded to the FOSS.
The standard form of the report does not substitute for the national Member States’
reports.

Page 37 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Annex 1 to the Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air
coordinated by Frontex

“Fit-to-travel” form

Page 38 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Annex 2 to the Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air
coordinated by Frontex

Positional Asphyxia16

The pictures are ilustrative.
16

The information about positional asphyxia has been copied from the training material “Medical Doctors’ Handbook on Medical Precautionary
Measures for Escort Officers” (to be used during various training sessions in the field of return operations)

Page 39 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Page 40 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Page 41 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

The picture is ilustrative.

Page 42 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Annex 3 to the Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air
coordinated by Frontex

Restraints forbidden on joint return operations coordinated by Frontex
1. Introduction:
Following the recommendation of the European Ombudsman,17 Frontex has
documented the means of restraint allowed for return operations in each Member
State and afterwards thoroughly analysed them to ascertain if any of those means
of restraint should not be permitted during JROs coordinated by Frontex. On the
basis of that analysis, Frontex has identified a list of restraints forbidden on JROs
coordinated by the Agency. The compliance of Member States with this list is
considered by Frontex to be a condition for participation in a JRO coordinated by
the Agency.
2. Forbidden restraints:
a. General principles
The use of restraints in JROs coordinated by Frontex is guided by the principles of
proportionality, necessity, respect for human dignity and personal integrity, in line
with the applicable legal framework.
All restraints causing pain or affecting human dignity are forbidden.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Council of Europe Twenty Guidelines on Forced
Return,18 in particular Guideline 19 thereof, “the only forms of restraint which
are acceptable are those constituting responses that are strictly proportionate
responses to the actual or reasonably anticipated resistance of the returnee with
a view to controlling him/her.” Furthermore, “Restraint techniques and coercive
measures likely to obstruct the airways partially or wholly, or forcing the
returnee into positions where he/she risks asphyxia, shall not be used”.
b. List of forbidden restraints
Based on the aforementioned principles and the Twenty Guidelines, the following
list of concrete forbidden restraints has been compiled:
a. metal chains used to restrain hands or legs;
b. straightjackets;
c. plastic ties not specifically designed for handcuffing or for leg restraint.

While closing her own-initiative inquiry OI/9/2014/MHZ on 4 May 2015, the European Ombudsman issued several recommendations to
Frontex regarding the coordination of JROs.
18 Adopted by the Committee of Ministers on 4 May 2005 at the 925th meeting of the Ministers’ Deputies
http://www.coe.int/t/dg3/migration/archives/Source/MalagaRegConf/20_Guidelines_Forced_Return_en.pdf
17

Page 43 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Annex 4 to the Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air
coordinated by Frontex

Examples of the List19 of recommended medical equipment and medication for a
medical doctor taking part in a JRO
Example 1 – Equipment list – emergency backpack, Austria

Anxiolit forte
Aspirin Filmtabl
Aspirin protect
Atropinum
Berodual
Betaisodona
Betnesol N
Blopress
Bricanyl
Brufen
Buscopan Comp Dg
Dehace retard
DOLO-Menthoneurin
Dolorex - Spray
Effortil
Emedyl (Kind)
Fenistil (ggt)
Fenistil Gel
Glucose 33%
Haldol - Tropfen
Halset
Halset plus Spray
Hova Filmtabletten
Hypnomidate
Immodium akut
Jubin Gel

19

Medikamente / Medication
Lasix/Furosemid
Rectopred Supp
Lemocin
Refobacin
Lovenox
Respicur
Lovenox
Elomel
Mexalen
Riopan Gel
Mexalen Supp
Risperdal Lsg
Mirtabene
Sedacoron
Motilium
Solu-Dacortin/Solu-Volon
NaCl 10 ml
Strepsyls
Naloxon
Sultanol
Nasivin
Symbicort forte
Nasivin (sanft)
Talcid
Nitrolingual Spray
Temesta
Novalgin
Temesta
Novalgin - Tropfen
Tramabene/Tramal
Nureflex Suspension
Trittico
Otrivin
Ulsal
Pantoloc
Vendal
Paracodin (ggt)
Vertirosan
Parkemed
Vertirosan
Filmtabletten
Parkemed Susp
Visadron
Paspertin
Vitawund
PsychoPax
Voluven
Passedan
Xanor
Perfalgan
Pulmicort

These lists have been developed by Austria and the United Kingdom. Such lists are used during the return operations of those countries
when their own medical staff are present. These lists are shared with the consent of those Member States and may be used by other
Member States as a basis for their own lists.

Page 44 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Medikamente - Ampullen / Medication – ampoules
Anexate

Ketanest S

Respicur

Aspirin

Kytrill

Rheumesser

Atropin

L-Adrenalin

Sedacoron

Bricanyl

Lasix

Suprarenin

Buscapina

Lystenon

Urbason

Dormicum

NacL

Vendal

Ebrantil

Naloxon

Xyloneural

Esmolol

Novalgin

Fenistil

Paspertin

ALU - Kompresse
alu - gauze

Verband / Wound dressing
Einmalskalpell
OP Handschuhe
scalpel (single use)
surgical gloves

Anatomische Pinzette Elastische Binde (fest)
tweezers
crepe bandage

Peha haft
adhesive bandage

Betaisadona
Betaisodona solution

Elastomull
Elastomull bandage

Pflaster
plaster

Chirurgische Schere
surgical scissors

Fingerstülpverband
finger dressing

Pinzette (Stahl)
Tweezers (metal)

Curapor Steril
sterile plaster

Gazin
Gazin gauze dressing

Skalpellklingen
scalpel blade

Druckverbandpackerl
pressure bandage

Kaltostat Kompresse
cool pack

Splitterpinzette
fragment tweezers

Einmalhandschuhe
disposable gloves

Kleiderschere
scissors for clothes

Steriles Tuch
sterile towel

Nahtmaterial
sterile sutures

Leukosilk
Leukosilk

Steri-Strip
sterile stripes

Mullkompresse
gauze

Verbandschere
scissors

Page 45 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Beatmung / Intubation / Sauerstoff / Defibrillator
Artificial respiration / intubation / oxygen / defibrillator

Ambu Beutel
bag valve mask

Stauschlauch
tourniquet

Ambu Maske # 4
ventilation mask No. 4

Führungsdraht
guidewire

Ambu Maske # 5
ventilation mask No. 5

Fußpumpe/Sauger
suction unit

Beatmungsfilter
ventilation filter

Guedel (div. Größen)
Guedel airway

Beissblock
bite block

Laryngoskop ink. Batt.
Laryngoscope, with battery

Blutzuckermessgerät
blood glucose monitoring

Laryngoskop Spatel Macintosh 2, 4
laryngoscope macintosh 2, 4

Blutzuckermessgerät Messstreifen

Laryngoskop Spatel Miller 1

blood glucose stripes

laryngoscope miller 1

Blutzuckermessgerät Tupfer
blood glucose swab

etCO2 - Indikator „easy cap"
etCO2 "easy cap"

Blutzuckermessgerät Lanzetten
blood glucose lances

Larynxtubus Gr 4/5, + Cuffspritze
laryngeal tube gr. 4/5 + cuff

Contamedbox (gelb)
medical waste box

O2 Brille
oxygen mask

Defibrillator (AED)
defibrillator (AED)
Defi Elektroden Erwachsener
defibrillator pads (adult)
Defi EKG Elektroden
EKG - electrodes

EKG Kabel 3pol.
EKG - cable 3 pol. for AED
Defi Elektroden Kind
defibrillator pads (child)

O2 Schlauch
oxygen tube

Otoskop Heine Mini 3000
otoscope

Pulsoxymeter

Ersatzbatterien für Pulsoxymeter
replacement batteries for pulse
oximeter

pulse oximeter

Page 46 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Sauerstoffflasche (2 Liter Flasche)
oxygen (2 litre bottle)

RR Manschette Kind
blood pressure monitor (child)

Druckminderer O2
pressure reducer for oxygen

RR Manschette Erwachsener
Blood Pressure Monitor (adult)

EKG (tragbar)
portable EKG
EKG Kabel 12 pol.
EKG wire (12 pol.)
EKG-Papier
paper for printer

Ladekabel 240 Volt/12 Volt für EKG
charging cable AC/DC
EKG Klebe- und Saugelektroden
EKG - electrodes

Endotrachealtubus (div. Größen)

Larynxtubus

endotracheal tube (various sizes)

laryngeal tube (various size)

Absaugkatheter
suction catheter

Stethoskop
stethoscope

Diverses / Others
Rettungsdecke (Alu)
rescue blanket (alu)

Eisspray
ice spray

Sofortkalt - Kompresse
cool pack

Drogentest Harn
drug test

Infusionsbesteck
infusion set

Sterilium
disinfectant

Einmalpinzette
tweezers (single use)

Mundspatel Holz
tongue depressors

Trockene Tupfer
swab

Einmalrasierer
razor (single use)

Einmalnadeln
needles (single use)

Einmalspritzen
syringe (single use)

Mundschutzmasken

Pupillenlampe

Fieberthermometer

protective masks

pupillary light

thermometer

Page 47 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Example 2 – the UK Aeromed inventory list
ITEM
Blue Diagnostic Bag
Electronic sphygmomanometer & cuff
Pulse oximeter
Tympanic thermometer
Disposable lens caps (20 per pack)
Blood glucose monitor
Blood glucose test strips
BM lancets
Pen torch
Stethoscope
Gauze dressing pack (5 per pack)
Alcohol wipes
Peak Flow Meter
Peak flow meter
Peak flow meter mouthpieces
Blue Airway Management Bag
O.P Airways
Size 00
Size 0
Size 1
Size 2
Size 3
Size 4
N.P Airways
Size 7
Size 9
I-gel Airways
Size 3
Size 4
Size 5
Catheter mount
Nasal cannula
20ml Syringe
Sachet of water based lubricant
Loose Items
Adult BVM (bag valve mask)
Medix nebuliser
Green Cannulation Pack
Pink cannula size 20g
Green cannula size 18g
Grey cannula size 16g
Syringe 10ml

QUANTITY per KIT
1
1
1
1
1
10
10
1
1
1
10
1
5

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
4
1
1
1
2
2
2

Page 48 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Syringe 5ml
Syringe 2.5ml
Orange needles 25g
Green needles 21g
Red (drawing up) needles
Gauze dressing pack (5 per pack)
Sodium Chloride 0.9% 500ml
Glucose 10% 500ml
Giving Set
Sodium Chloride 10ml for injection pods / Water for
injection
Tourniquet
Vecca Fix – plaster for securing cannula
Alcohol wipes
Mini sharps box
Orange Dressing / Burns Pack
Ambulance dressing No.3
Ambulance dressing No.2
Gauze dressing pack (5 per pack)
Triangular bandage
Steri-strip pack – pk of 5
Conforming bandage 7.5cm
Conforming Bandage 15cm
Pack of assorted sticking plasters
Moist cleaning wipes
Micropore tape
Tuff cut scissors
Bottle of watergel 50ml
Watergel dressing 10x10cm
Ice pack
Alcohol hand gel 50ml
Soiling Pack
Inco pads
‘Travel John’ urine bag
Gloves
Clinical waste bag
Drugs Pack
Adrenaline 1:1,000 – 1mg/1ml
Aspirin 300mg dispersable
Cyclizine 50mg/1ml
GTN
Ipratropium 250 mcg – 250mcg/1ml
Metoclopramide 10mg
Salbutamol 5mg – 5mg/2.5ml
Zantac – Ranitidine 150mg

1
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
4
1
2
10
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
10
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
10
1
2 ampoules
8 tablets/1 blister
2 ampoules
1 spray
1-2 nebules
8-14 tablets / 1
2-5blister
nebules
20 tablets / 2 blisters

Page 49 of 50

Guide for Joint Return Operations by Air coordinated by Frontex

Diazepam 5mg
Diazepam 5mg
Diazemuls 10mg – 10mg/2ml
Diazepam Rectal (Stesolid) 5mg
Dihydrocodeine 30mg
Over the Counter (OTC's)
Calpol Infant (2+ months)
Calpol Sixplus (6+ years)
Dioralyte
Glucose gel
Imodium - Loperamide 2mg
Nurofen – Ibuprofen 400mg
Paracetamol 500mg
Piriton – Chlorphenamine 4mg
Travel Sickness Tablets
Kalms

14-28 tablets / 2
blisters
2 ampoules
4 rectal tubes
20 tablets / 2 blisters
2-4 sachets
2-4 sachets
10 sachets
3 tubes
20 tablets / 2 blisters
24-48 tablets
24-48 tablets
14-28 tablets / 2
blisters
10 tablets
42 tablets / 2 blisters

Page 50 of 50

