European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

Policies &
Procedures

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

Policies &
Procedures

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States
of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

Contents
Quality Assurance Handbook #5
Definitions #7
1. Quality Assessment Framework #9
2. Quality Assurance Structure #10
3. Tasks and Responsibilities of the Parties Involved in the Quality Assurance Structure #10
4. Quality Assurance #22
5. Programme Review #37

Student Handbook #41
Definitions #43
1. Access and Admission #45
2. Appeals against the admission decision #49
3. Insurance #49
4. Intellectual Property Rights #50
5. Publicity #50
6. Academic Calendar #50
7. Requirements for the Degree #50
8. Recognition of Prior Learning #50
9. Programme structure #51
10. Award #52
11. Programme Progression #52
12. Assessments #52
13. Revision of the assessment results #54
14. Appealing assessment result #54
15. Re-assessment #55
16. Expulsion from the Programme #55
17. Appeals against expulsion from the Programme #55
18. Submission of Written Work #56
19. Plagiarism, Collusion and Cheating #56
20. Conduct of Students During Examinations #59
21. Late Arrival to an Examination #59
22. Illnesses During an Examination #59
23. Attendance #60
24. Absence from Examinations or Non-Submission of Assignments #60
25. Incomplete Grade #60
26. Examinations in Absentia #61
27. Extension of studies #61
28. Suspension of studies #62
29. Readmission into the Programme #62
30. Mentoring and Student Support #62
31. Student Records #64
32. Access to students records #64
33. Data Protection #65

2 of 128

﻿

34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.

Frontex Code of Conduct #65
Discrimination #65
Grievance #65
Suggestions #67
Feedback #67
Student Representatives #67
Alumni Network #68
Opening Ceremony and Orientation #69
Students Mobility #69
Further Information #69

Dissertation Guidelines #71
1. Purpose of the Dissertation #73
2. Structure of the Dissertation Work #74
3. The Research Area — Research Topic #75
4. The Dissertation Proposal #75
5. The Structure of the Supervision of the Dissertation Proposal #76
6. The Structure and Content of the Dissertation Proposal #77
7. Extension of the Dissertation Proposal Submission #78
8. Ethics and Confidentiality #78
9. Permissions for Materials Under Another Copyright and Restricted Use Data #78
10. Project Management #79
11. Dissertation (Proposal) Supervision #79
12. Replacement of Supervisors #80
13. Progress Reports #80
14. Schedule of Events — Dissertation Progress #80
15. Writing the Dissertation #80
16. Plagiarism #84
17. Turnitin #84
18. Important Tips #84
19. Dissertation Submission Checklist #85
20. Final Submission of Dissertation for Examination #85
21. Extension of the Dissertation Submission Deadline #86
22. Intellectual Property Rights #86
23. Access to Dissertations #86
24. Assessment #86
25. Dissertation Board #88
Appendices #89

Teaching and Examination Regulations #91
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Standards and Learning Outcomes #92
Requirements for the Degree #93
Award #93
Admission to the Programme #94
Content and structure of the EJMSBM #95

3 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

6. Assessment #95
7. Re-Assessment #97
8. Studying with a disability #98
9. Exemptions #98
10. Publication of the Regulations #99
appendix 1 Rules and Guidelines — Board of Examiners (BoE) #100
appendix 2 The Implementation Regulations #106
appendix 3 Assessment Grid (including RPL assessments) #107
appendix 4 Timetable #107
appendix 5 Component Assessment Breakdown document #107

Teaching Staff Handbook #109
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.

Roles and Responsibilities and Academic and Administrative Staff #113
Professional Standards #115
Selection and Assignment of Module Convenors: #116
Selection and Assignment of Teaching Staff: #116
Compensation of Teaching Staff and Module Convenors #118
Teachers’ Mobility #118
Reimbursement of Teachers’ mobility #118
Feedback #119
Agreement between the teaching staff’s authority and the Academic Partner #119
Insurance #119
Resignation #119
Termination #119
Absence #119
Frontex Code of Conduct #120
Fair Treatment #120
Academic Authority #120
Confidentiality #120
Confidentiality of Student Records #121
Intellectual Property Rights #121
Academic Calendar #121
Moodle #121
Graduation Ceremony #121
Opening Ceremony #121
Orientation Session #122
Teacher of the Year Award #122
Teaching Staff and Module Convenor Grievance procedure #123
Misconduct #125
Administrative Inquiry #125
Appeals #126

4 of 128

European Joint Master’s
in Strategic Border Management

Policies & Procedures

Quality
Assurance
Handbook

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

The Quality Assurance Handbook for the European Joint
Master’s in Strategic Border Management is intended
to provide guidance and information to all involved in
quality assurance across the Degree Programme.
This Quality Assurance Handbook is the primary document for the Degree Programme and consists of five
main sections: the Quality Assessment Framework, the
Quality Assurance Structure, Tasks and Responsibilities, Quality Assurance and Programme Review. The
Quality Assurance Handbook is accompanied by and
should be read in conjunction with the Student Handbook, the Teaching Staff Handbooks, the Dissertation
Guidelines, and the Teaching and Examination Regulations. In case of contradictions, the Quality Assurance Handbook prevails.
The above-mentioned Handbooks include, among others, the following polices and their corresponding
procedures:
access and admission; recognition of prior learning;
assessments; disability illness and mitigating circumstances, progression, appeals and grievances, attendance, professional standards, information and
documentation; extension and suspension of studies.

6 of 128

The Student Handbook serves as a user manual for the
Degree Programme, giving an overview of the options
available and the necessary resources. It contains the
academic and disciplinary rules that apply to everyone registered on the Degree Programme as well as a
set of the Degree Programme’s policies and procedures.
The Teaching Staff Handbook includes all the essential
information for staff working on the programme, including the rights and responsibilities of the teaching
staff and their nomination and assignment.
The Dissertation Guidelines provide direction to students through the dissertation stage of the programme.
The Teaching and Examination Regulations lay down
the rules and guidelines regarding content and structure of the programme, admissions, assessment and
examination, among other matters.
All other issues not addressed in the above mentioned
Handbooks are decided by the Governing Board on a
case-by-case basis.

Quality Assurance Handbook

Definitions
Academic Partners are the signatories to the Consortium Agreement which, according to their respective national laws, are permitted to deliver
validated programmes and are ultimately responsible for the conferring awards.
Access is construed to mean the right to apply for the Degree Programme, whereas admission means
the process by means of which a student satisfies the entry requirements.
Admissions Panel assesses all potential candidates in
order to determine eligibility for admission
to the Degree Programme in accordance with
the admission requirements.
Board of Examiners decides whether students have satisfactorily completed the Degree Programme
requirements.
Consortium is the association comprising all Partners collectively. For all intents and purposes,
it does not possess any legal personality,
which vests in each Partner individually/
independently.
Consortium Agreement is a legal contract between all
the Partners of the Consortium to deliver the
Degree Programme.
Complementary Entities are the affiliate institutions
at national level, commonly being the training institution within the national authority
with border security responsibilities, which
contribute to the ultimate delivery of the
programme.
ECTS means the European Credit Transfer System,
which is a student-centred system based on
the student workload required to achieve the
learning outcomes of the Degree Programme

External Examiner is a professional academic responsible for monitoring the reliability and validity of assessment procedures and academic
standards.
Governing Board is the central administering organ
of the Degree Programme.
National Frontex Point of Contact (NFPOC) is a single
point of contact between Frontex and the national services of Member States responsible
for border control.
National Training Coordinator (NTC) acts as a permanent contact in training matters between
Frontex and the national services of Member
States responsible for border control.
Module Convenor is a professional academic responsible for the delivery of the module.
Partners are all the signatories to the Consortium Agreement, including Frontex and the Academic
Partners
Programme Administrator is a Frontex representative
in charge of all administrative responsibilities with regard to the Degree Programme.
Programme Board is inter alia responsible for the monitoring, delivery and implementation of the
on-going Degree Programme. The composition, functions and the specific responsibilities of the Programme Board are described in
the Quality Assurance Handbook.
Programme Coordinator is a representative of an Academic Partner or Complementary Entity in
charge of administrative, logistical and organisational matters in its Institution.

Enrolment is the process by which a student is formally
accepted by the Governing Board onto the Degree Programme.

7 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

Quality Assurance Committee reports to and advises
the Governing Board on the implementation
of policies and procedures relating to quality assurance, enhancement and internal review of quality.
Sending Authorities are the national services of Member States responsible for border control under
their national law as represented in the Management Board of Frontex and other relevant
Frontex Partner Organizations.
The word ‘Student’ has the same meaning as the term
‘learner’ as defined in the Bologna process.

8 of 128

Validation is the process by means of which the Validating Authorities certify that the Degree Programme enables the student to attain, at the
appropriate level, the knowledge, skills and
competences that are expected as outcomes
of the programme.
Validating Authorities are the entities that ensure that
the Degree Programme is of the required academic standards, is supported by the necessary resources and is responsive to European
market needs.

Quality Assurance Handbook

1. Quality Assessment
Framework
The Consortium values the distributed nature
of the programme as an essential part of the
learning and recognises that defined procedures ensure a coherent approach to quality
assurance for the Programme. The Academic
Partners affirm and apply the ‘European
Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in the European Higher Education Area’.
The Partners implement the quality assurance
procedures detailed below and shall cooperate and participate, in a manner appropriate
to their respective roles, in these quality assurance procedures.

1.1. Programme Rationale
The EJMSBM is designed to enable mid- to
high-level border guard managers across the
EU to advance the practice and theory of European border management and to encourage
further developments in the field. It prepares
participants to collaborate with other professionals in an interdisciplinary and international context within the border management
sector.
The underlying rationale for this programme
includes the strong demand for higher standards of education in the border management
sector, in particular for education which is
focused on skills and competences acquired
through problem-solving in an applied professional context, as well as evidence-based
knowledge developed in formal academic and
disciplinary structures.
In response to increasing professionalism
in the European Border Management field,
the programme responds to the substantial growth in demand for enhancement of
interoperability at EU borders and the harmonisation of professional standards while

respecting diversity of Member States’ Border Guard organisations.
The academic standards of the programme
are commensurate with the highest level of
international developments in this sphere.
The bringing together of the knowledge and
experience of mid- to high-level border guard
managers across Europe is designed to enrich
the learning experience for all participants.
An ethos of critical self-evaluation and peer
review will be fostered. It will also ensure the
cross-fertilisation of European and international practice and encourage a comparative
approach to national practice.

1.2. Our Vision
The programme aims to advance and promote
highest standards in cooperation and interoperability at EU borders and the harmonisation of professional standards, as well as
protecting and promoting fundamental rights
within border management and border control
activities. It aims to empower European Border Guard Managers to rely on and apply professional judgment by equipping them with
knowledge and skills that are benchmarked
and evidence-based, providing a stimulating and innovative environment for teaching, learning and research.

1.3. Learning and assessment strategies
Our vision will be achieved through:
Teaching, learning and assessment strategies
designed to support the student in attaining
the required standard to achieve his/her academic award through continuous formative
assessments and a blended approach to learning which uses learning instruments such as
lectures, practical exercises, workshops, case
studies and simulations. The programme is
designed to capitalise on the knowledge and
experience of the participants, who will engage in experiential learning while reflect-

9 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

ing on theory. They will be motivated to think
critically and creatively and to evaluate all information critically while reflecting on the
principles of rigorous peer review. They will
scrutinise and use research and, wherever
possible, contribute to the development of
knowledge relevant to the operational Border Guard environment.

3. Tasks and Responsibilities
of the Parties Involved
in the Quality Assurance
Structure
3.1. Governing Board
3.1.1. Composition

The programme ensures scaffolded development and integration of Mode 1 and Mode 2
knowledge. In this programme, Mode 2 knowledge is considered of equal importance to Mode
1 knowledge and the programme is designed
specifically to achieve integration through an
appropriate philosophy of learning, implemented through an innovative combination of
teaching and learning methodologies, learning
support structures and programme structure.

2. Quality Assurance
Structure

The Governing Board comprises:
a)	the Head of the Frontex Training Unit,
who is the ex officio Chair of the Governing Board;
b)	one (1) representative from each Academic
Partner, who is also a serving member of
the Partner’s Academic Council/Senate/
Rectorate (or equivalent);
c)	one (1) representative from each Complementary Entity;
d)	two (2) elected student representatives;
e)	the Frontex Project Manager; and
f)	the Programme Administrator
3.1.2. Voting

The quality assurance structure and reporting lines as outlined in Figure 1 will be applied to the Degree Programme.

In principle, the Governing Board takes decisions by simple majority that includes the vote
of the Chair. In cases of split vote, the Chair
has a casting vote.

Figure 1. Quality Assurance Structure
Academic
Council/Senate
/Rectorate

Governing
Board

Programme
Board

Board
of Examiners

Programme
Administration

Quality
Assurance
Committee

The arrows in this figure represent communication lines.

10 of 128

3.1.2.1. Voting members of the Governing Board are:
a)	the Chair of the Governing Board, with
one vote;
b)	representatives of each Academic Partner,
with one vote each, except for suspended
Academic Partner(s), and the representatives of University of Salamanca and
National Distance Education University
which have one joint vote. In case one of
the Spanish Partners is suspended, the
voting right remains with the non-suspended Partner.
c)	student representatives, with one vote
each.

Quality Assurance Handbook

3.1.2.2. Non-voting members of the Governing Board
are:
a)	one (1) Representative from each Complementary Entity;
b)	the Frontex Project Manager;
c)	the Programme Administrator;
d)	any other persons that the Chair of the
Governing Board deems necessary in order to fulfil its functions.
3.1.2.3. Each Partner has the right to nominate one
(1) advisor to attend meetings of the Governing Board.
3.1.3. Meetings
3.1.3.1. Governing Board meetings are convened by the
Chair of the Governing Board at least once a
year and are in principle held at Frontex headquarters unless decided otherwise by the Chair
based on a proposal from any member of the
Governing Board.
3.1.3.2. Members of the Governing Board commit to
attend all Governing Board meetings and to
nominate a delegate to attend in their absence.
In accordance to applicable law, the delegate
represents the member at a comparable level
and enjoys the same rights in the Governing
Board. In the case of the Chair, the nominated
delegate will take over the responsibility.
3.1.3.3. Each member of the Governing Board informs
the Chair of the Governing Board in writing
of the contact details of one (1) representative
and their delegate.
3.1.3.4. The meeting quorum is validly constituted
by at least five (5) voting members of the Governing Board, one of whom is the Chair. If
no student representative participates in the
meeting, their interests are properly safeguarded by recording their comments in the
meeting minutes.
3.1.3.5. Student representatives are excluded from attending the discussions and voting on deci-

sions related to the withdrawal, suspension
or expulsion of Academic Partners, the dissolution and amendment of the Consortium
Agreement, as well as other comparable, justified cases as decided by the remaining voting members of the Governing Board.
3.1.4. Main tasks
3.1.4.1. The Governing Board takes responsibility for the
implementation of all parts of the Consortium
Agreement, in particular but not limited to:
a)	ensuring the implementation of the quality assurance procedures for the Degree
Programme and addressing issues as they
emerge in order to consistently and continuously improve the quality of the Degree Programme;
b)	agreeing on the services to be provided by
each Partner;
c)	determining the overall strategic direction of the Consortium in pursuance of
the successful fulfilment of the Degree
Programme;
d)	agreeing on a resource strategy for each
iteration of the Degree Programme; and
e)	initiating a periodic review process by not
later than one (1) year before the expiry of
the Consortium Agreement.
3.1.4.2. The Governing Board reports annually to the
Academic Council/Senate/Rectorate of each
Academic Partner and any other entities
which the Chair deems necessary.
3.1.4.3. The Governing Board nominates Module Convenors proposed by each Academic Partner for
the specific module that they deliver to:
a)	coordinate, lead and organise delivery of
the Module of Study;
b)	assume full responsibility for the module
quality assurance and ensure quality assurance procedures are implemented at
the module level;
c)	liaise with the Programme Administrator, the Programme Coordinator and the
Frontex Project Manager;

11 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

d)	collect, collate and disseminate all records
relating to the module;
e)	serve on the Programme Board;
f)	prepare reports in relation to the module
and disseminate them; and
g)	ensure that the Teaching Staff possess the
required prior security clearance.
3.1.5. Processes
3.1.5.1. The responsibilities of the Governing Board
are as detailed in 3.1.4 and serve the purposes
of maintaining and developing academic and
quality standards.
3.1.5.2. The Governing Board delegates responsibility
for direct monitoring and reporting on quality assurance mechanisms to the Quality Assurance Committee.
3.1.5.3. The Governing Board has no authority to take
decisions on the following matters:
a)	decisions in respect of the EU regulations,
including the financial regulations applicable to Frontex;
b)	decisions having financial implications,
which are subject to written approval by
Frontex;
c)	decisions pertaining to the basis upon
which the Degree Programme is validated,
which are subject to the approval by the
Validating Authorities.
3.1.5.4. The Governing Board recognises the distributed nature of the Degree Programme and
nominates one (1) of the members of the Academic Partners in the Governing Board to
act as Chair of the Programme Board and the
Board of Examiners.
3.1.5.5. In order to reflect the distributed nature of the
programme, all key functions in the Governing Board, the Programme Board, the Board
of Examiners and the Quality Assurance Committee should be representative of different
Academic Partners, as far as practicable.

12 of 128

3.1.5.6. The Governing Board determines the allocation of resources and services prior to the enrolment for each programme, including;
a)	proposing External Examiners to Frontex
b)	determining which Academic Partner is
to host the Graduation Ceremony;
c)	ensuring access to all relevant resources;
d)	nominating three (3) Module Convenors
to conduct admissions procedures;
e)	nominating the Quality Assurance Officer
(for all three iterations)
f)	nominating two (2) Module Convenors to be
part of the Quality Assurance Committee
g)	determining an equitable distribution of
the modules
3.1.5.7. At each meeting the Governing Board:
a)	reviews and assesses reports and recommendations, including those from the
Programme Board, the Board of Examiners and the Quality Assurance Committee, relating to Degree Programme
implementation;
b)	makes decisions on the measures to be implemented as a result of the quality assurance monitoring and review process
c)	ensures appropriate resource allocation
for the programme;
d)	reports to and makes recommendations,
where necessary, to each respective Academic Council/Senate/Rectorate.
3.1.5.8. The Governing Board initiates a periodic review of the Degree Programme prior to the
commencement of the fifth year from the
beginning of the first iteration of the Degree Programme, subject to no prior requests
for a periodic review from the Validating
Authorities.
3.1.6. The Programme Administrator
3.1.6.1. Frontex appoints the Programme Administrator who acts as secretary to the Governing
Board.

Quality Assurance Handbook

3.1.6.2. Tasks:
a)	collects, collates and appropriately disseminates all information related to the Degree
Programme including student records, assessments, quality assurance reports;
b)	liaises with the Frontex Project Manager;
c)	liaises with each Module Convenor and
with the Programme Coordinators;
d)	acts as a central point of contact for students on the Degree Programme;
e)	acts as secretary to the Programme Board,
the Board of Examiners and the Quality
Assurance Committee;
f)	gathers and reports on student feedback
for the Degree Programme;
g)	ensures distribution of all reports the Governing Board, the Board of Examiners, the
Programme Board, and the Quality Assurance Committee;
h)	publishes a schedule for Governing Board
meetings on the Virtual Learning Environment and circulates it to all its members; at the beginning of each iteration of
the Degree Programme;
i)	collates all documents, reports and draft
agenda items and agrees the agenda with
the Chair seven (7) working days before
each scheduled meeting;
j)	distributes the agenda and all related documents and reports to all members of the
Governing Board at least five (5) working
days in advance of each meeting;
k)	keeps minutes of all meetings of the Governing Board and circulates draft minutes
to all its members within three (3) weeks
of the meetings taking place;
l)	communicates resolutions of the Governing Board to the appropriate persons or
bodies;
m)	prepares and disseminates the annual report of the Governing Board.
3.1.6.3. After each Degree Programme, the Programme
Administrator:
a)	collects and collates student feedback in
relation to the whole programme;

b)	collects and collates feedback from each
student’s Sending Authority; and
c)	reports the results of QA measures to the
Quality Assurance Committee.
3.1.7. The Programme Coordinator
3.1.8. The Programme Coordinator is a representative
of an Academic Partner or Complementary Entity in charge of administrative, logistical and
organisational matters in their Institution.
The Programme Coordinators are appointed
by the Chair of the Governing Board following
the proposal of the Academic Partners and the
Complementary Entities and an assessment
conducted by the Programme Board.
3.1.8.1. Tasks:
a)	liaises with the Programme Administrator and the Frontex Project Manager
b)	liaises with the Module Convenors on
all matters related to the delivery of the
modules
c)	acts as a single point of contact for the Programme Administrator and Frontex Project Manager on all non-academic matters
related to the delivery of a module in his/
her Institution, including but not limited
to administrative, logistical and organisational issues
d)	prepares the orientation session for students
and external Teaching Staff at the beginning of the module contact week: arranges
access to all resources and services available
to all students and Teaching Staff at the Academic Partner or Complementary Entity
e)	ensures that the Teaching Staff possesses
the required prior security clearance
f)	ensures the smooth implementation of
the module
a)	collects, collates and disseminates to the
Programme Administrator all information related to the module
b)	acts as a point of contact for students during the delivery of the module;
c)	gathers and reports on student feedback
for the module;

13 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

3.1.9. Governing Board Subcommittees
The Governing Board has the capacity to establish permanent sub-committee(s) and
sub-committee(s) in an ad hoc fashion and
to co-opt members to subcommittees:
a)	The ad hoc sub-committees make decisions
by simple majority votes
b)	The Chair of the Governing Board does not
exercise his/her right to a casting vote
c)	The meetings are not public
d)	Everything discussed is recorded in the
minutes of the given meeting
3.1.9.1. Admissions Panel Subcommittee (APS)
3.1.9.1.1. Function:
The Admissions Panel assesses all potential
candidates nominated by Frontex in order to
determine eligibility for admission to the degree programme in terms of the admission
requirements. Frontex is notified of the eligibility status of each potential candidate.
3.1.9.1.2. Detailed procedure on the Admissions process
can be found in the Student Handbook
3.1.9.1.3. Composition:
a)	three voting members who are drawn from
the pool of Module Convenors; such members are appointed by the Governing Board
and report directly to the Governing Board
b)	the Frontex Project Manager in a non-voting capacity who provides advice to the
voting members of the APS
c)	the Programme Administrator in a nonvoting capacity
3.1.9.1.4. Voting: decisions are made by simple majority vote
3.1.9.1.5. Term: the APS members are appointed for one
iteration of the Degree Programme
3.1.9.2. Admissions Appeals Subcommittee (AAS)

14 of 128

3.1.9.2.1. Function:
The AAS considers appeals against decisions
of the Admissions Panel Subcommittee with
respect to application for admission. An appeal to the AAS must be launched within five
working days of the decision of the Admission
Panel Subcommittee.
3.1.9.2.2. Composition:
a)	three members (including the Chair)
b)	The AAS is chaired by the Governing Board
member appointed by the Chair of the Governing Board. One member is drawn from
the pool of Module Convenors and the remaining member is one of the External
Examiners.
c)	No member should belong to the Admissions Panel
d)	The secretary of the Governing Board in a
non-voting capacity
3.1.9.2.3. The decision is made by simple majority vote
3.1.9.2.4. The AAS members are appointed for one iteration of the degree programme
3.1.9.2.5. Detailed information on the appeals procedure can be found in the Student Handbook
3.1.9.3. Grievance Appeal Subcommittee (GAS)
3.1.9.3.1. Function:
The GAC considers appeals against the decisions of the Programme Board with respect
to grievances.
3.1.9.3.2. Composition:
a)	at least three members (including the
Chair)
b)	the GAS is chaired by the Governing Board
member appointed by the Chair of the Governing Board. The other two members are
drawn from the pool of Module Convenors.
c)	no member who is the subject of a grievance can form part of the Grievance Appeals Subcommittee

Quality Assurance Handbook

d)	the secretary of the Governing Board in a
non-voting capacity
3.1.9.3.3. Decision is made by simple majority vote
3.1.9.3.4. The GAS members are appointed for one iteration of the degree programme
3.1.9.3.5. Detailed information on the Appeals and Grievances procedure can be found in the Student
Handbook
3.1.9.4. Expulsion Appeal Subcommittee (EAS)
3.1.9.4.1. Function:
The EAS considers appeals against the decisions of the Programme Board with respect
to expulsion from the Degree Programme.

3.2.2. The Quality Assurance Committee comprises:
the Quality Assurance Officer, two (2) Module
Convenors, the Frontex Project Manager, and
one (1) student representative. The Programme
Administrator acts as secretary to the QAC.
An external advisor, a stakeholder representative such as a Frontex National Training Coordinator or a high-level decision maker in
the field of training of a border guard organisation, may be appointed by the Governing
Board in a non-voting capacity.
3.2.3. The QAC meets at least once during every stage
of the Degree Programme
3.2.4. The QAC members are appointed for the three
(3) iterations of the Degree Programme.
3.2.5. The QAC takes decisions by simple majority.

3.1.9.4.2. Composition:
a)	at least three members (including the
Chair)
b)	the EAS is chaired by the Governing Board
member
c)	no member that was involved in the expulsion decision can form part of the Expulsion Appeals Subcommittee
d)	the secretary of the Governing Board in a
non-voting capacity
3.1.9.4.3. Decision are made by simple majority vote
3.1.9.4.4. The EAS members are appointed for one iteration of the Degree Programme
3.1.9.4.5. Detailed information on the Appeals procedure can be found in the Student Handbook.

3.2. Quality Assurance Committee (QAC)
3.2.1. The Quality Assurance Committee is responsible for issues relating to quality assurance
and academic standards. The QAC monitors
the effectiveness of quality assurance procedures and can refer major policy issues, areas
of concern and issues of strategic importance
to the Governing Board.

3.2.6. Main tasks:
a)	reports to the Governing Board on the implementation of policies and procedures
relating to quality assurance, enhancement and internal review of quality;
b)	advises the Governing Board on matters
relating to quality of programme implementation, including programme review
and enhancement;
c)	
undertakes periodic and regular reviews (after each iteration of the degree
programme);
d)	considers proposed changes and makes recommendations to the Governing Board;
e)	reviews the results of feedback submitted
by the various stakeholders (such as students and teaching staff) and makes recommendations for action where necessary;
f)	follows up on any recommendations for
improvement as highlighted in the reports submitted to the Governing Board.
3.2.7. The Quality Assurance Officer is a member of
the staff of one of the Academic Partners dealing with quality assurance issues, appointed
by the Chair of the Governing Board following proposals by the Academic Partners and

15 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

an assessment conducted by the Programme
Board. The Quality Assurance Officer rotates after every third iteration of the programme. The
Officer should also have the relevant academic/
educational background, proven expertise with
quality assurance processes and procedures and
extensive experience with quality reviews, monitoring and quality enhancement in higher education, preferably with joint degrees.
3.2.8. Tasks of the Quality Assurance Officer include:
a)	chairing the Quality Assurance Committee
and ensuring a responsive and high-quality service to both internal and external
stakeholders
b)	providing leadership, advice and expertise on quality assurance, review and enhancement policies and procedures
c)	leading and assuming responsibility for
the planning, preparation and coordination of the processes related to regular and
periodic reviews of the Degree Programme
d)	overseeing the implementation and monitoring of quality processes across the Degree Programme
e)	liaising with various internal stakeholders, including the Programme Administrator and the Frontex Project Manager,
to improve the consistency of quality processes within the Degree Programme
f)	promoting good practice arising from quality assurance, review and enhancement
activity
g)	contributing towards the on-going review
of quality assurance policies and procedures to ensure their continuing relevance
and effectiveness.
h)	reviewing the results of feedback submitted by the various stakeholders (such as
students and teaching staff) and making recommendations for action where
necessary;
i)	following up on any recommendations for
improvement.

16 of 128

3.3. Programme Board
3.3.1. The Programme Board comprises each Module
Convenor, the two (2) student representatives,
the Frontex Project Manager and is chaired by
a person nominated by the Governing Board.
The Programme Administrator acts as secretary to the Programme Board.
3.3.2. The Programme Board meets at least once per
year. In principle and unless specified otherwise within the Consortium Agreement or
its Annexes, the Programme Board takes decisions by simple majority including the vote
of the Chair. In case of a split vote, the Chair
of the Programme Board has a casting vote.
3.3.3. The Module Boards are constituent parts of the
Programme Board and act to enhance quality
assurance and to implement the tasks of the
Programme Board at the module level.
3.3.4. Main tasks of the Programme Board:
a)	monitoring the delivery and responsible
for the implementation of the on-going
Degree Programme;
b)	ensuring adherence to the approved Degree Programme;
c)	examining the effectiveness of support
services;
d)	making recommendations on the use of
existing resources and the need for new
resources;
e)	implementing improvements to the Degree Programme arising from the quality assurance monitoring process;
f)	keeping the content of the Degree Programme continuously under review in
light of developments in the different fields
of study and the requirements of the Sending Authorities;
g)	making adjustments to the Degree Programme as a result of the programme review, as decided by the Governing Board;
h)	suggesting appropriate external examiners to the Governing Board to play a role in

Quality Assurance Handbook

the monitoring and reviewing of the Degree Programme;
i)	producing the Annual and End of Programme Reports and forwarding these to
the Governing Board for consideration.
3.3.5. The Programme Administrator, as secretary
to the Programme Board:
a)	
i nforms all members of scheduled
meetings;
b)	circulates all submissions, reports and documents a minimum of four (4) days in advance of the meeting;
c)	takes notes and records decisions of the
Programme Board:
d)	drafts the Annual and End of Programme
Reports to be approved by the Programme
Board and forwarded to the Governing
Board
3.3.6. The Programme Board may establish permanent sub-committee(s) and ad hoc subcommittee(s) in order to perform specific
tasks. Members are co-opted to sub-committees according to need and with the agreement of the Governing Board.
a)	The ad hoc sub-committees take decision
by simply majority votes
b)	The Chair of the Governing Board does not
exercise his/her right to a casting vote
c)	The meetings are not public
d)	Everything discussed is recorded in the
minutes of the given meeting

3.4. Module Boards
3.4.1. The Module Board for each Module comprises
a Module Convenor and all Teaching Staff involved in the delivery of the given Module.
3.4.2. In order to ensure quality, continuity and
teacher mobility, a minimum of one teacher
assigned to each module is from an institution other than the one responsible for the delivery of the given module.

3.4.3. It is expected that, in most cases, the composition of the Module Boards remains relatively
stable throughout the three (3) iterations of
the Degree Programme.
3.4.4. The Module Board is composed of:
••the teaching staff from the Academic Partner that is delivering the module in the
given iteration
••staff from other Academic Partners that
have the capacity to convene the respective
module as a ‘back up’ institution or as an
alternate (in case of the rotation of module delivery, as decided by the Governing
Board in advance of each iteration)
••teaching staff from Complementary Entities and other institutions and organisations, assigned in previous iterations or
involved in the development of the Degree
Programme, and recommended by the respective Module Convenor.
3.4.5. Such composition of the Module Boards ensures balanced burden sharing of the delivery of the modules between the Consortium
Partners. An added value is the mutual support in terms of teaching staff resource allocation, and a benefit for the programme quality
assurance results from a relatively stable core
teaching staff throughout all the three (3) iterations who are able to implement the lessons learnt and ensure continuity.
3.4.6. An External Examiner is appointed as an
additional examiner to review the given assessment when an appeal has been lodged by
student.
3.4.7. The Module Convenor for each module:
a)	collects and collates student feedback for
the module
b)	collects and collates feedback from all persons involved in the delivery of the module
c)	collects and collates grades and publishes
them in the Virtual Learning Environment

17 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

d)	considers the assessment performance
from a QA and academic standards
perspective
e)	forwards a module report with regard to
all QA measures to the Programme Administrator for onward consideration by
the Quality Assurance Committee
f)	ensures that any decisions he/she makes
are transparent and recorded accurately
in the minutes of the meeting.
g)	Ensures the overall quality of the module
delivery with respect to teaching, learning
and assessment strategies and methods as
specified in the programme curriculum.
h)	Ensure assessments for the module are
graded in accordance with grading rubrics and that the grades are moderated
if necessary
3.4.7.1. Detailed information on appealing against
the assessment grades can be found in the
Student Handbook.
3.4.8. Grievance Subcommittee (GS)
3.4.8.1 Function:
The GS investigates formal grievances submitted by those who seek to resolve any grievance
involving an alleged violation directly affecting them committed by any member of the
Degree Programme while acting in an official
capacity (e.g. teaching staff, administrator,
staff members, students), of any of the written policies of the degree programme.
3.4.8.2. Composition:
a)	at least three members (including the
Chair);
b)	the GS is chaired by the Programme Board
member appointed by the Chair of the Programme Board. The other two members
are drawn from the pool of Module Convenors, student representative and a Frontex legal expert;
c)	no member who is the subject of a grievance can form part of the Grievance
Subcommittee;

18 of 128

d)	the Programme Administrator in a nonvoting capacity.

3.4.8.3. Voting: decisions are made by simple majority
3.4.8.4. Term: the GS members are appointed for one
iteration of the Degree Programme
Detailed information on Grievances can be
found in the Student Handbook and the Teaching Staff Handbook

3.5. Board of Examiners
3.5.1. The Board of Examiners comprises each Module
Convenor, one of whom acts as a dissertation
coordinator, the two (2) External Examiners, the Programme Administrator, the Chair
(nominated by the Governing Board) and the
Frontex Project Manager. Only academic
members have voting rights.
3.5.2. In principle and unless specified otherwise
within the Consortium Agreement and its
Annexes, the Board of Examiners takes decisions by simple majority including the vote
of the Chair. In cases of 50% — 50% voting results, the Chair has a casting vote.
3.5.3. The Board of Examiners may establish permanent sub-committee(s) and ad hoc subcommittee(s) in order to perform specific
tasks. Members are co-opted to sub-committees according to need and with the agreement of the Governing Board.
3.5.4. Regular meetings of the Board of Examiners
take place after each stage of the Degree Programme and always before the Programme
Board meeting.
3.5.5. The Board of Examiners and its Subcommittees ensure that any decisions they make are
transparent and recorded accurately in the
minutes of the given meeting. All examination offences, such as plagiarism, that have

Quality Assurance Handbook

been dealt with should also be reported to the
Board and recorded.

3.5.9. Recognition of Prior Learning Subcommittee (RPLS)

3.5.6. Except in cases of illness or other unavoidable emergencies which are beyond control, External Examiners are required to attend the
meetings of the Board of Examiners’. When
an External Examiner is unable to attend a
meeting due to the reasons outlined above,
they should be available for consultation by
telephone, video conference, or email and
should confirm the results of students accordingly. The Board of Examiners cannot sit
without the presence of at least one External
Examiner.

3.5.9.1. The Consortium recognises previous learning
for the purposes of exemption from modules
of study in the Degree Programme, where
students can offer proof that they have previously achieved the stated learning outcomes
of those modules. Previous formal learning
will only be accepted as exemption from modules provided that the ECTS credits have not
been used to meet the credit requirements of
any other major award.

3.5.7. Main tasks of the Board of Examiners:
a)	ensuring the overall adequacy of standards
and compliance with the stated teaching
and assessment methods;
b)	determining whether or not the applied
procedures for assessment are valid, reliable, fair and consistent
c)	reviewing and deciding on borderline cases
d)	ensuring assessments are graded in accordance with grading rubrics and that
the grades are moderated
e)	making recommendations to the Programme Board on matters related to assessment policy and procedures, study
ability and academic standards;
f)	ensuring that students with extenuating
circumstances have been given due consideration and
g)	ensuring that all the requirements for
awarding the degree are met by individual students
3.5.8. The Programme Administrator, as secretary
to the Board of Examiners:
a)	
i nforms all members of scheduled
meetings;
b)	prepares spreadsheets in advance of the
given meeting;
c)	takes notes and records decisions of the
Board of Examiners;
d)	drafts a report for the Programme Board.

3.5.9.2. The Consortium conducts a graded assessment of prior formal, non-formal or informal
learning used as exemption from modules.
Such assessment is carried out in accordance
with the procedures on Recognition of Prior
Learning assessment outlined in the Student
Handbook.
3.5.9.3. Where exemption from module(s) is requested
on the basis of Recognised Prior Learning, the
Learning Outcomes of the successfully completed module(s) will be compared against the
expected Learning Outcomes of the module(s)
on the programme. Where these are found to
be sufficient, an exemption will be awarded
and the programme module(s) will be considered to have been completed on a ‘grade neutral’ basis.
3.5.9.4. Composition:
a)	Three voting members
b)	Two members are drawn from the pool of
Module Convenors and the third member
is the External Examiner
c)	The Secretary to the Board of Examiners
in a non-voting capacity
3.5.9.5. The decision is made by a simple majority vote
3.5.9.6. The RPLS members are appointed for one iteration of the Degree Programme

19 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

3.5.9.7. Function: The RPLS examines the requests
and based on the results of an assessment
makes a decision on whether to grant an exemption to the student(s), as they may be eligible to be exempted from one module (five
ECTS credits) from each of the first two stages.
Possible exemptions are therefore limited to
ten ECTS credits:
a)	Stage 1: Leadership and Organisational
Development in Border Management
(Module 3)
b)	Stage 2: Global Context in European Border Security (Module 7)
3.5.9.8. Procedure: In order to apply for an exemption
from the respective module, students complete
and return the request to the Programme Administrator within one week from the start
of the programme.
3.5.9.9. The RPLS examines the requests and based on
the results of the assessment decides within
two weeks from receiving the request whether
to exempt the student from the assessment
requirement and require the student to audit the module
3.5.9.10. The decision is communicated to the student
and to the Programme Board through the Programme Administrator within one month of
the start of the Programme. The assessment
criteria are included in the Teaching and Examination Regulations.
3.5.10. Dissertation Boards
3.5.10.1. Every Dissertation Board consists of four
members:
a)	the primary supervisor of the student
b)	a professor (or associate professor) in a relevant discipline (as the Chair)
c)	one other member from a partner border security organisation or from the Academic Partner depending on the nature
of the dissertation
d)	the External Examiner

20 of 128

3.5.10.2. At least two of the board members should not
be from the same Academic Partner.
3.5.10.3. Board members should hold a PhD or have similar qualifications within the relevant field.
3.5.10.4. The candidate’s supervisor is prohibited from
being the Board’s chair. The supervisor has no
voting rights but can answer questions from
other members.
3.5.10.5. The decision with regard to the dissertation
is made by a simple majority vote
3.5.10.6. The members of the Dissertation Board are
appointed for one iteration of the Degree
Programme
3.5.10.7. Function: For the assessment of dissertations, the Board of Examiners appoints a separate Dissertation Board for each dissertation.
The committee is accountable to the Board of
Examiners.
3.5.10.8. The Programme Board recommends members
of the given Dissertation Board to the Board
of Examiners. Their proposal for the composition of the given Dissertation Board should
include a description of how the proposed committee composition covers the relevant subject
area. This Subcommittee proposal should be
submitted together with the dissertation.
3.5.10.9. Procedure:
All the members of the Dissertation Board
must read and assess the quality of the dissertation as an ordered and logical exposition
of the application of knowledge, methods and
techniques in the subject of the course to the
task performed or to the problem investigated.
The (associate) professor must be present or
be replaced by another (associate) professor.
The Dissertation Board assesses the student’s
competence with regard to research skills, the
professional field, problem-solving skills and
practical orientation.

Quality Assurance Handbook

3.5.10.10. Detailed information on the Dissertation can
be found in the Dissertation Guidelines

3.6. External Examiners
3.6.10.1. External Examiners are central to the process of monitoring the reliability and validity of assessment procedures and academic
standards.
3.6.10.2. External Examiners must have the necessary
academic credentials and are selected from institutions other than the Academic Partners
and Complementary Entities and show relevant involvement in European Border Security/Law enforcement education and training.
3.6.10.3. Criteria for appointment as an external
examiner
To ensure appropriate expertise, experience
and independence, subject and course external
examiner appointees should normally have:
a)	academic qualifications at the level of PhD;
b)	relevant involvement in European Border
Security/Law enforcement education and
training;
c)	appropriate academic and/or professional
standing, expertise and experience to
maintain standards in higher education;
d)	recent experience of examining in higher
education, and preferably of acting as an
external examiner, or comparable recent
experience which provides evidence of
competence in assessing students in the
learning areas of the Degree Programme;
e)	no family relationships or direct working
relationships with the students enrolled
in the Degree Programme
3.6.1. The primary duties of External Examiners are
to:
a)	review the appropriateness of the intended learning outcomes at all levels of
the programme
b)	probe the actual attainment of students, in
the context of the actual programme learn-

ing outcomes using information agreed
with and supplied;
c)	compare and contrast the programme
learning outcomes and the actual attainment of students with the relevant awards
standards, with the relevant Qualifications Frameworks, and with corresponding data from other programmes in the
same or similar disciplines in other higher
education institutions in Europe;
d)	confirm whether or not the applied procedures for assessment are valid, reliable,
fair and consistent and that the assessments are in line with the stated learning outcomes;
e)	review intended assessment tasks prior to
their assignment to students, in the context of module assessment strategies and
pre-requisite prior learning;
f)	advise on consistency of standards and
fairness of assessment across the Degree
Programme;
g)	report findings and recommendations to
the Consortium through the Programme
Board;
h)	assess dissertations jointly with the rest of
the Dissertation Board appointed for each
student;
i)	take part in examinations as required;
j)	submit interim reports (after each stage)
on the standard of examinations and a final report at the end of the iteration;
k)	serve as members on the Board of Examiners and its subcommittees
3.6.2. Reports by External Examiners (Interim Reports and End of Programme Review)
3.6.2.1. External examiners submit their reports to
the Board of Examiners. The reports are scrutinised to identify any points of concern. The
Board of Examiners also considers the examples of good practice raised by the external examiners. Following consideration of
the reports, the Board of Examiners provides
feedback to External Examiners. The Exter-

21 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

nal Examiner reports and feedback are also
available on Moodle.
3.6.2.2. The Quality Assurance Committee receives the
reports of the External Examiners including
the comments of the Board of Examiners. The
reports should highlight good practice commended by External Examiners and also any
significant trends in the external examiners’
comments and further action should be taken
where necessary.
3.6.2.3. External examiners are asked to complete the
report using a specified template within one
month of the final meeting of the Board of
Examiners. External examiners complete the
report electronically, where possible. Handwritten reports may be returned if they are
not written clearly. Payment will be authorised once reports are received.
3.6.2.4. External examiners are reminded that reports
will be made available, in full, to students
and will be published on Moodle. Individual
teaching staff and students should not therefore be named in reports however. If external
examiners wish to make positive statements
of commendation about members of teaching staff they should do so directly to the Programme Board.
3.6.2.5. Should external examiners wish to raise a
confidential serious concern directly to the
Chair of the Governing Board, a template for
this purpose is available to download from
Moodle. The confidential serious concerns record will not be published on Moodle, though
staff and/or student representatives will be informed of the existence of such a record, or of
action arising from it, where this has implications for them.

4. Quality Assurance
Recognising that a joint degree programme is
a highly complex, coordinated activity of partners, cooperation and coordination is hence
crucial for the realisation of any joint degree
programme. The Degree Programme is embedded in a ‘culture of jointness’ that highlights the fact that the whole is more than
the sum of its parts and that the quality of
the whole, rather than simply the individual
parts, must be taken into account. The notion
of quality culture is thus not restricted to one
institution, but functions across institutional
and national borders (‘European guidelines
for quality enhancement in EU joint masters
programmes’, the European University Association, 2006).
Originating from the border guard community
and developed in collaboration, the European
Joint Master’s was designed as a programme
where learning has practical application for
the MS/SAC border guard organisations which
are the ultimate beneficiary. The Master’s
Programme is completely learner centred,
focusing on the relevance of the learning requirements for operational competence. The
Joint Master’s has the opportunity to draw
from the best expertise across the EU, valuing
academic cooperation and student / teacher
exchanges, but also development of expertise
in the border guard field through Degree Programme delivery and development of teachers.
The ethos of the programme has at its core the
enhancement of interoperability at EU borders
and harmonisation of learning and professional standards while respecting diversity,
in line with the Bologna principles. The Master’s is inclusive of international expertise for
delivery of the programme and accessible to
all of the European Union organisations with
a border guard function.
The structure of a Joint Degree is well suited to
achieving important outcomes for the learn-

22 of 128

Quality Assurance Handbook

ers, the teaching institutions and the agencies involved in this programme. It will bring
academic credibility to the expertise that exists in border guard (BG) organisations, foster
and enhance collaboration and cooperation
across the EU and address challenges faced
by BG organisations with a European solution, a flexible learning paradigm that aligns
with the training system of each Member
State (MS) and creates a standard for collaborative learning.
Learners are exposed to management practices in Border Security across Europe as each
class has learners from every Member State /
SAC and the programme content is designed
and delivered by international experts. The
Academic Institutions that form the Consortium for programme delivery will benefit from
mutual exchange processes that will enhance
theory and practice in the field of border management. The organisations and agencies responsible for border security / border guarding
in each MS / SAC will benefit through enhanced capacity for operational cooperation
/ interoperability at EU borders, which is also
one of the key goals for Frontex. The students
are offered an opportunity to learn in a context that reflects operational reality, to advance best practice in Border Guarding by
studying together and to reinforce the European dimension of the border-guard job while
contributing to the creation of a European border-guard culture at higher levels.
The Consortium values the distributed nature
of the Degree Programme and recognises that
defined procedures must be in place to ensure
a coherent approach to the quality assurance
of the programme, and the interoperability of
the different quality assurance structures of
each Partner. It is acknowledged that no single institution has the expertise to deliver this
entire programme and it is intended that the
Academic Partners will share the programme
delivery. The Degree Programme is intended
to demonstrate ‘unity’, not ‘multiplicity’, so

the Consortium in essence creates a ‘mini
university’ structure for the programme that
draws on each Partner, with shared responsibility between all partners as defined in the
Consortium Agreement.
The Consortium decides on the Programme
delivery for each iteration of the Master’s and
the allocation of modules, ensuring a balance
between Academic Partners and also aiming
to ensure that the programme is delivered in
a fair manner to all learners and that all Partners behave in the same way in terms of assessments; the same quality standards should
be applied across the Programme by all Partners and the learner’s experience should be
at least the same as if they had completed
the programme with one Academic Partner.
As a rule there is one main delivering Academic Partner for each module throughout
the duration of the Consortium Agreement
(three iterations) as well as a backup Partner
(for the protection of students, ensuring that
the Consortium as a whole has the capacity
to deliver the programme and mechanisms
to cope with unexpected events). The rotation
principle may be considered when there is a
strong interest from more than one Academic
Partner to deliver the same module, provided
that there is evident outstanding expertise
available that is to the benefit of the students
and of the Degree Programme. The composition of the Module Boards is relatively stable
in all iterations of the degree programme, as
the same core teaching staff is expected to be
involved in the delivery throughout the three
iterations, with the exception of the Module
Convenor who is assigned by the delivering
Academic Partner.
The allocation of the modules in each iteration may consider the following guiding principles and criteria:
••maintaining the same Delivering Partner
for a module, as far as practicable, for at
least 2 (two), preferably all 3 (three) itera-

23 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

tions, so as to enable the implementation
of the lessons learnt from the quality assurance monitoring process
••recommendations arising from the quality assurance process and feedback from
students and other stakeholders regarding previous performance
••considerable delivering expertise existing
in house
••national balance and balance across the
Consortium, as far as practicable
••national regulations imposing the obligation to an Academic Partner to deliver a
minimum percentage of ECTS credit points
out of the total programme
••the opportunity being given to each Academic Partner to deliver at least 1 (one)
module in each iteration
••strong interest from an Academic Partner
to deliver a particular module in the context of a demonstrated added value
••any other considerations, as deemed necessary by the Governing Board.
The quality-oriented implementation of the
joint degree programme, as highlighted by
the European Guidelines for Quality Enhancement in EU Joint Master’s Programmes requires the observance of a number of key
aspects:
••Cooperation on the principles of transparency, trust, inclusiveness, respect for diversity and honesty.
••Shared responsibility of all Consortium
Partners in analysing strengths and weaknesses in order to identify necessary fields
for change and improvement.
••A distributed nature of the Degree Programme that is reflected in the distributed nature of the delivery, as well as in
the quality assurance structure of the
programme that identifies all partners
in all governing roles and functions. It is
acknowledged that no single institution
has the expertise to deliver this entire programme and it is intended that the Consortium will share the programme delivery.

24 of 128

••Common agreement on a single set of regulations, policies and procedures that are
suitable to this programme and serve its
uniqueness, while being in line with each
of the different institutions’ regulations.
••Commonly agreed quality principles that
aim at ensuring that the student’s experience is at the same standard across the entire Consortium.
••Programme learning and assessment strategy that builds on the unique expertise
that exists in the classroom and encourages peer learning, group work, formative
assessments and learning opportunities.
Trustworthy communication between all
Partners.
••Sense of common ownership of the Degree
Programme.
••Networked types of cooperation which ensure the broad involvement and participation of all relevant stakeholder groups.
In line with the European Guidelines for Quality Enhancement in Higher Education, quality
is monitored at several levels such as programme and module, and focuses on four
main pillars:
••learning outcomes, cohesion and structure
of the curriculum;
••study ability of the Degree Programme;
••learning and assessment strategies of the
programme, ensuring that they facilitate
the achievement of the programme learning outcomes;
••the consistency of the programme delivery
across all Academic Partners.

4.1. Assessments
4.1.1. All assessments and assessment procedures
are fair, consistent, valid and reliable. Assessments are derived from the module learning
outcomes and authentic to the subject, with
transparent grading criteria that are unambiguous. Each module within the Degree Programme has an assessment strategy as well
as the programme as a whole.

Quality Assurance Handbook

4.1.2. Students are familiar with and understand the
learning outcomes, the assessment strategies
and the grading criteria for all assessments.
4.1.3. Detailed procedures related to assessments can
be found in the Student Handbook, Teaching
and Examination Regulations and the Module Handbooks.
4.1.4. All assessors, the Board of Examiners and any
other persons with a direct role in the assessment of students have the necessary competence for their role.
In higher education, ‘assessment’ refers to any
processes that appraise an individual’s knowledge, understanding, abilities or skills. Quality
assessment practices are an important element
of the student experience, with the outcomes of
assessment influencing students’ future careers.
The Consortium is committed to promoting
good practice, consistency and rigour in assessment by ensuring that the following principles are adhered to:
••Assessment is reliable, with clear and consistent processes for the setting, grading
and moderation of assessment exercises. A
reliable assessment will produce the same
results on re-assessment, and will produce
similar results with a similar cohort of
students, so it is consistent in its methods and criteria
••Assessment is valid, effectively measuring
student attainment of the intended learning outcomes
••Assessment is inclusive and equitable,
ensuring that tasks and procedures do
not create disadvantages for any group or
individual
••Assessment procedures are transparent,
and the criteria and methods by which
students’ work is judged are made clear
to students, teaching staff and external
examiners
The Degree Programme includes a variety of
assessment types, in order to promote effec-

tive learning and allow a range of learning
outcomes to be appropriately addressed.
Assessment is at the heart of the learning
experience for students and serves many
purposes:
••promoting student learning by providing
appropriate feedback on performance;
••evaluating the extent to which students
have achieved the desired learning outcomes
of their programme or module, in terms of
knowledge, skills, and competences;
••providing a grade that enables a student’s
performance to be established and which
may be used to make progress decisions;
••providing information for employers and
higher education providers, indicating
whether an individual has attained an appropriate level of achievement;
••providing opportunities for staff to evaluate the effectiveness of teaching/delivery.
4.1.5. The Assessment Process
At its most basic, the assessment process can
be broken down into three parts:
1.	establishing student learning outcomes
for the module or programme element;
2.	measuring whether these learning outcomes have been met;
3.	using the results to improve teaching and
learning in the programme.
4.1.6. Assessment Strategy
The overall programme assessment strategy
has been designed to support students’ learning towards attaining the required award
standards. There is a combination of ongoing assessment strategies, offering students
formative feedback during the module and
end of module terminal/summative assessments. Techniques that test understanding,
knowledge and skill development which are
fundamental to Border Guard management
are implemented. There is an emphasis on assessment of higher level competencies such as
synthesis, analysis and application. Assess-

25 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

ment techniques will be informed by research
and international good practice.

authenticity of the assessments are reflective
of the workload that a Border Guard Manager
experiences in the work environment.

The assessment strategy for this programme
envisages assessment activities as learning
activities where the learning will be attained
though performance, observation, engagement, discussion, peer review and feedback.
Students learn from performing their assessments, getting feedback on these and observing others, where appropriate.

The linkage between assessment and learning outcomes ensures that the volume of assessment to be undertaken is a fair reflection
of the scope of the module and associated student workload as indicated by the number of
ECTS credits awarded on successful completion of the programme.

The distinctive features of the assessment
strategy are the range of assessment instruments, the number of assessments and the
timing of the assessments. The instruments
selected reflect the authenticity of the occupational and statutory requirements of a mid- to
high-level border guard manager in combination with reflective assessments that aim
to facilitate a greater depth of learning. They
include forms of assessment such as written
examinations, problem solving using case
studies, report writing, strategy development,
risk analysis, written self-evaluations, peer
evaluation and group work.
Coherence and integration between progression of learning and assessment will be
achieved through the use of a range of learning and assessment strategies that are authentic to the real life experience of a Border
Guard Manager.
The number of assessments, and their progressive nature, spread throughout a stage,
ensure opportunities for learning, scaffolding of learning and enable identification of
areas of difficulty at an early stage thus allowing for early intervention. They are designed to be fair and consistent throughout.
Assessments are distributed throughout the
programme. The timing of assessments ensures that the student is consistently engaging
in the learning process and that their progression of learning is achieved. The timing and

26 of 128

Where a student has failed or missed an assessment in a module, an opportunity to remediate that failure (or sit for the assessment)
will be provided at the end of stages 1 and, respectively 2. It is ensured that sufficient time
is provided for the student to prepare for the
re-assessment.
Student input is essential in the ongoing
improvement of quality in the teaching and
learning strategies. The programme will ensure coherent and regular student feedback on
all modules and this feedback will be an explicit input to the Quality Assurance process.
The quality assurance of the programme will
rest on three pillars1: self-evaluation, external review and information to and from the
Sending Authorities.
4.1.7. Grading system
All modules involve a combination of competence and skills training and knowledge acquisition. A pass/fail competency approach is
taken with regard to the assessments. However, the basis of assessment specifies all the
requirements that need to be achieved by the
student in order to pass. This grading approach
ensures that students, in the event of failure,
receive detailed feedback on their learning
and the skills that they need to develop further. For the purposes of learning, the use of
this grading scale provides valuable feedback

1

European University Association, 2008.

Quality Assurance Handbook

to students on their learning achievement.
This grading scale also ensures fairness and
consistency.

in order to compare different national grading
systems. This norm-referenced 7-point system
was designed to rank students statistically
across two or more programmes on different
national grading systems, ranking students’
raw scores to a pre-determined distribution
(normally a bell-curve) for awarding grades.
Norm-referencing assumes a pre-determined
grade distribution and the grade that students
can achieve is thereby as much influenced
by the performance of others as by their own
performance. In 2007 it was acknowledged
that the ECTS Grading Scale was overly complex and limited in its effectiveness. It was
replaced in 2009 by a 5-point ECTS Grading
Table and more recently by EGRACONS the
European Grading Conversion System. Both
of these latter systems are still norm-based
statistical approaches.

Grading in higher education is based on the
use of numeric or alphabetic scales which are
largely unique to individual national systems
or indeed even individual institutions within
that nation. Transnational joint degrees must
find an agreed grading system that is clear and
transparent for all stakeholders and fair to
the students. The grades used and what those
grades say about the quality of student effort
needs to be understood by the students participating in the degree. Just as importantly,
staff from different counties need to be able
to assess students in a common and equitable
manner, particularly if those academic staff
are asked to grade within a different grading
systems to the one to which they are accustomed (Hager et al 1994).

A basic principle of the educational architecture of the European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management is an appreciation of
the academic knowledge, skills and competences that cross-national students coming
from a shared professional sector are able to

As student mobility programmes such as Erasmus and Erasmus Mundus began to develop
using the common Bologna ECTS system, the
EU created an ECTS Grading Scale (2003-2008)
Consortium

Consortium A

Consortium B

Consortium C

Consortium D

Consortium E

Consortium F

Learning
Descriptor

Work of excellent
quality.

Work of very good
quality.

Work of good
quality.

Work of fair but below
average quality

Pass. Work that only just meets the
passing (threshold) standards

Unsatisfactory failing
work in any study-unit.

Superior performance
showing a comprehensive
understanding and
application of the subject
matter. Evidence of
considerable additional
reading/research/work

Performance is typified
by a very good working
knowledge of subject
matter. Evidence of a
considerable amount of
reading/ research/work.

Above average
performance, with
a good working
knowledge of subject
matter. Evidence of
sufficient reading/
research/work.

Considerable
but incomplete
understanding of the
subject matter. Evidence
of a fair amount of
reading/research/work.

Performance demonstrates an
Fail
understanding of the basic concepts
of the subject; evidence of limited
additional reading/research/work
This grade can also be used for work that
is assessed on a pass/fail basis. In this
case, the result is Grade Neutral — i.e.
does not impact positively or negatively
on the student’s grade average.

Estonia

A
Suurepärane

B
Väga hea

C
Hea

D
Rahuldav

E
Kasin (Avestus for Pass/Fail)

F
Puudulik

Lithuania

10
Puikiai

9
Labai Gerai

8
Gerai

7
Pakankamai

6–5
Patenkinamai* – Silpnai

1–4
Visai Blogai – Nepakankamai

Netherlands

10
Uitmuntend

9
Zeer Goed

8
Goed

7
Ruim Voldoende

6.0–5.5
Voldoende

1–5.4
Zeer Slecht – Bijna Voldoende

Spain

10
Matrícula de Honor

9
Sobresaliente

8
Notable

6.5
Aprobado

5
Aprobado

0–4
Suspenso

Latvia

10–9
izcili (with distinction) –
teicami (excellent)

8
ļoti labi (very good)

7
labi (good)

6
5–4
gandrīz labi (almost good) viduvēji (satisfactory) – gandrīz viduvēji
(almost satisfactory)

1–3
neapmierinoši
(unsatisfactory)

* This ‘telescoping’ of the Pakankamai (6) grade and the Silpnai (5) grade is seen in some international programmes where Lithuania is a participant
to fit a 5-stage grading structure

27 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

demonstrate at the end of module, stage and
programme level. Biggs and Tang (2012) describe this as ‘outcome-based teaching and
learning’ which fits well with the fundamental ethos of the Bologna process. Assessment in
such an approach needs to judge performance
and how well students have met a specified
standard of achievement (criteria) rather than
being measured against the performance of
other students (norm). In cross-national programmes such as this programme, a criterion-referenced structure based primarily on
descriptors of performance is indicated. However, for the purposes of clarity and harmonisation, it is helpful for such an approach to
have some reference back to the different national grading scales with which assessors are
most familiar. However it should be emphasised that such a matrix is supplied only as a
reference to the agreed descriptors and the primary assessment judgments need to be graded
on the agreed programme descriptors, rather
than using the home national grading structure for Consortium assessments.
No up-to-date cross-national grading comparator scale exists that encompasses all the
countries participating in the European Joint
Master’s in Strategic Border Management.
The matrix (below) has been drawn up from
an exploration of current published national
grading structures incorporating, where possible, cross-national or cross-institutional arrangements already in existence in EU higher
education. The 6-stage matrix draws together
the 6-level descriptors proposed by the Consortium (Excellent — Fail) and matches them to
the corresponding national grading levels in
each of the Consortium Partners.
Consideration is given to using a simple
6-point numerical scale to accompany the descriptors. The 6-point scale as used by Estonia
(A [Excellent] — F [Fail]) seems the most appropriate. This allows a relatively simply overall
grade calculation to be set up within Moodle

28 of 128

to calculate and publish the final award derived from component grades awarded within
a module. For example Module 1 is based on
two components, one worth 30% of the overall grade and one worth 70%. An algorithm
is set up within Moodle to calculate the overall final grade of a student gaining different
grades in the component assessment. Having
a numerical value attached to each of the descriptors simplifies this process.

4.2. Study load analysis
In the higher education literature the concept of ‘study ability’ is primarily focused on
a range of factors that should be considered
when assessing the capacity of a student or
students to successfully undertake a particular programme of study. In a series of studies
of the impact of third-level education on the
health and well-being of Finnish students,
Knuttu et al 2 (2001, 2005, 2009) have identified four key domains associated with study
ability, the first two largely related to the student’s own capabilities and the last two to the
standards of the learning environments in
which they learn.
1.	Personal Resources: including those innate resources of the individual to cope
with study such as personality, identity,
life situation, social relations and the individual’s current health, both physical
and mental.
2.	Study Skills: this indicates the learning
skills and habits of the individual including their study orientation and techniques, their ability to think critically
2 Knttu K, Huttunen T. (2001)
‘Korkeakouluopiskelijoiden terveystutkimus’ 2000.
Helsinki: Kansaneläkelaitos, Sosiaali- ja terveysturvan
katsauksia 45
Kunttu K, Huttunen T (2005) ‘Yliopistoopiskelijoiden terveystutkimus’ 2004. Helsinki:
Ylioppilaiden terveydenhoitosäätiön tutkimuksia 40.
Kunttu K, Huttunen T. (2009) ‘
Korkeakouluopiskelijoiden terveystutkimus’
Helsinki: Ylioppilaiden terveydenhoitosäätiön tutkimuksia 45

Quality Assurance Handbook

and to solve problems and their capacity
to plan and manage time.
3.	Study Environment: this domain covers
the physical, psychological and social environments in which the student will study
and the classes, study groups and other
communities (such as study and living surroundings) in which the student operates.
4.	Teaching: the final area looks at the teaching approaches that will be used and the
pedagogical competences of the academic
staff on the programme; ancillary educational supports available to the student
such as tutoring and services such as extra language, mathematical and writing
skill supports also appear in this domain.
Taking these domains and applying them to
the proposed programme may be a useful exercise to explore the specific study ability factors that may emerge and how they should be
considered in the application process and during the course of the programme.
4.2.1. Personal Resources:
As nomination to this programme is made
by the national employing bodies, it will be
necessary that the organisational decision to
propose potential students to this programme
explores the ‘personal readiness’ of the candidates to undertake a course of study and
to support and facilitate students’ learning
including by reducing their daily workload.
The preparedness of candidates returning to
study, and how realistic they are about their
management of work and study that the programme will demand, will need to be considered in the final decision on choosing the
most suitable individuals to undertake the
programme from those declared eligible by
the Admission panel. This is to give them a
reasonable timeframe within which to undertake the programme and, barring serious
emergencies, to agree that no extra work be
added to that schedule during their time on
the programme.

4.2.2. Study Skills:
As a post-graduate programme, all students
will already have a primary degree and so will
have some awareness of their educational
skill-set. The attainment of a Bachelor’s degree ensures that the students have a good
foundation in topics relevant to the Master’s
programme. The requirement of a minimum
of three years’ experience in Border Guarding
means that this academic knowledge is augmented by experiential knowledge.
In addition, this cohort of learners will also
have undergone many professional courses.
These qualifications and their career to date
will have developed learning skills and study
habits and techniques. Their ability to think
critically, solve problems and plan and manage
time will also have been developed through
this study and through their work as border
guard managers. Candidates’ applications
for the programme will be supported by a recommendation from their sending institution
which will testify to the learner’s professional
performance in terms of the following:
••Long-term career prospects;
••potential for multiplying the learning/experience within the organisation;
••involvement in activities/working groups
at EU level i.e. European Commission, European Agencies;
••commitment/drive with regard to personal
development/drive to succeed;
••Ability for arrange different work patterns
in order to achieve a balance between studying and maintaining a life outside of work;
••prior academic performance.
These considerations ensure that learners have
the necessary personal resources and study
skills to complete the workload required for
this programme.
One of the biggest fears of adult students returning to higher education can be that they
have ‘forgotten’ how to study, so consideration
should be given to the provision of some re-

29 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

fresher classes on academic writing and referencing and sourcing material both through
physical and online library spaces. This will
be particularly important given the fast pace
of change in the use of online educational resources in recent years. Such study supports
may be required both at the start and at intervals throughout the programme and the period prior to the start of the thesis should be
noted as a particularly stressful one for students in this regard.
As the programme is delivered through English to those for whom English may not be
their first language, the linguistic capacity
of the students to cope with the programme
is an issue to be considered. The requirement
of B23 on the Common European Framework
of Reference for Languages as a minimum
should allow students to be able to cope well
with all aspects of the programme and to
communicate easily with each other. It will
be important that academic and support staff
contributing to the programme have at least
that capacity in spoken and written English.
4.4.3. Study Environment:
In this domain it will be important to ensure that students are supported in order to
learn both as individuals in their own countries and also as a cross-national group. The
planned week-long sessions will contribute
to the formation of a class identity and individual students will need to have reliable ac3 B2 Common European Framework of Reference for
Languages
Can understand the main ideas of complex
text on both concrete and abstract topics,
including technical discussions in his/her field of
specialisation.
Can interact with a degree of fluency and
spontaneity that makes regular interaction with
native speakers quite possible without strain for
either party.
Can produce clear, detailed text on a wide range of
subjects and explain a viewpoint on a topical issue
giving the advantages and disadvantages of various
options.

30 of 128

cess to online resources that will allow them
to communicate online in order to retain this
group dynamic through digital discussion forums. Easily accessible face-to-face and online
access to academics and to academic supports
will also be important. The fact that all students share similar work-place environments
and practice experiences will be an important
bonding aspect for the student group and the
programme has been designed to allow them
to share their practice experiences. This will
not only allow for group cohesion, but also improve the confidence of individual students
in allowing them to apply theory to practice
with which they are familiar.
4.2.4. Teaching:
On developing the programme there has been
an emphasis on the application of androgogical
principles to the programme’s educational design and delivery. This understanding of adult
learning styles should enhance the students’
experiences on the programme. This approach
is supported by the provision of regular formative feedback to students, thus allowing them
to understand how they can improve their performance as the programme progresses. As
stated above, the emphasis in the curriculum
design on encouraging students to draw on
their knowledge of practice will also contribute to their engagement with their studies.
Care will be taken to collect student feedback
on their experiences at different junctures during the programme and to use such feedback
to adapt aspects of the programme in consultation with the academics involved in its delivery.
This programme constitutes 90 ECTS credits. 1 ECTS credit reflects 28 hours of student
learning activity directly related to the Programme outcomes. It is delivered over three
(3) Stages. Each Stage represents one semester
of full-time study, carrying 30 ECTS credits.
Stage 1 and 2 contain the taught component
of the programme and Stage 3 is comprised
solely of a dissertation. The programme also
incorporates independent learning, an expe-

Quality Assurance Handbook

riential learning element which is applied in
the operational context and intensive contact
sessions. A schedule of these phases of learning is outlined in the programme schedule.
Each module of the programme begins with
an independent learning phase where students will engage in guided self-study. For
some modules this self-study involves refreshing their knowledge of Frontex Guidelines and
procedures or of research methodologies. In
other modules it involves completing online
questionnaires to identify their organisation’s
leadership model or their organisation’s riskassessment tools. These are topics that the
learners are already familiar with, the focus here is to relate them to the key concept
of the programme. The students will be provided with detailed briefing documents outlining what is required of them. Where the
self-study involves reading text, this reading
is limited to an average of 10 pages per hour
up to a maximum of 220 pages. The purpose
of these self-study exercises is to orientate and
motivate the students and to stimulate their
readiness to learn in advance of the intensive
contact week. During the contact weeks the
theoretical element of these topics will be explored during the intensive taught sessions.
There will be online support available to the
students during this self-study phase.
These contact sessions are also designed to encourage discussion, collaboration and cooperation among students. This will contribute
to the formation of a class identity, cooperation and critical thinking skills. It will also
equip students with the skills and resources
to progress their learning in the next phase.
Upon completion of the contact week, the programme continues with both independent and
experiential learning. Individual students
will have reliable access to the online platform that will allow them to communicate
online in order to retain this group dynamic
and engage in group work. This will not only
allow for group cohesion but also improve the

confidence of individual students in allowing
them to apply theory to practice with which
they are already familiar. The Sending Authority will also support the student in the
experiential phase of learning by providing
the time and resources to the student in order to complete their assignments.
For detailed information on grading, assessment and re-assessment of modules please refer to the Student’s Handbook, the Modules
Handbook and the Teaching and Examination Regulations.

4.3. Mentoring
4.3.1. The Consortium is committed to providing
a supportive and positive environment for
all students. However, there might be times
in everybody’s life when things do not go as
well as they wish. In such cases, there is comprehensive support available to help with all
kinds of different problems.
4.3.2. All students have confidential access to the
Module Convenors regarding academic issues,
appeals, grievances and all aspects of discipline within the Degree Programme. Students are also always encouraged to discuss
any matters with the Programme Administrator who should be the first point of reference if any problems/issues arise.
4.3.3. The Module Convenors, the Programme Administrator and the Programme Coordinators, within the scope of each of their roles
are available to:
a)	provide general academic advice in case
of concerns of academic ability/study
problems;
b)	give students help and advice on non-academic matters and refer for further assistance if required;
c)	assist students with the orientation to the
programme;
d)	offer support in questions related to financial, travel and accommodation issues.

31 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

4.3.4. Students have a direct contact with the Programme Administrator, a Frontex representative, as well as with the Programme
Coordinators and the Academic Partner’s
representatives, who are responsible for the
administrative running of the Master’s programme and who will provide guidance to
students from the submission of their application right through to the graduation stage.
4.3.5. In addition to the Programme Administrator,
students can also always contact their Mentor, the Module Convenor and the Programme
Coordinator in case of any questions and/or
concerns.
4.3.6. Every Module Convenor is responsible for
mentoring 2 or 3 students per iteration of the
programme. The students are assigned to a
Mentor on a random basis by the Programme
Board.
4.3.7. Module Convenors are assigned as Mentors by
the Programme Board before the start of each
iteration of the programme
4.3.8. The Consortium recognises that the mentoring
of students is an integral part of the graduate
experience for both. Teaching Staff mentoring is broader than advising a student as to
the programme of study to fulfil programme
requirements and distinct from formal instruction in a given discipline.
4.3.9. Mentoring encompasses more than serving as
a role model. The Consortium has outlined the
following mentoring roles to guide the relationship between faculty and students. Teaching
Staff and students must realise that, while the
Module Convenor will be the primary Mentor
throughout the duration of the programme,
many of the mentoring ‘functions’ defined below may be performed by the programme teaching staff other than the Module Convenor. An
important consequence to this recognition is
that teaching staff must realise that much of
their interaction with all students has an im-

32 of 128

portant mentoring component to it. Students
also have responsibilities to ensure successful
mentoring and these are also indicated below.
4.3.10. Mentoring has been defined as:
a)	guiding students through Degree Programme requirements;
b)	providing a clear map of the Degree Programme requirements from the beginning, making clear the nature of the
requirements and assessments, and defining a timeline for their completion;
c)	providing clear guidelines for starting
and finishing dissertation work, including encouraging the timely initiation of
the dissertation, as well as exploring a
wide range of possible fields of research
throughout the programme when choosing a topic for the dissertation;
d)	encouraging an open exchange of ideas,
including pursuit of the student’s ideas;
e)	
checking regularly on the student’s
progress;
f)	evaluating clearly the strengths and weaknesses of the student’s academic performance and research competences;
g)	providing and discussing clear criteria for
authorship of collaborative research and
project work;
h)	being aware of the student’s learning and
research needs and providing assistance
in obtaining required resources.;
i)	providing constructive feedback and advice on the student’s performance;
j)	guiding the students through professional
development;
k)	providing guidance and serving as a role
model for upholding the highest ethical
standards;
l)	advising students on the fair and equitable distribution of tasks and a workload
within a team;
m)	encouraging peer learning, cooperation,
team work and a stimulating learning atmosphere within the student group;
n)	encouraging students to keep in contact with each other throughout the pro-

Quality Assurance Handbook

gramme, meet online, provide mutual
support, seek and provide constructive
feedback, consult on their group and individual work;
o)	facilitating interactions with other students, the faculty and the wider professional community;
p)	advising students in all matters related to
the Degree Programme;
q)	providing support and advice to students
on non-academic matters and referring
them to further assistance if required.
4.3.11. As partners in the mentoring relationship, students have responsibilities as well. As mentees, students should:
a)	Be aware of their own mentoring needs
and how these change throughout the programme. Students should discuss these
changing needs with their Mentors.
b)	Recognise that one teaching staff member may not be able to satisfy all of a student’s mentoring needs. They should seek
assistance from multiple individuals that
are able to fulfil the mentoring roles described above.
c)	Recognise that their mentoring needs
must respect their Mentor’s other responsibilities and time commitments.
d)	Maintain and seek regular communication with their Mentors, especially their
Module Convenor.
4.3.12. Mentoring Timeline
End of August/ Early
September

•	Mentors receive their list of mentees.
•	Mentors e-mail their mentees to introduce themselves, offer to
answer any immediate questions and arrange a group meeting
during Opening Ceremony/Orientation.

Opening Ceremony/
Orientation

•	Mentors meet with their group at the Frontex HQ to answer
questions and to help the mentees to get to know one another
•	Mentors attend the module orientation events if requested.

Throughout the entire
iteration of the programme

•	Mentors are available via e-mail to answer any questions and
pass on useful information as requested

Beginning and end
of each stage

•	Mentors offer to get together with their mentoring group to
catch up and offer advice.

4.4. Teaching staff professional
development
4.4.1. Continuous teacher professional development
is valued and strongly encouraged. The Academic Partners are required to encourage
teacher development and create learning opportunities for their staff, as necessary, including the enhancement of English language
competences, development of a research community and the extending of the field of research within the border management area.
4.4.2. The field of border management is one of the
areas where there is very little or no research
history. As this is the first Master’s degree in
strategic border management, it covers an existing research gap and it equips border guard
managers with knowledge, skills and competences at the Master’s level.
4.4.3. The required expertise to deliver this programme is drawn from both academic and
professional resources. Given the nature of the
programme and the fact that not all the specialists in border security may necessarily, at
this early stage, be experienced researchers,
the existing overall capacity of the Consortium
to deliver the programme is a minimum of 60
per cent teaching staff with PhD degrees.
4.4.4. Nevertheless, the Consortium aims at increasing the academic credentials before the next
re-validation of the Degree Programme by increasing the number of PhD holders on the
Teaching Staff by 10 per cent and by increasing the number of PhD holders on the Module
Convenors to 100 per cent as well as encouraging the development of a research community
by Academic Partners. This will advance the
field of knowledge within the border management sector, and also enhance the academic
research community of the Consortium by the
time of the re-validation of the programme.
Frontex will facilitate the enhancement of
the academic research and the border guard
community through enabling participation

33 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

in relevant research events and facilitating
contact between the students, teachers and
graduates with the European and international border management security research
and development community of interests, as
far as possible.
4.4.5. The same principle applies to English language
competency as, due to its multidisciplinary
field of border management, highly specialised professionals are at the core of this programme delivery. As a result, the Consortium
requires a C1 level of English language with a
goal of Academic Partners continuously supporting and improving the language competence of teaching staff in the view of the
degree programme re-validation.
4.4.6. Teacher of the Year Award
The Teacher of the Year Award is given each
year to acknowledge and emphasise excellence
in teaching. Other scholarly activity such as
research and publication records may become a
consideration in the selection process, but the
main emphasis will be on teaching excellence
as judged by Teaching Staff and students.
The Governing Board is to appoint a committee made up of students, Module Convenors
and the Project Manager to select outstanding teachers from the Programme. The Evaluation Committee then selects the Teacher of
the Year from up to 5 nominees. This teacher’s
accomplishments will be acknowledged at the
annual European Day for Border Guards, an
annual event organised by Frontex.
4.4.6.1. The following criteria for selection of the nominees are recommended:
a)	excellence in teaching and mentoring as
supported by standard module evaluations
and letters from peers;
b)	the inclusion of other evidence of teaching excellence in addition to module evaluations and letters from peers;
c)	because so many individuals are potentially deserving of the Teacher of the

34 of 128

Year Award, past recipients will not be
considered.
4.4.6.2. In order to provide greater uniformity in the
nomination materials provided to the Committee, the following must be prepared:
••a statement from the candidate summarising his or her objectives as a teacher;
••a summary of evaluation scores;
••letters of support from students;
••a letter of nomination from the Module
Convenor spelling out the candidate’s
teaching responsibilities and influence
on teaching;
••a short CV that emphasizes teaching roles.

4.5. Programme Quality Assurance
4.5.1. Student Representation
4.5.1.1. Given the distributed nature of Programme
delivery, the Consortium recognises the importance of student representation on the Programme Board, the Governing Board and the
Quality Assurance Committee (QAC).
4.5.1.2. Student representatives are students who are
chosen by their peers to act as representative on the Governing Board, the Programme
Board and the Quality Assurance Committee.
They act as a formal channel of communication between the students they represent and
the Boards and the Committee.
4.5.1.3. The role of the Student representative is:
a)	to be an advocate for students;
b)	to provide feedback on various aspects of the
Programme and the student experience both
to the Programme and Governing Boards
and the QAC and to the student body;
c)	to take an active role in quality assurance
by participating in the Quality Assurance
Committee
4.5.1.4. Elections of the Student Representatives
Student representatives should be appointed
as soon as possible after the start of the Pro-

Quality Assurance Handbook

gramme, ideally during the Orientation
session
4.5.1.5. Number of Representatives
There should be four (4) student representatives, two (2) of whom serve as reserves.
4.5.1.6. Election Process
Students who would like to put themselves forward should make themselves known, preferably in advance of the day of the election.

ity of opportunity for all students. However,
there are cases where elections are impractical, perhaps due to small numbers. In these
cases, an alternative method of fair selection
may be used, as long as all students have the
same opportunities to become representatives
if they so wish. For example, when only one
or two volunteers come forward, they may be
appointed as the student representatives by
the Governing Board.
4.5.2. Student and Teaching Staff Feedback

On the day of the election, each candidate
should be given an opportunity to speak to his
or her peers. Each candidate should be given
an equal amount of time. The ballot can be
conducted either by a show of hands or by a
secret ballot.
Once the representatives have been elected,
the students present should be informed about
where their contact information will be (Moodle) and reminded of the representative’s role.
4.5.1.7. Equal Opportunities
All students must have an equal opportunity
to put themselves forward to become representatives. This requires effective communication, fair timing and placement of the
election, and absolutely no discrimination on
any grounds by those overseeing the election.
To ensure that students from all Member
States are represented at the Boards and the
QAC, it is strongly encouraged that students
from Member States not represented in previous iterations of the Programme put themselves forward to become representatives.
The entire process must also be effectively and
accurately communicated from the outset.
4.5.1.8. Low Participation / Difficulties in Using Elections for Selection
It is envisaged that elections will form the
basis for selecting students to act as representatives as this method allows for equal-

4.5.2.1. The Consortium accepts that the involvement
of students is key to quality enhancement and
will seek feedback from students and teaching staff relating to the development of the
Degree Programme, the curriculum and its
delivery, as well as operational and non-academic support issues.
4.5.2.2. Students and teaching staff play a critical
part in the evaluation, development and enhancement of the quality of this learning experience. Feedback from students allows the
Consortium to evaluate how its service provision is viewed by its most important group of
stakeholders, namely its students.
4.5.2.3. Feedback from students and the teaching
staff is collected after every module, after the
taught component and after the end of the Degree Programme.
4.5.2.4. After every iteration of the programme the results of the feedback process are made available and areas for appropriate follow-up action
are identified. The results of the student and
teaching staff feedback process, as well as the
recommendations and the action taken on
the basis of such recommendations are important considerations for the programme
review which the Consortium is required to
undertake.
4.5.2.5. Students and teaching staff complete an online feedback form available in Moodle with an

35 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

agreed feedback questionnaire to enable consistency and comparison, on an anonymous
basis, after every module, after the taught
component and towards the end of the iteration of the Programme. The feedback is collected by the programme administrator after
students have been assessed, but prior to publication of results in Moodle.
4.5.2.6. The programme administrator collects and
collates the feedback and forwards it to the
Quality Assurance Committee for the compilation of a report which is to be submitted to
the Governing Board by the Quality Assurance
Officer. The recommendations and changes
proposed by the QAC are communicated to all
students and all stakeholders involved.

dle with an agreed feedback questionnaire to
enable consistency and comparison.
4.5.4.2. The programme administrator collects and
collates the feedback and forwards it to the
Quality Assurance Committee for the compilation of a report which is to be submitted
to the Governing Board by the Quality Assurance Officer. The recommendations and
changes proposed by the QAC are communicated to all the stakeholders involved.
4.5.4.3. The feedback from the alumni is collected once,
approximately one year after the end of every
iteration of the Degree Programme.

4.6. Module Quality Assurance
4.5.3. Feedback from Sending Authorities
4.6.1. Student Feedback
4.5.3.1. Feedback from students’ Sending Authorities
in relation to the whole programme is gathered by the Programmes Administrator using
online evaluation via Moodle with an agreed
feedback questionnaire to enable consistency
and comparison. The programme administrator collects and collates the feedback and forwards it to the Quality Assurance Committee
for the compilation of a report which is to be
submitted to the Governing Board by the Quality Assurance Officer. The recommendations
and changes proposed by the QAC are communicated to all the stakeholders involved.
4.5.3.2. The feedback from the students’ Sending Authorities is collected twice. The first feedback
is conducted approximately 3 months after the
end of every iteration of the programme and
the second feedback is collected one year after the end of every iteration the programme.
4.5.4. Feedback from Alumni
4.5.4.1. Feedback from alumni in relation to the whole
programme is gathered by the programme administrator using online evaluation via Moo-

36 of 128

4.6.1.1. Student feedback on modules has three main
objectives:
a)	to provide students with an opportunity
to comment on the quality of their learning experiences, and content of the modules as required in preparation for and as
part of review processes;
b)	to assess the success of academic provision
in relation to the expectations of students;
c)	to provide feedback to teachers in order to
improve delivery of the modules.
4.6.1.2. Students complete a brief online feedback
form, on an anonymous basis, towards the
end of the given module. The feedback is collected after the students have been assessed
on that particular module, but prior to the
publication of results.
4.6.1.3. Anonymous Feedback from all students is gathered at module level by the Module Convenor
using online evaluation via Moodle with an
agreed feedback questions to enable consistency and comparison.

Quality Assurance Handbook

4.6.1.4. The student feedback focuses on the following issues, among others:
a)	general questions about the modules;
b)	comparison between module description
and actual delivery;
c)	teaching/delivery methodology;
d)	teacher attributes;
e)	method of assessment;
f)	administration and resources;
g)	any additional comments.
4.6.1.5. After each module the Programme Administrator collates student feedback in relation to
the module and the Module Convenor drafts
a report for the QAC.
4.6.1.6. Students are also strongly encouraged to provide feedback at any time to the Module Convenor either during contact week or through
email, telephone, etc.
4.6.1.7. Module feedback is made available on Moodle.
4.6.1.8. The Programme Administrator prepares the
report and provides it to the Quality Assurance
Committee. In case there is a need to introduce
changes to the module, the QAC proposes the
changes to the Governing Board and tasks the
Programme Board to implement the changes
for the next iteration of the programme.
4.6.1.9. The recommendations and changes proposed
by the QAC are communicated to the students
and all stakeholders involved.

5. Programme Review
5.1. Regular Internal Review (End of
Programme Review)
5.1.1. The Quality Assurance Subcommittee (QAC)
holds regular reviews of the programme after the end of each iteration of the Degree
Programme.

5.1.2. The regular internal review of the programme
contributes to the periodic review. Regular internal reviews focus on the details of the programme, whereas periodic reviews focus on
more overarching themes linked to the strategy of learning.
5.1.3. The aspects of the program which the QAC
scrutinises are as follows, among others:
5.1.3.1. General
1.	The Programme has a well-formulated vision, learning outcomes, learning and assessment strategies
2.	The Programme learning and assessment
strategies facilitate the achievement of
the learning outcomes, and the module
learning and assessment strategies are
in line with the programme’s higher-level
strategies
3.	The assessments are reliable, transparent
and effectively measure the stated learning outcomes, indicating the level of the
learning attained by the student
4.	The aims of the Degree Programme are met
5.	The learning outcomes of the Degree Programme are met
6.	Learning and assessment strategy facilitates the intended student learning experience, including progression, and student
achievements demonstrate successful completion of the programme;
7.	Governance structure of the programme
and the way it functions
8.	Admissions: whether the timing/scheduling and communication channels were
appropriate during the admission process
9.	A statement providing details of any changes
that have been made to enhance and develop
learning and teaching, if applicable
10.	An update regarding any queries that were
raised during the last periodic review
11. Study ability (study load analysis)
12. Other

37 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

5.1.3.2. Resources
13.	Feedback from Teaching Staff
14.	Non-teaching staff resources (the Programme Administrator, the Programme
Coordinator, Moodle, etc.)
15.	Support arrangement available to students
5.1.3.3. Programme Information
16.	Material provided to students
17.	Programme structure
18. Relevance of the learning for the job
19.	Opportunity for peer learning
20.	
Harmonisation and comparability of
standards and assessments across the programme delivery in different institutions
5.1.3.4. Assessment
21.	Methods of assessment and details of grading scheme
22.	External examiner reports, comments on
main themes and actions taken
23.	Assessment results
5.1.3.5. Feedback from Students
24.	Collection and consideration of feedback
from students, changes made in response
to feedback in order to enhance provision,
mechanisms for transmitting this information to students; details of feedback on
the current iteration of the programme
and any actions taken in response
25.	The role of student representation
26.	Comparison of students’ experience with
every Academic Partner and Complementary Entity
5.1.3.6. Results
27.	Pattern of assessment results over the Programme iterations, if applicable
5.1.3.7. Sending Authority Information
28.	
Feedback from students’ Sending
Authorities
29.	Support provided to the students by the
Sending Authorities to facilitate the
learning

38 of 128

5.1.4. Conduct of the regular internal review
5.1.4.1. Regular internal review of the programme
contributes to the procedures for the periodic
review of the Programme.
5.1.4.2. The review is started after the end of each iteration of the programme. The conduct of the
regular review will normally be as follows:
a)	The Programme Administrator compiles
the input and completes the programme
evaluation form.
b)	The Quality Assurance Committee reviews
and evaluates the material, consulting
the relevant Module Convenors where
appropriate.
c)	The QAC can also ask for follow up actions
and/or seek further clarification on any issue prior to finalising the evaluation.
d)	Quality Assurance Officer considers the
review, confirms the final rating and sets
the date of the next review and reports to
the Governing Board and informs the Programme Board;
e)	Immediate action is taken when a module
or any other element of the programme is
rated as Poor.
f)	The outcomes of this process are reported
to the Governing Board, all students and
other stakeholders involved.

5.2. Periodic Review
5.2.1. Periodic review of the programme is conducted
after the second iteration of the Programme.
While the internal reviews of the programme
examine the detail of individual modules and
of the programme, periodic reviews are intended to focus on more general overarching
themes, for example:
••strategies for teaching, including the learning and support provided for students;
••quality assurance and enhancement processes that ensure the standards of the award;
••consistency and comparability of standards
across the programme and across the different iterations.

Quality Assurance Handbook

5.2.2. In summary, the purpose of the periodic review is to ensure that:
a)	The structure, content, academic coherence and assessment procedures for the
programme are well defined, made explicit to students and achieve academic
standards appropriate to the award.
b)	Through regular and systematic processes
of curriculum review and feedback from
students, action is taken to introduce improvements to the programme, building
on existing strengths and correcting identified weaknesses.
c)	The Programme is exposed to external scrutiny to ensure transparency of processes,
to confirm standards and to ensure the
programme remains current and valid.
5.2.3. The periodic review will be conducted by two
external assessors proposed by the Programme
Board and appointed by the Chair of the Governing Board and contracted by Frontex.
5.2.4. Periodic review documentation prepared by
the Quality Assurance Committee should include (at a minimum):
a)	copies of the regular programme evaluation forms, including the reviewers and
Module Convenors; responses; and extracts from the records of the QAC meetings where the programme review was
discussed
b)	information on the views of employers
(Sending Authorities) on the graduates,
feedback results;
c)	information on how feedback is obtained
from the students, on the assessment process and on the overall student experience;
d)	a statement regarding the evaluation of the
effectiveness of the procedures for maintaining and enhancing the quality of provision and academic standards;
e)	an evaluation of the appropriateness of the
learning outcomes, the appropriateness
of the content in supporting the achievement of the learning outcomes, the effectiveness of the teaching and learning in

providing good learning opportunities to
support, and the achievement of the learning outcomes and academic standards;
f)	arrangements for orientation;
g)	the identification of and action with regard to any special learning needs;
h)	how feedback is given to students;
i)	the latest set of examination papers;
j)	
the availability of resources (including space, equipment and other nonstaff costs, and library and computing
provision);
k)	an evaluation of the effectiveness of the
deployment of human and material resources in supporting the learning of students and the effectiveness of their linkage
to learning outcomes;
l)	
Teaching Staff feedback on the programme, prizes for teaching excellence,
and student progression and failure rates
in each year;
m)	students’ opinion (e.g. a report from the
Student Representative(s) outlining the
current concerns of the student body and
encompassing comments on the resources
for teaching (including IT provision) and
on assessment arrangements);
n)	student feedback on access to information
(recourse, libraries, and other support offered by Academic Partners);
o)	overall coordination of the programme
and/or sharing of responsibilities;
p)	coordination and responsibilities regarding the quality assurance structure;
q)	the European dimension of the programme;
r)	consistency across the programme;
s)	facilities and student support.
5.2.5. Review Procedure
5.2.5.1. The relevant documents are submitted to the
external assessors appointed for the review;
such assessors are free to request additional
information or clarification.
5.2.5.2. Arrangements are made for the assessors to
visit one of the Academic Partners for discus-

39 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

sions with teaching staff and student representatives and to see facilities.
5.2.5.3. The Programme Board, the Board of Examiners or individual members, as may be the
case, are asked to prepare a Reaction document in response to the external assessors’ reports. The reaction documents together with
the assessors’ report are then considered by
the QAC. The outcome of the periodic review
is reported to the Governing Board, all students and stakeholders involved and any instances of good practice are highlighted.
5.2.6. External Assessors’ Reports
5.2.6.1. Each external assessor will be asked to submit an individual report, based on their impressions gained from the documentation and
the discussions during the visit, together with
any recommendations thought appropriate,
normally within one month of their visit to
the Academic Partner.
5.2.6.2. External assessors are invited to formulate
their reports in the light of the following
questions:
a)	Are the learning outcomes of the programme appropriate and achieved?
b)	Do the learning outcomes match the strategy for learning and the assessment?
c)	What are the strengths and weaknesses
of the programme?
d)	Are the students adequately supported by the
learning outcomes, study skills help, etc.?
e)	Are the students given adequate high quality and timely feedback on their work and
progress
f)	Are the procedures for maintaining and
enhancing the quality of provision and

40 of 128

the academic standards effective? What
are the strengths and weaknesses?
g)	Is there adequate support for students, including the provision of personal tutors?
h)	Comments on student experience
i)	
Consistency of standards across the
programme
j)	Are there adequate mechanisms for student feedback? How are the students informed of any actions that are taken as a
result of feedback?
5.2.6.3. The review should also be guided by the criteria and standards of the Self Evaluation Report developed by the European Consortium
for Accreditation in Higher Education (ECA)
Assessment Framework for Joint Programmes
in Single Accreditation Procedures – JOQAR
methodology in view of the validation
5.2.6.4. External assessors are encouraged to highlight
examples of good practice, particularly with
regard to any aspect of the procedures which
might be considered worthy of dissemination.
5.2.6.5. The external assessors’ reports are made available on Moodle.
5.2.6.6. The Quality Assurance Committee will present the report along with recommendations,
if any, to the Governing Board.
5.2.6.7. The Frontex Project Manager will form a working group to address recommendations highlighted by the external assessors.
5.2.6.8. The outcome is communicated to all students
and stakeholders involved.

European Joint Master’s
in Strategic Border Management

Policies & Procedures

Student
Handbook

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

This Student Handbook should be read in conjunction
with the Quality Assurance Handbook, the Teaching
Staff Handbook, the Dissertation Guidelines and the
Teaching and Examinations Regulations.
All information relevant for applicants and registered
students including assessment standards and policies,
is available on the Frontex website (V-Aula/Moodle).
The webpages of the Academic Partners will be linked
to V-Aula in order to keep the information consistent.
The Handbook for Students is designed to guide you
through the European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border
Management. It is meant to be a kind of user’s manual
for the Programme, giving you an overview of the options and the resources available to you.
A quick scan of the Handbook will show you what types of
information it contains. This document can be your guide
to academic requirements but, more importantly, it clarifies the standards that should inform your conduct within
the Programme. It contains the academic and disciplinary
rules that apply to everyone registered on the Programme.

42 of 128

This Handbook contains a concise review of the rules
and procedures of the Programme with which students
are expected to be familiar. It includes the specific requirements for the European Joint Master’s in Strategic
Border Management and information on a number of
services and bodies that have been created to assist you.
The Governing Board makes all decisions concerning all
aspects pertaining to the delivery of the Programme.
Discriminating against individuals on the basis of race
and ethnic origin, colour, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, age, national origin, political beliefs, veteran status, or disability unrelated to job or
programme requirements is strictly prohibited.
While every effort has been made to ensure that this
Handbook is accurate and up to date, it may include typographical or other errors. Changes which need to be
made periodically to this Handbook will be made available in the online version of this document.

Student Handbook

Definitions
Academic Partners are the signatories to the Consortium Agreement which, according to their respective national laws, are permitted to deliver
validated programmes and are ultimately responsible for conferring awards.
Access is construed to mean the right to apply for the Degree Programme, whereas admission means
the process by means of which a student satisfies the entry requirements.
Admissions Panel assesses all potential candidates in
order to determine eligibility for admission
to the Degree Programme in accordance with
the admission requirements.
Board of Examiners decides whether students have satisfactorily completed the Degree Programme
requirements.
Consortium is the association comprising all Partners collectively. For all intents and purposes,
it does not possess any legal personality,
which is vested in each Partner individually/
independently.
Consortium Agreement is a legal contract between all
the Partners of the Consortium to deliver the
Degree Programme.
Complementary Entities are the affiliate institutions
at national level, commonly being the training institution within the national authority
with border security responsibilities, which
contributes to the ultimate delivery of the
programme.
ECTS means the European Credit Transfer System,
which is a student-centred system based on
the student workload required to achieve the
learning outcomes of the Degree Programme

Enrolment is the process by which a student is formally
accepted by the Governing Board onto the Degree Programme.
External Examiner is a professional academic responsible for monitoring the reliability and validity of assessment procedures and academic
standards.
Governing Board is the central administering organ
of the Degree Programme.
National Frontex Point of Contact (NFPOC) is a single point of contact between Frontex and the
national services of Member States responsible for border control.
National Training Coordinator (NTC) acts as a permanent contact in training matters between
Frontex and the national services of Member
States responsible for border control.
Module Convenor is a professional academic responsible for the delivery of the module.
Partners are all the signatories to the Consortium
Agreement, including Frontex and the Academic Partners
Programme Administrator is a Frontex representative
in charge of all administrative responsibilities with regard to the Degree Programme.
Programme Board is inter alia responsible for the monitoring, delivery and implementation of the
on-going Degree Programme. The composition, functions and specific responsibilities
of the Programme Board are described in the
Quality Assurance Handbook.
Programme Coordinator is a representative of an Academic Partner or Complementary Entity in
charge of administrative, logistical and organisational matters in their Institution.

43 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

Quality Assurance Committee reports to and advises
the Governing Board on the implementation
of policies and procedures relating to quality assurance, enhancement and internal review of quality.
Sending Authorities are the national services of Member States responsible for border control under
their national law as represented in the Management Board of Frontex and other relevant
Frontex Partner Organisations.
The word ‘Student’ has the same meaning as the term
‘learner’ as defined in the Bologna process.

44 of 128

Validation is the process by means of which the Validating Authorities certify that the Degree Programme enables the student to attain, at the
appropriate level, the knowledge, skills and
competences that are expected as outcomes
of the programme.
Validating Authorities are the entities that ensure that
the Degree Programme is of the required academic standard, is supported by the necessary resources and is responsive to European
market needs.

Student Handbook

1. Access and Admission
There will be a minimum of 16 students and
a maximum of 40 students per iteration of
the Master’s Programme, a minimum of one
student from the national agencies with border guard responsibilities from each Member
States and Schengen Associated Countries as
well as from Frontex and Partner Organisations which cooperate with Frontex.

1.1. Admission Requirements
1.1.1. Academic Admissions Requirements:
1.1.1.1. To be admitted, candidates must possess at
a minimum a first-cycle qualification comprising at least 180 ECTS credits (bachelor degree or equivalent) obtained from a recognised
higher education institution. Moreover, the
academic degree should be obtained in an area
that is related to the subject of this Degree
Programme, such as law, business administration, public administration, entrepreneurship, border guarding, border policing,
policing, criminology, military sciences, security sciences, sociology, psychology, political sciences, risk and security management
and related areas.
1.1.1.2. In case the bachelor’s degree obtained is in
subject areas other than the ones mentioned
above, the Admission Panel decides whether
the respective field of study is relevant for ensuring the prerequisite learning required for
enrolling in the Master’s programme, also taking into consideration the applicant’s overall
professional experience.
1.1.2. Professional Experience Admission
Requirements:
1.1.2.1. In addition to the aforementioned academic requirements, to be admitted to the Programme,
students are also expected to have first-hand
knowledge and experience of working in the
field of Border Guarding.

1.1.2.2. Students must have a minimum of 3 years’ experience in an operational border guard function in at least middle management level,
including but not limited to the following:
••border surveillance units (all types of
borders);
••border checks units (all types of borders);
••risk analysis units;
••cross-border crime units (smuggling of migrants, trafficking of human beings, countering illegal migration, document forgery,
investigation units etc.);
••intelligence related to border crime;
••immigration control units;
••return, asylum operational units;
••headquarters structures coordinating the
operational units (as listed above).
1.1.3. Security clearance
1.1.3.1. All persons who have access to training materials and assessments related to the Degree
Programme must have an appropriate level of
security clearance issued by the competent
national authority (EU RESTRICTED).
1.1.3.2. The selected students will have to be in a possession of the necessary level of security clearance (EU RESTRICTED or equivalent) at the
beginning of their studies. The original certificate of security clearance must be submitted
to the Programme Administrator who presents
it to the Frontex Security Officer. EU security
clearance at RESTRICTED level or equivalent
level security clearance issued by a national security authority of a Member State (or Schengen-associated country) will be accepted.
1.1.3.3. In case students do not possess valid security
clearance, they will be requested to undergo
a security screening procedure.
1.1.4. Applicants should normally be expected
to remain in service for a period of at least
5 years after the completion of the Degree
Programme.

45 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

1.1.4.1. Exceptions to this clause will be considered on
a case-by-case basis by the Chair of the Governing Board only for candidates who meet
all the other entry requirements. In exceptional cases, such as different types of job contracts among others, this requirement may be
waived by the Governing Board if the Board
concludes that there are justifiable reasons to
warrant such a course of action. Such cases
will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.
1.1.5. English Language Proficiency Requirements
1.1.5.1. All elements of the Degree Programme, including the materials, teaching and delivery, are drafted and conducted in the English
language.
1.1.5.2. As a consequence, all lectures, assignments,
tests and the dissertation will be conducted in
English. If a student is a non-native speaker of
English (i.e. his/her first language is not English) that student is required to provide recent
evidence of the level of his/her command of
the English language at least at the B2 level
as defined in the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR). The
evidence may take the following forms:
a)	substantial education (a minimum of a
bachelor’s degree or equivalent) conducted
in English in a majority English-speaking
country;
b)	an internationally recognised, valid certificates are IELTS, TOEFL, or Cambridge.
The necessary level is the B2 level of the
European Qualifications Framework for
Languages.
1.1.5.3. Applicants who cannot provide recent evidence
as to the level of their English language proficiency will be required to sit a proficiency
assessment.
1.1.5.4. Candidates are required to demonstrate that
they:
••can understand the main ideas of complex
texts on both concrete and abstract topics,

46 of 128

including technical discussions in a subject area related to border security;
••can interact with a degree of fluency and
spontaneity that makes regular interaction
with native speakers quite possible without strain for either party;
••can produce both orally and in writing a
clear, detailed text on a wide range of subjects related to their professional field and
explain a viewpoint on a topical issue giving the advantages and disadvantages of
various options.
1.1.5.5. The English language proficiency assessment is
administered only to candidates who successfully meet all the other entry requirements.
1.1.6. Candidates need to be citizens of a European
Union Member State or Schengen Associated
Country.

1.2. Access and Admission Process
1.2.1. Frontex launches a call for proposals for applicants (prospective students). The call is
addressed to the National Frontex Points of
Contact (NFPOC) and copied to the National
Training Coordinators (NTC). In case of Partner Organisations the calls are addressed to
the countries’ relevant authorities via official
points of contact.
1.2.2. Sending Authorities nominate candidates that
meet the admission requirements as specified
in article 1.1 of this Handbook.
1.2.3. The nominated candidates complete an Application Form, which is provided to the Sending Authorities by Frontex with the Call for
Applicants.
1.2.4. The signed application form must be completed in English and be submitted through
the National Frontex Point of Contact to Frontex, and include:
a)	a statement from the Sending Authority,
signed by a relevant representative, stating

Student Handbook

that the student is expected to remain in
service for a period of at least 5 years after
the completion of the Degree Programme;
b)	a statement from the Sending Authority,
signed by a relevant representative, stating that the student’s workload will be decreased to facilitate his/her learning;
c)	a copy of the applicant’s national ID or
passport;
d)	a first cycle bachelor’s degree diploma and
diploma supplement (legalised copy) or
equivalent, or any higher academic degree in a relevant subject area (see also
paragraph 1.1.1 of this Handbook);
e)	a legalised copy of a certificate that proves
that the candidate has changed his/her
name if the name on the diploma is
different;
f)	a Europass CV;
g)	a letter from the employer that states the
positions and length of service in each position held by the candidate;
h)	a certificate or any other proof of English
language proficiency (if applicable);
i)	one recent photo in electronic format
(jpeg);
j)	a security clearance certificate or proof that
the student is in the process of obtaining
it;
k)	a recognised chronic/temporary disabilities certificate (if applicable);
l)	a signed declaration on Intellectual Property Rights which indicates that all industrial and intellectual property rights to all
works and materials created or developed
for the purposes of the Degree Programme
belong exclusively to Frontex (see also article 4 of this Handbook).

1.3. Application Timeline
1.3.1. The Programme Administrator receives the
students’ application forms from the Sending
Authorities no later than 10 weeks before the
start of the academic year.

1.3.2. Pre-screening is performed by the Programme
Administrator to ensure that all applications
are completed according to the checklist in
1.2.4. The pre-screening lists each complete
application, including those which require
an additional English language proficiency
test.
1.3.3. The Programme Administrator forwards the
list as well as the completed application forms
to the Admission Panel in electronic format
within 2 weeks.
1.3.4. Every application is assessed by each member
of the Admissions Panel. Every member of the
Admissions Panel makes a decision on the list
of eligible candidates (that meet the admission requirements) within 2 weeks from receiving the applications from the Programme
Administrator.
1.3.5. An assessment of the professional experience
admission requirement is to be made in consultation with the Frontex Project Manager
1.3.6. The list prepared by each member of the Admission Panel will include eligible candidates
(including those who satisfy the language requirements), partially eligible (those who still
need to be assessed with regard to language
competence) and ineligible candidates. The
applicants should be listed in order of Sending Authority.
1.3.7. The Programme Administrator makes the necessary arrangements for the identified candidates who need to be assessed with regard to
English Language Proficiency.
1.3.8. When the results of the language test are submitted, a final online meeting of the Admission Panel takes place at which a decision is
made as to the final list of eligible candidates
which will also include ineligible candidates
with a clear statement with regard to the justification for such ineligibility.

47 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

1.3.9. Based on the final list, the Programme Administrator prepares an official communication to the Sending Authorities.
1.3.10. Through the National Frontex Point of Contact, Frontex informs the Sending Authorities of the list of eligible candidates for their
Member State, requesting a decision on the
student(s) to be enrolled and those eligible to
be placed on the reserve list, considering the
criteria recommended below (which are not
exhaustive):
a)	appraisal report — professional performance of duties assigned;
b)	long-term career prospects;
c)	potential for multiplying the learning/experience within the organisation;
d)	involvement in activities/working groups
at EU level i.e. European Commission, European Agencies;
e)	commitment/drive with regard to personal
development / drive to succeed;
f)	ability to arrange different work patterns
to achieve a balance between studying and
maintaining a life outside of work;
g)	prior academic performance.
1.3.11. The names of the selected candidates are published on Frontex Virtual Aula within 3 days
from the deadline of receiving the final decision from the Sending Authorities. The list
of selected candidates must be published no
later than 4 weeks before the start of the academic year.
1.3.12. On completion of their registration form, candidates who have been admitted to the Degree Programme must send this form to the
Programme Administrator who will register
them as admitted students with each of the
Academic Partners. The registration form includes a contract with Frontex regarding issues of Intellectual Property Rights and access
to classified information and administrative
and logistical information related to the Degree Programme (i.e. travel arrangements, accommodation, and other related information)

48 of 128

1.3.13. Candidates do not individually register with
Academic Partners as it is done centrally by the
Programme Administrator. The Programme
Administrator sends the list of the admitted students to the respective Academic Partners’ registrars (or equivalent functions) for
registration.
1.3.14. Upon enrolment of their national students,
the Sending Authorities sign a declaration
stating their acceptance of the terms of the
programme, including inter alia:
a)	Financial arrangements
b)	Conditions for withdrawal
c)	Recovery of costs
d)	Commitment to facilitate the student’s
learning

1.4. Vacant Places
1.4.1. If none of the proposed candidates from Sending Authorities meet the admission requirements, the Admission Panel makes a selection
from the reserve list of eligible candidates
from other Sending Authorities based on the
following additional criteria:
a)	More than one national service responsible
for border control under their national law
as represented in the Management Board
of Frontex
b)	The size of the Member State’s border
guard function of the law enforcement
organisation
••The size of the Member State’s border
function of the law enforcement organisation is proportional to the size
of its border and the related challenges
posed by the management of such borders including air borders. Hence, the
increased need to have qualified staff.
c)	Consortium Partners
••Consortium Partners should be offered
an opportunity to fill vacant places as
they have been heavily involved in the
development of the Degree Programme,
which required a substantial commitment and effort.

Student Handbook

1.4.2. The Admission Panel applies the rotation principle and selects candidates from the Sending
Authority who have not been previously admitted from the reserve list.
1.4.3. Upon exhaustion of the candidates from the
reserve list, the remaining vacant places are
offered to candidates from Frontex and from
Frontex Partner Organisations.
1.4.4. In exceptional situations, the Admission Panel
reserves the right to change the timeline for
the admission procedure, including a situation
where there are vacant places. The start date
of the Degree Programme will not be affected.
1.4.5. Students with a disability, illness or mitigating circumstances
1.4.6. In case of a disability, the Admission Panel
checks whether a student can, within reason, for the benefit of the student, be given
access to the facilities, the delivery environment and the adaptations to the way examinations are taken.
1.4.7. Students with a disability, defined as conditions
of a chronic or permanent nature (at least for the
time being) that represent a structural impediment to studying or taking exams, such as all
motor, sensory or psychological disabilities, but
also functional disorders such as instance dyslexia, repetitive strain injury, chronic fatigue,
depression, chronic illnesses etc., or any temporarily disabilities, might need special arrangements to be made. All Academic Partners are
therefore obliged to provide facilities and services to make it possible, for students with a disability to participate in the Degree Programme.
1.4.8. Regarding the facilities for students with a
disability, the following three areas can be
distinguished:
a)	access to the Partners’ buildings
b)	the delivery environment of the modules
c)	adaptations to the way examinations are
taken

1.4.9. Students who need to make use of these additional facilities should inform the Programme
Administrator. If necessary, a medical declaration should be provided, stating the nature
and extent of the limitation.

2. Appeals against the
admission decision
2.1. Appeals relating to applications should be
addressed to the Programme Administrator
within 5 working days from the time the decisions were communicated to the Sending
Authorities.
2.2. An Appeal Committee will only consider an
appeal relating to an application for admission
if there is substantive evidence of irregularity in the procedure under which the application has been handled in accordance with
these regulations. Appeals will not be considered where the grounds of appeal relate
to the nomination procedures of the Sending
Authority.
2.3. An Appeal Committee, assigned by the Governing Board, takes a decision within 3 working days after the day the appeal is received.
2.4. The decision of the Appeal Committee is final.

3. Insurance
All student enrolled in the Degree Programme,
must obtain, at their own expense, and keep
in effect during the duration of the module
being covered at the designated Academic
Partner, liability insurance covering bodily
injuries and property damage to others arising out of their activities within the Degree
Programme unless this liability is already covered by their employer or another authority.

49 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

4. Intellectual Property
Rights
4.1. All industrial and intellectual property rights
to all works and materials created or developed
for the purposes of the Degree Programme belong exclusively to Frontex, subject to specific
agreements, where required, for the protection of industrial and intellectual property
rights previously owned by the authors.
4.2. Frontex commits to respect the rights of authors (e.g. teachers, professors, academics,
students) of the materials by indicating their
names on the work created by them.
4.3. See also article 1.2.4 (l)

7. Requirements for the
Degree
7.1. The Degree Programme is delivered over three
(3) Stages. Each Stage represents one semester
of full-time study carrying 30 ECTS credits.
Stage 3 is comprised solely of a dissertation.
7.2. Students who successfully complete all the
modules covered during the two stages and
the dissertation stage with a letter grade of E
in each module shall be eligible for the award
of the degree.
7.3. The European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management Degree Programme constitutes 90 ECTS credits. 1 ECTS credit reflects
28 hours of learning activity directly related
to the Programme.

5. Publicity
5.1. Any marketing, advertising or dissemination
of publically accessible information or materials arising from the subsistence of the Degree Programme must:
a)	be approved by Frontex;
b)	be in compliance with Frontex corporate
identity guidelines; and
c)	indicate that the Degree Programme is a
result of Frontex funding.

6. Academic Calendar
6.1. The academic calendar and schedule for assessments, re-sits and dissertations will be
published on Moodle for each academic year.
6.2. A provisional timeline for the Degree Programme can be found as an appendix to the
Teaching and Examination Regulations.

50 of 128

8. Recognition of Prior
Learning
8.1. The Consortium recognises previous learning
for the purposes of exemption from modules
of study in the Degree Programme, where
students can offer proof that they have previously achieved the stated learning outcomes
of those modules. Previous formal learning
will only be accepted as exemption from modules provided that the ECTS credits have not
been used to meet the credit requirements of
any other major award.
8.2. The Consortium conducts a graded assessment
of prior formal, non-formal or informal learning used as exemption from modules. Such
assessment is carried out in accordance with
the procedures on Recognition of Prior Learning assessment outlined in the Teaching and
Examination Regulations.

Student Handbook

8.3. Where exemption from module(s) is requested
on the basis of Recognised Prior Learning, the
Learning Outcomes of the successfully completed module(s) will be compared against the
expected Learning Outcomes of the module(s)
on the programme. Where these are found to
be sufficient, an exemption will be awarded
and the programme module(s) will be considered to have been completed on a ‘grade neutral’ basis.
8.4. Exemption from module(s) with the awarding
of ECTS credits will be limited to one-sixth of
the ECTS credits for each Stage. No exemptions will apply to the dissertation.
8.5. Students may be eligible to be exempted from
one module (5 ECTS credits) from each of the
first two stages. Possible exemptions are therefore limited to 10 ECTS credits:
a)	Stage 1: Leadership and Organisational Development in Border Management (Module 3)
b)	Stage 2: Global Context in European Border Security (Module 7)
8.6. A student who wishes to apply for exemption
from the respective module, should complete
and return the form to the Programme Administrator within one week from the start
from the programme.
8.7. The Recognition of Prior Learning Subcommittee examines the requests and, based on
the results of the assessment, decides within
two weeks of receiving the request whether to
exempt the student from the assessment requirement and require the student to audit
the module. Detailed information on the Recognition of Prior Learning Subcommittee can
be found in the Quality Assurance Handbook.

8.9. The decision is communicated to the student
and all Academic Partners through the Programme Administrator within one month of
the start of the Programme.

8.10. The assessment criteria are included
in the Teaching and Examination
Regulations.

9. Programme structure
9.1. Stage 1
••Strategy, Planning and Evaluation in Border Guarding (5 ECTS credits)
••Fundamental Rights and Ethics in European Border Security Management (5 ECTS
credits)
••Leadership and Organisational development in Border Management (5 ECTS
credits)
••EU Border Policies and Strategies (5 ECTS
credits)
••Innovation and Technology in Border Security (5 ECTS credits)
••Researching Management Practices in Border Security 5 (ECTS credits)
9.2. Stage 2
••The Global Context of European Border Security (5 ECTS credits)
••Strategic Risk & Threat Management for
European Border Security (5 ECTS credits)
••Cooperation in Strategic Border Management (10 ECTS credits)
••Researching Integrated Practices in Border
Management (10 ECTS credits)
9.3. Stage 3
••Dissertation (30 ECTS credits)

8.8. Auditing module(s) allows the student to participate in the module without the requirement to complete assessments.

51 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

10. Award
10.1. The European Joint Master’s in
Strategic Border Management
10.1.1. The Master’s Degree is awarded to a student
who has been officially registered on the Degree Programme and has fulfilled the assessment requirements of the Programme
comprising 90 ECTS credits.
10.1.2. Master Award parchments are issued by one
of the Consortium Partners and signed by
the Registrars and Rectors (or equivalent officials) of all Academic Partners of the Consortium and are accompanied by a Diploma
Supplement describing the nature, level, context, content and the grades obtained for the
modules and the dissertation as well as the
national equivalent of the degree of the Consortium Partners.

10.2. Transcripts
10.2.1. The transcript indicates both the part of the
Degree Programme attended successfully by
the student as well as the corresponding study
load.
10.2.2. Students who do not complete the Degree Programme may request directly from any of the
Academic Partners or through the Programme
Administrator a transcript of successfully
completed modules.
10.2.3. In case the transcript is issued directly by one
of the Academic Partners, the Programme Administrator and the other Academic Partners
needs to be informed.
10.2.4. Students who do not complete the Degree Programme may, upon readmission, request exemption from successfully completed modules,
provided that the ECTS credits have not been
used to meet the credit requirements of any
other major award.

52 of 128

11. Programme Progression
11.1. In order to be eligible to progress to the next
stage of the Degree Programme, a student is
required to pass all assessments (except for assessments that are deemed to have been passed
by exemption) in the preceding stages. In exceptional situations, where there are mitigating circumstances, the Board of Examiners
may recommend that a student is permitted
to progress subject to conditions which the
Board of Examiners may impose.
11.2. When students do not obtain all the requirements to proceed regularly to the following
stage having been absent for examination
with a valid reason they shall progress conditionally, if eligible, and be (re)assessed within
a predefined period.

12. Assessments
12.1. All assessments and assessment procedures
are fair, consistent, valid and reliable. Assessments are derived from the module learning
outcomes and authentic to the subject, with
transparent grading criteria that are unambiguous. Each module within the Degree Programme has an assessment strategy.
12.2. Students are familiar with and understand the
learning outcomes, the assessment strategies
and the grading criteria for all assessments.
12.3. All assessors, the Board of Examiners or anyone with a direct role in the assessment of
students will have the necessary competence
for their role.
12.4. The assessment of each module may be through
coursework, written or oral examination, assignments or combinations of these, to each of
which a letter grade is assigned. The method of
assessment can be found in the description of

Student Handbook

each module as well as in the in the appendix
to Teaching and Examination Regulations.

12.9 The Module Board informs the Programme
Administrator of the results obtained by each
student in a particular module.

12.5. Assessors state the student’s performance in
the assessment of all modules, including the
dissertation, as a letter grade. For successful
completion of each taught module and research component a letter E is required.

12.10. The teacher is required to determine the result as soon as possible after the assessment
and not later than 10 working days thereafter. The teacher publishes the grades in Moodle and the Programme Administrator shares
them with the Academic Partners’ registrars
or equivalent within 15 working days of the
assessment date. If the teacher is not able to
meet these requirements due to exceptional
circumstances, he/she must inform the Board
of Examiners and the Programme Administrator, stating the reasons for the delay. The
Programme Administrator will pass this information on to the students.

12.6. The letter grades are recorded in the student’s
academic record.
12.7. The learning outcomes of the modules are included in the description of the module together
with the method of assessment, duration of the
assessment and the assessment periods.
12.8. The following system of letter grades is used
to evaluate the student’s work. The 6-stage
matrix draws together the 6-level descriptors proposed by the Consortium (Excellent
— Fail) and refers them to the corresponding
national grading levels in each of the Consortium Partners. More information on the
grading system can be found in the Quality
Assurance Handbook.

12.11. Teachers responsible for the assessment are
required to give an explanation of the grades
awarded. Students are provided with feedback
so that they may know the strengths and weaknesses of their performance. Students are entitled to receive feedback on their assessment after
the publication of the results and before the re-

Consortium

Consortium A

Consortium B

Consortium C

Consortium D

Consortium E

Consortium F

Learning
Descriptor

Work of excellent
quality.

Work of very good
quality.

Work of good
quality.

Work of fair but below
average quality

Pass. Work that only just meets the
passing (threshold) standards

Unsatisfactory failing
work in any study-unit.

Superior performance
showing a comprehensive
understanding and
application of the subject
matter. Evidence of
considerable additional
reading/research/work

Performance is typified
by a very good working
knowledge of subject
matter. Evidence of a
considerable amount of
reading/ research/work.

Above average
performance, with
a good working
knowledge of subject
matter. Evidence of
sufficient reading/
research/work.

Considerable
but incomplete
understanding of the
subject matter. Evidence
of a fair amount of
reading/research/work.

Performance demonstrates an
Fail
understanding of the basic concepts
of the subject; evidence of limited
additional reading/research/work
This grade can also be used for work that
is assessed on a pass/fail basis. In this
case, the result is Grade Neutral — i.e.
does not impact positively or negatively
on the student’s grade average.

Estonia

A
Suurepärane

B
Väga hea

C
Hea

D
Rahuldav

E
Kasin (Avestus for Pass/Fail)

F
Puudulik

Lithuania

10
Puikiai

9
Labai Gerai

8
Gerai

7
Pakankamai

6–5
Patenkinamai* – Silpnai

1–4
Visai Blogai – Nepakankamai

Netherlands

10
Uitmuntend

9
Zeer Goed

8
Goed

7
Ruim Voldoende

6.0–5.5
Voldoende

1–5.4
Zeer Slecht – Bijna Voldoende

Spain

10
Matrícula de Honor

9
Sobresaliente

8
Notable

6.5
Aprobado

5
Aprobado

0–4
Suspenso

Latvia

10–9
izcili (with distinction) –
teicami (excellent)

8
ļoti labi (very good)

7
labi (good)

6
5–4
gandrīz labi (almost good) viduvēji (satisfactory) – gandrīz viduvēji
(almost satisfactory)

1–3
neapmierinoši
(unsatisfactory)

* This ‘telescoping’ of the Pakankamai (6) grade and the Silpnai (5) grade is seen in some international programmes where Lithuania is a participant
to fit a 5-stage grading structure

53 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

sit takes place. Scripts are retained for at least
six years by Frontex and the Academic Partners
after the results have been officially recorded.

13. Revision of the assessment
results
13.1. Once a grade has been reported to the Academic Partner, it can be changed only upon
written request from the responsible teacher.
13.2. Students may request the teacher to review
a grade that they have received and may also
ask to consult with the Module Convenor or
with their Mentor. Additionally, they may request that the decision of the revision be elaborated in a detailed report.

14. Appealing assessment
result
14.1. The Module Board and the External Examiner
representing the Board of Examiners are responsible for dealing with student appeals
against their grades
14.2. In order to make an appeal the student should
complete a Student Appeal Form and submit it
together with any supporting evidence to the
Programme Administrator within 1 week of
receiving official notification of the results.
A member of the Module Board/External Examiner not involved in the original grading
should carry out the review of the module under appeal. The work of the original teacher
who graded the assessment is not reviewable
by the reviewing academic and a recommendation to alter the results can only be made
if the change can be justified by objective
criteria.

54 of 128

14.3. Students can make an appeal concerning their
assessment results on the following grounds:
a)	academic: that the grade awarded in any
given exam or question does not reflect
the quality of the answer given;
b)	that the exam(s) was not conducted in accordance with the relevant instructions,
regulations or requirements;
c)	where new evidence is provided of circumstances which might have adversely affected their performance in the exams;
d)	arithmetical grade check.
14.4. The student can request an arithmetical grade
check if he/she believes that there has been an
administrative error when the grades were being recorded. Students are advised that, in the
event of any form of administrative error being discovered, it must be corrected, whether
it results in the grade in question being adjusted upwards or downwards.
14.5. Students are reminded that if they believe
that their performance in exams may be affected by illness (or by other personal circumstances) they should report the matter to the
teacher/instructor before sitting the exams.
Students should not wait for their results before deciding to notify the Programme Administrator of the situation.
14.6. Information regarding mitigating circumstances received after the exams will not be
considered as grounds for an appeal, unless
there are exceptional reasons why this information could not be provided at the time. All
appeals due to extraordinary mitigating circumstances are only valid when accompanied by comprehensive supporting evidence,
including detailed medical certificates where
appropriate, and a full explanation of the reason for the original non-declaration.
14.7. The decision of the Module Board is communicated to the student within 5 days by the
Programme Administrator, with notice of the

Student Handbook

outcome of the appeal also communicated to
the Board of Examiners
14.8. On exhaustion of the procedures in relation
to the appeals, students are entitled to pursue any further proceedings offered by the Academic Partners.

16.3. Expulsion from the programme is equivalent
in all respects to failing it and makes the student’s record unsatisfactory. A notation of
EXLD (excluded) on the transcript indicates
that the student was not permitted to continue in the course and receives no further
ECTS. Students excluded from a programme
are denied any right to further course evaluation, including re-sits.

15. Re-assessment
15.1. Only those students who obtain a fail grade
(F) in an assessment at the first attempt
are allowed one re-assessment of the failed
assessment.
15.2. In principle, the re-assessment takes place at
the end of each stage, unless otherwise specified in the Programme Schedule (Academic
Calendar).
15.3. Only the final module grade will be shown on
the Transcript without indicating whether it
was obtained through a re-assessment.
15.4. Students who fail to obtain the ECTS for any
module after re-assessment are deemed to
have failed the Programme and are required
to withdraw from the programme.

16. Expulsion from the
Programme
16.1. In cases where a student has failed the programme as stated in 15.4, the Programme
Board, in consultation with the Board of Examiners, decides that the student must discontinue his/her studies. Consortium partners
and the Sending Authority are also informed.
16.2. A student may also be expelled from the programme if the student has committed academic dishonesty.

17. Appeals against expulsion
from the Programme
17.1. Students should be aware that the only possible outcome of a successful appeal against
expulsion is that they are permitted to repeat
the Degree Programme in the next iteration
starting from the point where they left off,
provided that the programme is offered again.
Students cannot appeal to progress onto the
next stage of the programme, unless the timing allows for the requirements for progressing to the next stage of the programme to be
met.
17.2. Appeals will be considered on the following
grounds:
a)	Where there is new evidence of mitigating
circumstances which the student had been
unable for valid reasons to disclose before
the Programme Board made the decision.
b)	Where there is evidence that the Programme Board had acted unreasonably
in requiring the student to be expelled
from the Programme.
c)	Where there is evidence that the procedure on expulsion from the Programme
has not been correctly followed.
17.3. Appeals against expulsion from the Programme are reviewed by an Expulsion Appeal
Subcommittee appointed by the Governing
Board as detailed in the Quality Assurance
Handbook.

55 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

17.4. It must be stressed that all appeals should be
supported by a detailed reasoned case stating
why the student should be allowed to repeat
the iteration. This must include comprehensive supporting evidence of any exceptional
extenuating circumstances.
17.5. On exhaustion of the procedures in relation to
appeals, students are entitled to pursue any
further proceedings offered by the Academic
Partners.

18. Submission of Written
Work
Students are responsible for ensuring that required written course work is submitted and
received within the specified timeframe. All
work is submitted electronically through an
Internet-based plagiarism detection service
such as Turnitin.

19. Plagiarism, Collusion and
Cheating
19.1. The Consortium views academic misconduct
and plagiarism as serious breaches of academic standards. Plagiarism is defined as:
‘The incorporation by a student in work for assessment of material which is not their own,
in the sense that all or a substantial part of the
work has been copied without any adequate attempt at attribution, or has been incorporated
as if it were the student’s own when in fact it
is wholly or substantially the work of another
person or persons’. Allegations or suspected
cases of academic misconduct or plagiarism
are investigated and managed in accordance
with the procedures detailed below.

56 of 128

19.2. The Consortium recognises that the open exchange of ideas plays a vital role in academic
endeavour, as often it is only through discussion with others that one is fully able to process information or to crystallize an elusive
concept. Therefore, students generally are
encouraged to engage in conversations with
their teachers and fellow students about their
modules, their research, and even their assignments. These kinds of discussions and
debates in some ways represent the essence of
life in an academic community. And yet, it is
important for all to acknowledge clearly when
they have relied upon or incorporated the work
of others. To ensure the proper use of sources
while at the same time recognising and preserving the importance of the academic dialogue, the following policy is adopted:
19.3. It is expected that all home assignments, projects, reports, papers, dissertations and examinations and any other work submitted
for academic credit will be the student’s own.
Students should always take great care to distinguish their own ideas and knowledge from
information derived from sources. The term
‘sources’ includes not only primary and secondary material published in print or online, but
also information and opinions gained directly
from other people. Quotations must be placed
properly within quotation marks and must be
cited fully. In addition, all paraphrased material must be acknowledged completely. Whenever ideas or facts are derived from a student’s
reading and research or from a student’s own
writings, the sources must be indicated.
19.4. Students must also comply with the policy on
collaboration established for each module, as
set forth in the module syllabus or on the Programme’s website. Unless otherwise stated in
the module documentation, when collaboration is permitted within a module, students
must acknowledge any collaboration and its
extent in all submitted work; however, students need not acknowledge discussion with
others of general approaches to the assignment

Student Handbook

or assistance with proofreading. If the module
documentation or website does not include a
policy on collaboration, students may assume
that collaboration in the completion of assignments is permitted. Collaboration in the completion of examinations is always prohibited.
19.5. The responsibility for learning the proper forms
of citation lies with the individual student.
Students are expected to be familiar with the
Harvard Guide to Using Sources (http://usingsources.fas.harvard.edu) and with the Legal
Citation Guidelines of the College of Europe.
Students who are in any doubt about the preparation of academic work should consult their
teacher, Module Convenor or Mentor before
the work is prepared or submitted.
19.6. Plagiarism is defined as the unacknowledged
use, as one’s own, of the work of another person, whether or not such work has been published or paid for.
19.7. Major cases of plagiarism include:
a)	Significant unacknowledged copying of
text, diagrams, tables, images or other
material from any published or unpublished material, lecture slides or handouts,
whether such material is in manuscript,
print or electronic form.
b)	Acquisition of work, designs, or concepts
(including buying or commissioning work
from third parties/professional agencies)
prepared by one or more others and presenting the work in whole or in part as
the student’s own work.
c)	Significant amounts of patch writing
(i.e. changing only some of the words, or
the order of the words, or redrawing diagrams, etc.) with or without citation.
Patch writing should not be confused with
paraphrasing, which is the appropriate
(and acknowledged) rewriting of ideas present in a source text in the student’s own
words and should be actively encouraged
as a feature reflecting maturity in academic writing.

19.8. Examples of major plagiarism include:
a)	Copying text or a diagram from another
source, failing to enclose the copied text
within quotation marks, or taking somebody else’s ideas, and failing to correctly
acknowledge the source of the text, diagram, or ideas.
b)	Purchasing a paper or report; paying others to prepare an assignment but then submitting the work under the student’s own
name.
c)	Copying text but replacing some words or
changing word order, whether or not the
source is correctly acknowledged; re-drawing diagrams and failing to acknowledge
the source.
19.9. Minor offences of plagiarism include:
a)	Individual in-line citations lacking corresponding entries in the references section,
or failure to compile a references section.
b)	Demarcated text without in-line citation
or instances of incomplete or inconsistent
inline citation.
c)	Incorrectly written entries in a reference
list, when this results in the reader’s inability to create a correspondence between
the entries in the reference list and in-line
citations.
d)	Inconsistent citation style, when this results in the reader’s inability to identify
sources.
e)	Unacknowledged borrowing that does
not contribute significantly to the text in
question.
19.10. Collusion occurs when two or more students
collaborate to produce work, where such collaboration is not permitted.
19.11. The examples below indicate the range of acceptable behaviour, but should not be taken
as a comprehensive list:
a)	In supervised examinations, it is expected
that students work individually, and no
sharing of ideas or material is allowed;
only reference to permitted resources is

57 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

allowed (such as the text book in an openbook exam) when indicated in the rubric
of the exam paper.
b)	In home assignments, unless otherwise
specified, it is expected that students work
individually, and no sharing of ideas or
material is allowed; however, reference
to publicly available information is permissible (with appropriate citation).
c)	If a home assignment is an individual
assignment, students are permitted to
communicate orally so that the problem
assigned is understood — however, students are not permitted to share material.
d)	If a home assignment is specifically groupwork, it is generally accepted that the work
involved will be divided equitably between
the students working together; however,
students are still expected to collectively
take responsibility for the content of their
work, and therefore to know and understand the work produced by their team
mates. It is not permissible to have students who do not make a sufficient contribution, or who fail to allow their team
mates to contribute. Also, communication
between teams is generally not allowed,
except for oral communication so that the
problem is understood. If students working in a group are expected to submit individual work for assessment, then students
must acknowledge which aspects of the
work are the results of group effort and
which are their own. It therefore follows
that the students take individual responsibility for the individually submitted contribution, but collective responsibility for
the aspects of the submitted work that required a joint effort.
e)	In individual project work, each student is
assessed on his or her own contribution;
however, the nature of the work often demands assistance from others. Such assistance must be acknowledged, so that the
student’s individual contribution may be
properly assessed.

58 of 128

f)	Any authorised deviations from the limitations of permitted collaboration as specified in the assignment description must be
documented by the study-unit coordinator.
19.12. Examples of collusion include but are not limited to:
a)	‘Borrowing’ an assignment written by another student and basing your assignment
on the borrowed one.
b)	Sharing results of experiments/work performed by others and incorporating them
into your own work as though you had performed the experiments/work yourself.
c)	Sharing solutions to problems, or other
sections of a report or assignment.
d)	A number of students colluding on an assignment intended to be performed as an
individual assignment, such that each student works on a part of the assignment but
submits individual reports covering the
work performed by all colluding students.
19.13. Students who, for whatever reason, submit
work which is either not their own or does
not have clear attribution of its sources will
be subject to disciplinary action, up to and
including requirement to withdraw from the
Programme.
19.14. Definition of Cheating
Cheating is defined as fraud, deceit or dishonesty in an academic assignment, or using or
attempting to use materials, or assisting others in using materials, which are prohibited or
inappropriate in the context of the academic
assignment in question, such as:
a)	Copying or attempting to copy from others during an exam or on an assignment.
b)	Communicating answers with another
person during an exam.
c)	Using unauthorised materials, prepared
answers, written notes, or concealed information during an exam.
d)	Allowing others to do an assignment or portion of an assignment for you, including the
use of a commercial term-paper service.

Student Handbook

e)	Submission of the same assignment from
a different course without prior approval
of all the teachers involved.
f)	Collaborating on an exam or assignment
with any other person without prior approval from the teacher.
g)	Taking an exam for another person or having someone take an exam for you.

••Students should also not retain or refer to
any books or papers during an examination
except with the express permission of the
instructor or Teaching Staff.
••Eating and drinking are not permitted in
any examination room.
••Personal belongings should be put away and
all electronic devices should be turned off.

19.15. Cases of plagiarism, collusion and cheating
are examined by the Academic Partner responsible for delivering that part of the study programme in which the plagiarism took place.
In the case of the dissertation, the instances
are examined by the Academic Partner from
which the dissertation supervisor comes. Each
Academic Partner has procedures for plagiarism, collusion and cheating in place.

20.2. In the event of a fire, students should take their
personal belongings and leave their exam and
meet in the location announced at the beginning of the exam. Students should not discuss the exam with other students during
the emergency procedures. Violation of the
examination rules or dishonesty in an examination may result in a student being required
to withdraw from the Programme. Students
who fail to obey instructions are liable to disciplinary action.

19.16. After the examination of the alleged case of
plagiarism, collusion or cheating, the respective Academic Partner advises the Programme
Board how to deal with the particular case.
19.17. On the advice of the Academic Partner the Programme Board decides what measures should
be taken.

20. Conduct of Students
During Examinations
20.1. Students should adhere to the following rules
during the administration of examinations:
••During bathroom breaks, students should
not use computer terminals, telephones
(land line or cellular), or other communications devices.
••Students cannot exit the exam room for
the first 30 minutes of the examination.
••In order to avoid any possible suggestion
of improper behaviour during an examination, students should refrain from communicating with other students while an
exam is in progress.

21. Late Arrival to an
Examination
A student who is late for an exam may be
refused admission and reported as absent.
No one will be admitted to an examination
if any student has already left the examination room. Ordinarily, latecomers will not be
allowed to make up lost time.

22. Illnesses During an
Examination
22.1. Any student, who becomes ill during an exam,
should report the illness immediately to the
instructor/teacher. An ill student will be kept
under supervision until able to resume the examination. Upon resumption of the examination, the student will be allowed only the
balance of time remaining.

59 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

22.2. If the student requires immediate medical attention and thus cannot resume the examination, the procedure on the Absence from
Examination or Non-Submission of Assignments applies.

23. Attendance
23.1. Student attendance in each learning activity
is compulsory and is recorded and monitored.
Students who attend less than 80% of contact
time of a module may render themselves ineligible to take the assessment for that module, in which case a failing grade is recorded.
23.2. A list of attendance will be provided by the
Module Convenor, on the basis of the information given by the teachers after the module has finished, to the Board of Examiners.

24. Absence from
Examinations or NonSubmission of Assignments
24.1. If a student is absent from examinations held
in the pre-defined period for a proven reason
that the Board of Examiners decides to be valid
(for instance, illnesses or being faced with an
extraordinary situation), they are allowed to
take the missed examination at a predefined
later period as a first sit or second attempt depending on the case, at a time specified by the
Board of Examiners.
24.2. When the mode of assessment is by assignment, and there are valid reasons for non-submission of assignments, such validity being
decided on by the Board of Examiners, students shall be given an extension of the deadline as proposed by the Module Convenor.

60 of 128

24.3. If a student is ill or faced with an extraordinary situation he/she (or his/her representative) should always inform the Programme
Administrator or Module Convenor about their
absence from examination(s) or non-submission of assignments by email within 24 hours.
The Programme Administrator or Module Convenor informs the student and the teachers by
email that he/she has received this information. Written proof of absence from examinations or non-submission of assignment (such
as a medical certificate) has to be submitted
to the Programme Administrator or Module
Convenor as soon as possible.
24.4. Unavoidable absence from an examination
resulting from causes other than illness
should be reported and explained in advance
to the Programme administrator or Module
Convenor.
24.5. It is then for the Board of Examiners to decide whether or not to allow the student to
take the examination as scheduled or at a
later stage and/or to make up for the authorised absence from the modules. The student
will be informed about the decision.
24.6. A student who is absent from an examination
or does not submit an excuse or who offers a
reason which is not considered sufficient to
justify the absence or non-submission, fails
the examination or assessment and receives
a failing grade (F).

25. Incomplete Grade
25.1. Occasionally, extenuating circumstances occur that prevent students from completing the
work during a given module, such as when a
student suffers extended illness or unforeseeable circumstances that make it impossible to
meet module requirements on time. In such
occasions, a student may apply for an incomplete grade for the module. Assigning an in-

Student Handbook

complete grade is at the discretion of the Board
of Examiners and is available for a maximum
duration of one stage following the stage in
which the original module was offered. Additional time granted to complete course work
will normally not exceed the amount of time
lost due to the extenuating circumstances. Final approval or denial of the request is made
by the Board of Examiners.
25.2. An incomplete grade request (form available
from the Programme Administrator and on
Moodle). Application for an incomplete grade
must be made prior to the end of the module.
Failure to apply before the end of the module
will result in denial of the request for an incomplete grade unless a petition is submitted
and approved allowing the incomplete grade
based on circumstances that prevented filing the application within the stated deadline. The teacher must indicate on the form
the work to be completed, due date, and grade
to be assigned if the work is not completed by
the due date. An incomplete module not completed by the date indicated will be changed
to the grade assigned on the incomplete form.
25.3. Extenuating circumstances for the purpose
of granting additional time to complete module work include death in the family, serious
accident or illness resulting in an inability to
do the required work, unusual circumstances
surrounding the birth of a child, and similarly mitigating circumstances which could
not have been prevented or anticipated by the
student and were completely beyond his/her
control.

26. Examinations in Absentia
26.1. In exceptional cases, students who cannot be
present at the time of an exam or reassessment
examination may request permission from the
Board of Examiners to take the examination
in absentia. Applications are available from

the Programme Administrator. Before petitioning to take an examination in absentia,
students should consult their Mentor.
26.2. Ordinarily, an examination administered in
absentia must be given on the same day and
at the same time as the scheduled examination of the Programme and at a place acceptable to the Board of Examiners.
26.3. Students are responsible for arranging for a
proctor at the examination site. The proctor
is subject to approval by the Board of Examiners. Ordinarily, he/she would be a professional
in education (an instructor or administrator).
The rules and regulations that apply to examinations within the Programme also apply to
in absentia examinations.
26.4. Frontex is not responsible for any fees incurred
in the administration of examinations taken
in absentia, including proctoring fees, postage, and any extraordinary costs incurred in
the delivery or administration thereof (room
rentals, media rentals, etc.).

27. Extension of studies
27.1. The Programme Board may grant students
enrolled in the Degree Programme an extension of up to six (6) months in order to enable
them to complete their studies.
27.2. In special circumstances and on the recommendation of the Board of Examiners, the
Programme Board may grant students a further extension of up to (2) two years in order
to enable them to complete their studies.
27.3. Requests for an extension of studies signed
by the students and the respective Sending
Authority, are submitted to the Programme
Administrator.

61 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

27.4. Any request approved by the Programme
Board is shared with the Academic Partners’
registrars (or equivalent) and the Sending
Authority.

29.2. In case of suspension of studies for justified
reasons (medical, operational, personal, etc.)
and when the 6 month period has elapsed,
the Sending Authority may submit a request
to Frontex.

27.5. All decisions by the Programme Board affecting the duration of the Degree Programme for
a student are subject to approval by the Sending Authority.

29.3. Open spaces for re-admissions are part of the
procedure of the resources strategy management of the Governing Board.

28. Suspension of studies

29.4. Students are encouraged to consult their Mentor when suspending their studies and/or applying for re-admissions.

28.1. For well justified reasons a student may be
granted a suspension of studies for a definite
period. In such cases, the period of suspension is not taken into consideration for calculating the period of enrolment in the Degree
Programme.

30. Mentoring and Student
Support

28.2. If it is not practicable for the student to join
the Degree Programme following the suspension, the student may be allowed to join
a subsequent iteration if and when the Degree Programme is next offered.

30.1. The Consortium is committed to providing a
supportive and positive environment for all
students. However, there might be times in
everybody’s life when things do not go as well
as they might wish. In such times, there is
comprehensive support available to help with
all kinds of different problems.

28.3. Requests for suspension of studies must be
signed by the students and the respective
Sending Authority and be submitted to the
Programme Administrator.
28.4. Any request approved by the Programme Board
is shared with the University registrars and
the Sending Authority.

29. Readmission into the
Programme
29.1. Students who drop-out of the programme
without any valid reason shall not be re-admitted into the programme.

62 of 128

30.2. All students have confidential access to the
Module Convenors regarding academic issues,
appeals, grievances and all aspects of discipline within the Degree Programme. Students are also always encouraged to discuss
any matters with the Programme Administrator who should be the first point of reference if any problems/issues arise.
30.3. Module Convenors, the Programme Administrator and Programme Coordinators within
the scope of each of their roles are available to:
a)	provide general academic advice in case of
concerns with regard to academic ability/
study problems;
b)	give students help and advice on non-academic matters and refer them for further
assistance if required;

Student Handbook

c)	assist students with orientation to the
Programme;
d)	offer support in questions related to financial, travel and accommodation issues.
30.4. Students have a direct contact with the Programme Administrator, a Frontex representative, as well as with the Programme
Coordinators, the Academic Partner’s representatives, who are responsible for the administrative running of the Programme and who
will provide guidance to students from the
submission of their application right through
to graduation.
30.5. In addition to the Programme Administrator,
students can also always contact their Mentor,
Module Convenor or Programme Coordinator
in case of any questions and/or concerns.
30.6. Every Module Convenor is responsible for mentoring 2-3 students per iteration of the programme. Students are assigned to a Mentor
on a random basis by the Programme Board.
30.7. Module Convenors are assigned as Mentors by
the Programme Board before the start of each
iteration of the programme
30.8. The Consortium recognises that mentoring of
students by Teaching Staff is an integral part
of the graduate experience for both. Teaching
Staff mentoring is broader than advising a
student as to the programme of study to fulfil programme requirements and is distinct
from formal instruction in a given discipline.
30.9. Mentoring encompasses more than serving
as a role model. The Consortium has outlined
the following mentoring roles to guide the
relationship between faculty and students.
Teaching Staff and students must realise that,
while the Module Convenor will be the primary Mentor throughout the duration of the
programme, many of the mentoring ‘functions’ defined below may be performed by
the programme teaching staff other than the

Module Convenor. An important consequence
of this is that teaching staff must realise that
much of their interaction with all students
has an important mentoring component to
it. Students also have responsibilities to ensure successful mentoring and these are also
indicated below.
30.10. Mentoring is defined as:
a)	guiding students through Degree Programme requirements;
b)	providing a clear map of the Programme
requirements from the beginning, making clear the nature of the requirements
and assessments, and defining a timeline
for their completion;
c)	providing clear guidelines for starting
and finishing dissertation work, including encouraging the timely initiation of
the dissertation, as well as exploring a
wide range of possible fields of research
throughout the Programme when choosing a topic for the dissertation;
d)	encouraging an open exchange of ideas,
including pursuit of the student’s ideas;
e)	
checking regularly on the student’s
progress;
f)	evaluating clearly the strengths and weaknesses of the student’s academic performance and research competences;
g)	providing and discussing clear criteria for
authorship of collaborative research and
project work;
h)	being aware of the student’s learning and
research needs and providing assistance
in obtaining required resources;
i)	providing constructive feedback and advice on the student’s performance;
j)	guiding the students through professional
development;
k)	providing guidance and serving as a role
model for upholding the highest ethical
standards;
l)	advising students on the fair and equitable distribution of tasks and workload
within a team

63 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

m)	encouraging peer learning, cooperation,
team work and a stimulating learning atmosphere within the student group;
n)	encouraging students to keep in contact with each other throughout the Programme, meet online, provide mutual
support, seek and provide constructive
feedback, consult on their group and individual work;
o)	facilitating interactions with other students, the faculty, and in the wider professional community;
p)	advising the student in all matters related
to the Programme;
q)	providing support and advice to students
on non-academic matters and referring
them for further assistance if required.
30.11. As partners in the mentoring relationship, students have responsibilities as well. As mentees, students should:
a)	Be aware of their own learning and mentoring needs and how those change
throughout the duration of the programme. Students should discuss these
changing needs with their Mentors.
b)	Recognise that one teaching staff member may not be able to satisfy all of a student’s mentoring needs. They should seek
assistance from multiple individuals that
are able to fulfil the mentoring roles described above.
c)	Recognise that their mentoring needs
must respect their Mentor’s other responsibilities and time commitments.
d)	Maintain and seek regular communication with their Mentors, especially their
Module Convenor.

30.12. Mentoring Timeline
End of August/ Early
September

•	Mentors receive their list of mentees.
•	Mentors e-mail their mentees to introduce themselves, offer to
answer any immediate questions and arrange a group meeting
during Opening Ceremony/Orientation.

Opening Ceremony/
Orientation

•	Mentors meet with their group at the Frontex HQ to answer
questions and to help the mentees to get to know one another
•	Mentors attend the module orientation events if requested.

Throughout the entire
iteration of the programme

•	Mentors are available via e-mail to answer any questions and
pass on useful information as requested

Beginning and end
of each stage

•	Mentors offer to get together with their mentoring group to
catch up and offer advice.

31. Student Records
31.1. The Programme Administrator routinely
maintains student records describing and
documenting their work and progress. These
education records generally include records
such as permanent and local addresses, emergency contact information, admissions records, enrolment status, grades, reports and
evaluations, completion of requirements and
progress toward the degree, records of disciplinary actions, and other correspondence with
or concerning the student.
31.2. The responsibility for keeping students’ data
and performance records accurate and up-todate is entrusted to the Programme Administrator who disseminates this information to
each Academic Partner in a timely manner.
31.3. Each Academic Partner must maintain detailed records for all recipients of the joint
award. The Programme Administrator in close
collaboration with the Programme Coordinators of the Academic Partners or Complementary Entities ensure that the student records
kept by each of the Academic Partners are
identical in substance and nature.

32. Access to students records
32.1. All students have direct access to their own
academic and personal records.

64 of 128

Student Handbook

32.2. Students should direct any questions they
have about the accuracy of records to the
Programme Administrator. If questions still
remain, the matter may be referred to the
Registrars of the Academic Partners by the
Programme Administrator. The official grading sheets kept by the Programme Administrator are the official record of the results of
assessments.
32.3. In case of any discrepancies between this official record and the grades presented to students in other ways, the grades in the official
Frontex record apply.

33. Data Protection
33.1. The Consortium ensures that applicants’ personal data are processed in accordance with
Regulation (EC) n° 45/2001 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2000 on the protection of individuals with
regard to the processing of personal data by
the Community institutions and bodies and
on the free movement of such data, OJ L 8/01,
12.1.2001). The purpose of processing personal
data is to enable the admissions procedure.
The admissions procedure is conducted under
the responsibility of the Admission Panel. The
controller for personal data protection purposes is the Chair of the Programme Board.
The information provided by the applicants
will be accessible to the members of the Programme Board. For enrolled students: data
is kept for a period of 10 years. All applicants
may exercise their right of access to and right
to rectify personal data. In the case of identification data, applicants can rectify the data
at any time during the procedure. In the case
of data related to the admissibility criteria,
the right of rectification cannot be exercised
after the closing date for submission of applications. Should the applicant have any query
concerning the processing of his/her personal
data and has substantiated requests, he/she

shall address them to the Programme Administrator by email.
33.2. Applicants may have recourse at any time
to the European Data Protection Supervisor
(edps@edps.europa.eu).

34. Frontex Code of Conduct
All students and staff of the programme must
observe the articles of the Frontex Code of Conduct during their periods of study or work on
the Programme. The Frontex Code of Conduct
is available at http://www.frontex.europa.eu/
assets/Publications/General/Frontex_Code_of_
Conduct.pdf and is also available on Moodle.

35. Discrimination
Discriminating against individuals on the
basis of colour, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, religion, age, nationality or race
and ethnic origin, political beliefs, veteran
status, or disability unrelated to job or Programme requirements is strictly prohibited.

36. Grievance
36.1. The student Grievance Procedure is available
to any student who seeks to resolve any grievance involving an alleged violation directly
affecting that student by any member of the
Programme while acting in an official capacity (e.g. faculty member, administrator, staff
member, student), of any of the written policies of the Programme.
36.2. On exhaustion of the procedures in relation
to grievances of the Consortium, students are
entitled to pursue any further procedures offered by the Academic Partners.

65 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

The Grievance process is as follows:
36.3. Phase One: Informal Resolution:
Students wishing to object to an alleged violation of the Programme’s policies and procedures must first contact, within 2 weeks of
any occurrence giving rise to the grievance
or the time when they could reasonably have
learned of such occurrence, the person responsible for the matter being objected to and attempt to resolve the problem informally. A
student who is uncertain about how to proceed
may consult the Programme Administrator
or the Mentor who identifies the appropriate
person. At the request of the grievant or respondent, the Programme Administrator arranges for a meeting of the parties, attends
such meeting(s), and the Frontex Project Manager who assumes the role of a Mediator attempts to resolve the problem.
36.4. Phase Two: Formal Review:
If the attempt to resolve a matter informally
is unsuccessful, the student may submit to
the Programme Administrator (preferably
within 15 working days of the first direct contact he or she had with the Programme Administrator, provided that it was possible to
hold the informal mediation meeting) a formal written grievance. The Programme Board
appoints a subcommittee of 3 members to investigate the grievance. Detailed description
of the Grievance Subcommittee can be found
in the Quality Assurance Handbook.
36.4.1. A grievance report must consist of the
following:
••the specif ic w ritten Programme
policy(policies)/procedure(s) allegedly
violated;
••a description of the facts and evidence supporting the allegation;
••a brief history of the attempts to resolve
the grievance;
••a description of the redress that the Grievant seeks.

66 of 128

36.4.2. The Subcommittee meets (such meeting may
be a virtual meeting) with the Grievant and
with such other persons as deemed appropriate for the purpose of ascertaining the facts
and attempting to resolve the grievance
36.4.3. The Subcommittee may declare the grievance
to be:
••Valid, which means that the grievance is
accepted
••Invalid, which means that the grievance
is rejected
••Inadmissible, this means that as a result
of procedural shortcomings, the objection
will not be taken into consideration
36.4.4. The decision may also be divided: the grievance may be deemed partially invalid and/
or partially inadmissible. This will be clearly
stated in the decision.
36.4.5. The term within which a written decision on
a grievance must be made known is 30 days,
starting from the date on which the complaint
is registered by the Programme Administrator, with copies to the grievant, the person
deemed responsible, the Programme Board
and the Governing Board. The decision shall
include findings of fact, a statement of the
policy that is alleged to have been violated, an
opinion on the validity of the grievance and,
if appropriate, remedial recommendations.
36.4.6. In special circumstances the procedure may
take longer. The student will be kept informed
on a regular basis.
36.5. Phase Three: The student may appeal the decision of the Programme Board to the Governing
Board by submitting both the written decision
and a letter of complaint to the Chair of the
Governing Board within 10 working days of
receiving the written decision from the Programme Board.

Student Handbook

36.5.1. A complaint must consist of the following:
••the written decision of the Programme
Board that is being appealed against;
••the specific written Programme policy(ies)/
procedure(s) allegedly violated;
••a description of the facts and evidence supporting the allegation;
••a description of the redress that the Grievant seeks.
36.5.2. The role of the Governing Board in such matters is narrow and strictly procedural. Its function is limited to rendering a decision as to
whether the Programme Board did or did not
substantively adhere to the specific written
policies or procedures cited by the Grievant
in its management of a matter.
36.5.3. The Governing Board cannot consider a complaint asking for a review of the fairness, merits, or other subjective aspects of the decision
and neither can it substitute its judgment
for that of the Programme Board. Furthermore, the Governing Board cannot consider
any issues or policies other than those presented in the original grievance. The Governing Board’s decision is relevant only to the
specific policy questions cited in the grievance and should not be construed as being a
statement on the overall manner in which a
matter should be managed or as limiting the
Programme Board’s authority to apply its policies, procedures and judgment.
36.5.4. The Governing Board forms a subcommittee
to review the written materials. A detailed
description of the Grievance Appeal Subcommittee can be found in the Quality Assurance
Handbook. The subcommittee may declare the
appeal to be:
••valid, which means that the grievance is
accepted
••invalid, which means that the grievance
is rejected
••inadmissible, which means that as a result of procedural shortcomings, the appeal will not be taken into consideration.

36.5.5. The decision may also be divided: the appeal
may be deemed partially invalid and/or partially inadmissible. This will be clearly stated
in the decision.
36.5.6. The subcommittee advises the Governing Board
on how to deal with the appeal, following
which the Governing Board makes a decision.
The student will be informed of the decision
within four weeks following the decision.
36.5.7. The decision of the Governing Board is final.

37. Suggestions
Students are given the opportunity to give
suggestions for improvement, if necessary
anonymously, to the Module Convenor and/
or the Programme Administrator. The Module
Convenor and/or the Programme Administrator forward the suggestion to the responsible person.

38. Feedback
38.1. Anonymous feedback from all students is
gathered at module level by the Module Convenor and after each stage of the Degree Programme by the Programme Administrator.
38.2. Further details with regard to the feedback
procedures can be found in the Quality Assurance Handbook

39. Student Representatives
39.1. Given the distributed nature of Programme
delivery, the Consortium recognises the importance of student representation on the Programme Board, the Governing Board and the
Quality Assurance Committee (QAC).

67 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

39.2. Student representatives are students who are
chosen by their peers to act as representative
to the Governing Board, the Programme Board
and the Quality Assurance Committee. They
act as a formal channel of communication
between the students they represent and the
Boards and the Committee.
39.3. The role of the Student representative is:
a)	to be advocate for students;
b)	to provide feedback on various aspects of
the Programme and the student experience both to the Programme and Governing Boards and the QAC, and to the student
body;
c)	to take an active role in quality assurance
by participating in the Quality Assurance
Committee.

where their contact information will be (Moodle) and reminded of the representatives’ role.
39.7. Equal Opportunities
39.7.1. All students must have an equal opportunity to
put themselves forward to become representatives. This requires effective communication,
fair timing and placement of the election, and
absolutely no discrimination on any grounds
by those overseeing the election.
39.7.2. To ensure that students from all Member
States are represented at the Governing and
Programme Boards, it is strongly encouraged
that students from Member States not represented in previous iterations of the Programme put themselves forward to become
representatives.

39.4. Elections of the Student Representatives
39.4.1. Student Representatives should be appointed
as soon as possible after the start of the Programme, ideally during the Orientation
session
39.5. Number of Representatives
39.5.1. There should be four (4) student representatives, two (2) of which serve as reserves.
39.6. Election Process
39.6.1. Students who would like to put themselves
forward should make themselves known preferably in advance of the day of the election.
39.6.2. On the day of the election, each candidate
should be given an opportunity to speak to his
or her peers. Each candidate should be given
an equal amount of time. The ballot can be
conducted either by a show of hands or by a
secret ballot.
39.6.3. Once the representatives have been elected,
the students present should be informed about

68 of 128

39.7.3. The entire process must also be effectively and
accurately communicated from the outset.
39.8. Low Participation / Difficulties in Using Elections for Selection
It is envisaged that elections will form the
basis for selecting students to act as representatives as this method allows equality of
opportunity for all students. However, there
are cases where elections are impractical, perhaps due to small numbers. In these cases, an
alternative method of fair selection may be
used, so long as all students have the same
opportunities to become representatives if
they so wish. For example, when only one or
two volunteers come forward, they may be appointed as the student representatives by the
Governing Board.

40. Alumni Network
40.1. The mission of the Alumni Network is to provide networking opportunities through various initiatives and events that will foster

Student Handbook

relationships among alumni, students, Teaching Staff and Frontex.
40.2. The Alumni will stay connected via an online community in Moodle, where alumni
and current students can connect with new
and old colleagues, receive information about
various events, opportunities and network
professionally.

c)	make connections and socialise with other
students, the Mentors and the Teaching
Staff;
d)	orientate themselves with all student support services and resources;
e)	become familiar with the Programme’s
rules and regulations

42. Students Mobility
41. Opening Ceremony and
Orientation
41.1. The opening ceremony and the orientation
programme provide the opportunity for students to prepare for the academic, social and
personal aspects of the Programme.
41.2. The opening ceremony will be held at the Frontex HQ in Warsaw at the beginning of each
iteration of the Degree Programme.
41.3. During the opening ceremony, students are
welcomed and provided with the first opportunity to make connection with other students,
Teaching Staff, Mentors and representatives of
the Programme. Students also receive all the
necessary information about the programme
including all the relevant rules and regulations, training on the usage of Moodle and
the Frontex Code of Conduct, the structure
of the programme and its requirements.

42.1. mobility is an essential and integral part of
the Degree Programme. Students are expected
to attend lectures and other learning activities at the venues designated by Academic
Partners. For an exact schedule of the contact
time please refer to the programme schedule.
42.2. All costs related to the Degree Programme
including enrolment fees, travel expenses
(including local travel), accommodation and
meals are covered by Frontex.
42.3. Once admitted to the Degree Programme, students are provided with detailed information
related to administrative and logistical arrangements related to the Degree Programme.

43. Further Information
For further information please contact:
ejmsbm@frontex.europa.eu

41.4. All students must participate in the general
orientation sessions carried out before the
start of every module at the premises of the
Academic Partner or Complementary Entity
where the module takes places.
41.5. At orientation the students:
a)	meet with a Module Convenor, a Mentor,
and the Programme Coordinator;
b)	learn about the delivering institutions’
services;

69 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

70 of 128

European Joint Master’s
in Strategic Border Management

Policies & Procedures

Dissertation
Guidelines

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

The aim of this document is to guide students following
the European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management through the dissertation stage. Given that this
guide cannot cover all the aspects related to the dissertation in detail, students are encouraged to pursue additional reading and are advised to discuss any further
queries they may have with their assigned supervisor
and co-supervisor.

72 of 128

Students are encouraged to read this guide before the
commencement of the dissertation stage as this guide
should provide an idea of what is expected from them
at this stage of the Joint Master’s Programme. Any issues that students are unsure about should be clarified
with the assigned supervisors as early as possible in order not to hinder their progress.

Dissertation Guidelines

1. Purpose of the Dissertation
1.1. The purpose of this dissertation is to develop
the ability to select, interpret and apply methodology suitable to the chosen field and draw
on disciplinary literature to synthesise research. It will enhance the students’ ability
to reflect on their own practice with reference
to international research in the area of border management. Students will develop critical awareness of previous work in the chosen
field and contribute to knowledge by exploring, advancing or modifying some additional
areas. This means that the students are able
to apply and integrate knowledge and problem-solving skills to deal with complex situations in their organisation or in unfamiliar
environments. They will be able to present
and critique their work in a clear, structured
style using logical argument.
1.2. The dissertation forms an essential component of this Master’s degree. It is a part of the
learning process and is considered to be a test
of academic skills and the culmination of the
Master’s Programme. In the dissertation the
student has to demonstrate that he/she is capable of carrying out research according to academic standards and of developing his/her
own perspective on the subject studied, and
also of contributing to new academic insights
by independent research.
1.3. Incorporating research in the Master’s Programme also aims to translate research into
practice. Information based on systematic research would make strategic decision-making
more effective. In the end it will also stimulate the development of a common border
management culture. At the same time, research would be fruitful for creating relations
and cross-fertilisation between practice and
academic fields.
1.4. The dissertation is the last stage of the Master’s Programme, but it could also be considered as the first step for a follow-up doctoral

study. Academic Partners should create conditions which allow students to continue to a
Doctorate in the areas covered by this Master’s
Programme. Furthermore, the teaching staff,
mentors and module convenors shall ensure
that the students are encouraged to explore
all topic areas of the programme, throughout
the entire programme delivery, with a view to
deciding on their research topic after careful
consideration of all potential research interests and research gaps within the border security sector.
1.5. The learning outcomes for the dissertation
state that, upon successful completion, the
student would be able to:
A. Knowledge related qualifications:
••Demonstrate advanced knowledge of all
the previous modules.
••Review, evaluate and summarise all relevant theories.
••Integrate theories and promote respect
for fundamental rights, professional and
ethical standards across Border Guard
activities.
Furthermore, by the end of the dissertation,
the student should gain the following skills
and be able to demonstrate an intellectual
and critical attitude.
B. Intellectual skills and intellectual and critical attitude:
••Summarise and demonstrate the relevance
of other workers’ findings to the presented
work.
••Employ appropriate (intellectual) tools and
techniques to manage all resources, maximising utilisation while balancing organisational goals with national, European and
international stakeholders’ expectations.
••Apply professional and research skills,
drawing from an extensive crucial analysis of related information/data to make evidence-based recommendations to enhance
border security in a European context.

73 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

••Ensure an intelligence-driven, strategic approach to European border control
management.
••Continuously engage in learning opportunities and promote professional development across the organisation.
••Critically evaluate organisational development potential in the context of management principles.
••Promote European cooperation, harmonisation and interoperability in Border Guarding activities.
••Apply critical thinking and demonstrate
an appreciation of, and analyse or assess
ethical issues in research within this field
and respond to them appropriately.
C. Practical skills:
••Demonstrate advanced knowledge of research methods and their practice.
••Plan, manage and conduct a research project within a predetermined time frame.
••Select and evaluate research tools for an organisational issue or problem.
••Communicate effectively in multi-professional and multicultural contexts.
••Present information in a succinct, accurate and logical way.
••Produce, defend and debate a completed research dissertation.
D. Transferable skills:
••Engage confidently in academic and professional communication with others.
••Work effectively, independently and in collaboration with members who hold responsibility for management of border security
from other states.
••Be able to assume leading roles and management roles in border guard organisation
and related institutions, and contribute to
innovation.
••Engage in responsibility for the need to update knowledge and skills.
••Reflect on the quality of the work.
••Use computer-based software and techniques effectively.

74 of 128

It is important that students understand
these outcomes and achievable skills, as
they will be expected to demonstrate that
such learning outcomes and skills have been
achieved through the process of completing
the dissertation.

2. Structure of the
Dissertation Work
2.1. The dissertation is part of the graduation work
(30 ECTS) and consists of:
••the choice of a research topic and the writing of a dissertation proposal: 5 ECTS;
••the dissertation, a summary of the dissertation and a final presentation, a total of 25 ECTS.
2.2. The duration for the 30 ETCS will be 20 weeks,
including a first week for choosing the research topic.
Figure 1. Timeline of the Dissertation Phase

Choose research topic
1st week

Dissertation proposal
5 Ects
3 seminar group meetings
face-to- face

Master's dissertation
25 ECTS,
3 individual milestone meetings
face-to-face or online

Dissertation Guidelines

3. The Research Area —
Research Topic
3.1. The proposed research topic must be within
the areas of study covered by the course and
must be relevant to the Joint Master’s Degree
in Strategic Border Management. Students
are nevertheless encouraged to choose a topic
that they find interesting and should seek to
focus on a particular problem/research question that the research will attempt to address.
3.2. At the beginning of the second stage, Frontex sends Member States/Schengen Associated Countries and relevant Frontex business
units a Call for Proposals for topics for dissertations which fill gaps in the research area
and innovation with regard to strategic border management. Following the approval of
the Board of Examiners, the list of the selected
research areas/topics is published in Moodle
after the end of Module 10: Researching Integrated Practices in Border Management.
3.3. Researchers from a given domain should formulate broad topics. These should be connected to the border management research
field and should be matched with the research
area/expertise of the experts.
3.4. Following the selection of a research topic, the
first step in the dissertation proposal phase
is choosing a topic and writing a draft dissertation proposal (approximately 2 pages),
that is to be submitted to the Board of Examiners one week after the start of the dissertation phase. On the basis of that draft proposal
the supervisor(s) are assigned to the student
by the Board of Examiners.
3.5. Students can choose any topic from the list
published in Moodle or propose a new topic
to the Board of Examiners. In the latter case,
in the draft dissertation proposal, the student
will have to write out the arguments for his/
her new topic proposal, and add his/her other

option chosen in the topics listed in Moodle.
If the topic proposed by the student is not accepted by the Board of Examiners, the student must present another draft dissertation
proposal based on his/her second topic chosen during the week after the response of the
Board of Examiners.
3.6. The draft dissertation proposal must include
the following elements:
••the subject, global aim and the main research question(s);
••the approach to the research, including the
research strategy, the methods of data collection and data analysis, an overview of
the literature that is going to be studied/
used.
3.7. When selecting and submitting a title, the
student must verify that a dissertation with
a similar title has not already been submitted in the past or is in the process of being
written. Students are required to warn their
supervisor(s) if that is the case. While verifying whether a dissertation by the same title has already been submitted, the student
is required to consult dissertation titles in all
related areas of studies.

4. The Dissertation Proposal
4.1. Once the supervisors are assigned, the student enters the third stage with an approved
global dissertation proposal. In consultation
with the supervisor(s) the student must submit the final dissertation proposal no later
than five weeks after the start of the dissertation stage. This final dissertation proposal
is then submitted to the Board of Examiners and the Research Ethics Committee for
approval.
4.2. The dissertation proposal is an important
working document which eventually builds
the foundation for the dissertation. Used cor-

75 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

rectly, the proposal will become the student’s
road map through the dissertation process.
4.3. The main structure of a dissertation proposal
will be similar to the final structure of the
dissertation, and it should provide the reader
with a general idea of the area of study, as
well as an indication of the methodology to
be used.
4.4. The dissertation proposal will show that the
student has thought through what the main
research aim/questions and underlying objectives are to be, that the main sources of
primary and secondary data have been identified and that the student has given due consideration to research methodology and data
analysis.

5. The Structure of the
Supervision of the
Dissertation Proposal
5.1. The actual dissertation proposal process is organised in groups of 5-7 students (first 5 ECTSs,
during the first five weeks). The supervision is
organised around one broad research theme
per group, allowing for cross-national comparisons and/or addressing multiple aspects
of one research theme in the various dissertations. These thematic approaches require
two or three face-to-face seminar meetings in
the first five weeks. This enables peer-learning and evaluation, along with learning from
supervisors. It is considered the first step in
the dissertation phase.
5.2. Based on this cycle of seminars each student draws up his/her dissertation plan,
which describes the subject and aim research
questions(s), both linked and relevant to the
border guard management organisation and
work field; sets forth the approach to the
research (including the research strategy),

76 of 128

methods of data collection and data analysis; provides an overview of the literature to
be studied (for examples of important journals, please see the Appendix); gives an indication of the duration (planning, timetable
and/or schedule); and provides a general outline of the supervision of the dissertation addressed in the dissertation plan.
5.3. The supervision is conducted in two or three
face-to-face seminar meetings in groups on
location (2 days each) in which the research
proposal and the plan for conducting research
activities will be discussed and the almost
final result will be reviewed in the group by
both the supervisor(s) and the peer students.
5.4. During the actual research and dissertation
writing there will be three more face-to-face or
online (virtual classroom) milestone meetings
in the dissertation process. In addition to the
face-to-face meetings, the groups and the supervisors share a common collaboration space
in Moodle where group members can ‘meet’
and exchange ideas, report on the ongoing
work, and provide advice, feedback and encouragement in the spirit of peer mentorship.
The Supervisor(s) shall:
••guide the student in the formulation of the
final dissertation proposal;
••establish the schedule for two to three supervisory face-to-face meetings with the
group in the dissertation proposal writing phase;
••provide general advice and guidance on the
execution of the dissertation and be available to students outside of the face-to-face
supervisory meetings on a regular and reasonable basis throughout the dissertation
supervision;
••provide feedback on draft written work,
within a reasonable time (normally within
one week of submission);
••forward, where appropriate, any comments
on the performance of the student to the
Board of Examiners;

Dissertation Guidelines

••inform the Board of Examiners when the
progress of a student gives cause for concern so that action can be taken in accordance with these regulations;
••where work submitted has been executed
in cooperation with others, the supervisor must submit a written statement to
the Board of Examiners indicating the extent of the given student’s share of the
piece of work.

6. The Structure and Content
of the Dissertation
Proposal
6.1. The research proposal should ultimately provide the reader with a ‘detailed skeleton’ of
the whole dissertation, and should generally
include:
6.1.1. Title:
Students should try their best to come up with
a title of under 10 words. While this may eventually change, it is recommended that students attempt to find precise wording that
helps indicate the focus of the dissertation.
6.1.2. An introduction to the topic and a rationale for the research
This will include a brief description of the
topic, the aim, the research objectives and/or
the research questions to be addressed.
a)	The aim of the research provides a description of what the student wants to achieve
from carrying out the research.
b)	The objectives of the research should outline the particular issues that need to be
addressed in order to achieve the research
aim which has been set out. They are more
specific than the aim, in that they outline
the particular dimensions of the research
topic, which are relevant to the overall aim
of the research.

c)	The research questions are more specific
than the research objectives. They should
be efficient and specify the various insights/information that need to be collected in order to achieve the objectives
and should be given direction to the research. Students should keep in mind that
the research question often starts with a
‘Why?’, ‘How?’, or a ‘What?’.
6.1.3. Brief/preliminary literature review
students are expected to provide a brief literature review and background to the area of
study, as this indicates:
a)	that the student has considered the work
of the major authors in the research field;
b)	that the student is familiar with the major themes relevant to that subject area;
c)	what further investigations are being proposed by the student to pursue as part of
this dissertation.
The student should bear in mind that the review of the relevant literature is necessary in
order to be able to develop sharper, more insightful and focused research questions about
the research topic. Therefore, the literature review should lead to and justify the research
aims, research questions, objectives and/or
hypothesis set out by the student.
6.1.4. Research methodology
the methodology section should discuss what
methods the student is going to use in order to
address the research objectives of the dissertation. The student needs to justify why the
chosen methods, and the discussed research
qualities, were selected as the most appropriate for the research study.
6.1.5. Proposed work plan
the student should propose a practical work
plan which indicates how the student is proposing to complete the dissertation by the
submission date. The dissertation proposal
is a record of mutual agreement between the
student and the supervisors. The dissertation
plan structures the student’s thoughts on the

77 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

subject and his/her work, and lists the activities for the dissertation. The dissertation proposal should include the following elements:
a)	the start date and the planned end date
(the student is required to submit the final product on the end date; the end date
can be changed if that is considered to be
desirable);
b)	the name(s) of the supervisor(s);
c)	the planning of the sequence of activities
and a timeline for those activities;
d)	a description of the subject;
e)	a schedule for the supervision meetings
agreements (both individual and group
meetings);
f)	the period within which the supervisor(s)
assess the final product;
g)	possible additional agreements.

7. Extension of the
Dissertation Proposal
Submission
In exceptional cases an extension to the dissertation proposal submission deadline may
be given; the student will take the initiative
and apply in writing to the Board of Examiners for an extension. If the Board of Examiners is of the opinion that the conditions for
an extension are met, the Board informs the
student via the Programme Administrator.

8. Ethics and Confidentiality
8.1. It is imperative that students take into consideration any possible ethical implications
that the proposed research might have, seeking advice from the assigned supervisors early
where there is any degree of uncertainty. Students will not be allowed to do anything which
might be considered unethical.

78 of 128

8.2. Ethical approval can take a considerable
amount of time, so it is of utmost importance
to plan in advance and as early as possible. Students must consider questions of confidentiality and the implications of any legislation
governing the use of personal data, especially
with respect to its storage and manipulation
on computers. Students should also acknowledge that they may require permission from
any relevant data protection officers.
8.3. Students must seek and obtain ethical approval from the Research Ethics Committee
(the REC) prior to pursuing any aspect of the
study, other than the literature review. More
information concerning the procedure to be
followed when applying for ethical approval
from the REC may be found in Appendix 9 and
in Moodle.
8.4. The REC is composed of the Frontex Data Protection Officer, the Frontex Fundamental
Rights Officer, the Dissertation Coordinator
and an additional member (if necessary) from
the Frontex Risk Analysis Unit.

9. Permissions for Materials
Under Another Copyright
and Restricted Use Data
9.1. If a student plans to use material which was
previously copyrighted and/or restricted to
law enforcement, that student will need to
obtain permission to do so (even if the material belongs to the Sending Authority of that
student).
9.2. When requesting permission, the student
should precisely describe the proposed use of
the material. The objectives are to eliminate
any ambiguities and to ensure that the permission encompasses the full scope of the student’s needs.

Dissertation Guidelines

10. Project Management
10.1. It is good practice that students set and try
to adhere to deadlines, for their own good as
well as for the benefit of those involved in the
research. Students should recognise that data
collection can take longer than anticipated,
and therefore they should allocate adequate
time to ensure that it is carried out within a
reasonable timeframe.
10.2. Students are encouraged to start as early as
possible, in order to help avoid being under
unreasonable pressure to finalise data analysis and the write-up of the dissertation. Students should also give due consideration to
the cost implications of their study.

11. Dissertation (Proposal)
Supervision
11.1. Based on the dissertation proposal and in
consultation with members of the Board of
Examiners, the Programme Board recommends a primary and a secondary supervisor
(if needed). Supervisors are appointed by the
Programme Board within 5 working days.
11.2. The primary supervisor is chosen by the Programme Board, but in case of considering a
secondary supervisor themselves, students
can also propose to the Programme Board logical arguments for a secondary supervisor. The
Programme Board may accept the proposal
for this secondary supervisor or may appoint
a secondary supervisor chosen by the Board.
11.3. The primary supervisor will provide guidance and advice to the student during the
dissertation stage (including the research proposal). If the nature/topic of the dissertation
requires the input of another specialist, the
Programme Board may appoint a secondary
supervisor, in which case the two supervi-

sors shall meet the student together to decide
how they will divide their responsibility for
advice and how future meetings are to be arranged. When a secondary supervisor is appointed, the primary supervisor shall retain
the ultimate responsibility for the leadership
of the supervision.
Primary Supervisor
••The primary supervisor is a member of the
academic staff from one of the Academic
Partners appointed by the Programme
Board who can guide and support the student through the research process.
••The primary supervisor must have a PhD.
Secondary Supervisor
••The secondary supervisor is a member of the
academic staff from one of the Academic
Partners or external expert appointed by
the Programme Board, who can provide
advice on the research. The secondary supervisor is appointed by the Programme
Board following consultation with the Primary Supervisor.
Role of the Supervisors
The Primary Supervisor is responsible for organising and scheduling a minimum of three
(3) individual supervisory meetings with the
student at which the secondary supervisor (if
appointed) should be present and keep a record
of the minutes of these meetings. It is recommended that the meetings should be scheduled as follows:
1.	Prior to submission of the dissertation proposal for ethical approval and to the Board
of Examiners:
••the primary and Secondary Supervisor (if any) evaluate the proposed ethics proposal form and the dissertation
proposal
2.	Prior to collection of any data (face-to- face
or online)

79 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

••the primary and secondary supervisor
(if any) evaluate the methodology and
tools for data collection
3.	Prior to submission to the Board of Examiners (BoE) (face-to-face or online)
••the primary and secondary supervisors
(if any) evaluate the draft of the written dissertation
The primary and secondary supervisor (if any)
are responsible for providing written feedback
to the student.
••The Primary Supervisor is responsible for
submitting a Student Dissertation Progress
Sheet (SDPS) to the Board of Examiners for
each of the three (3) meetings [Appendices
1, 2 and 3]. The SDPSs are to be signed by
the student and the primary and secondary supervisor (if any).
••Supervisors are not responsible for proofreading the dissertation and it is not a supervisor’s responsibility to ensure that the
work presented for examination (the finished dissertation) does not contain plagiarised elements.
••The supervisory role ceases when the dissertation is submitted for examination.
The Primary Supervisor will signify formally in writing that he/she is aware that
the student is submitting the work for examination by the Board of Examiners [Appendix 4].
••In order to ensure the quality of supervision, the Programme Board must ensure
that the maximum number of students
for each supervisor does not exceed three.

quests should be submitted to the Programme
Administrator.

13. Progress Reports
Supervisors must submit ‘Student Progress
Reports’ to the Board of Examiners (Appendix 5) for each student under their supervision, at the end of the stage.
Such reports may include recommendations
to either:
a.	extend the period of study in order to enable the student to complete the dissertation; or
b.	terminate studies prematurely if the supervisor deems that to be appropriate in
the circumstances, provided that
i.	the extension of the study period referred to in (a) must be in accordance
with the provisions of the Student
Handbook and the Teaching and Examination Regulations and
ii.	the Board may not terminate studies
prematurely pursuant to (b) until it
has first given the student a chance
to be heard.

14. Schedule of Events —
Dissertation Progress
Please see the attached schedule with timeline and milestones

12. Replacement of
Supervisors
Requests for replacement of supervisors may
be considered by the Programme Board, if the
request can be justified by reasons deemed
acceptable by the Programme Board. Re-

80 of 128

15. Writing the Dissertation
15.1. Structure and content
Following the approval of his/her proposal by
the Board of Examiners and the Research Eth-

Dissertation Guidelines

ics Committee, the student proceeds with the
dissertation writing process as planned and
reports on progress to the supervisor(s) according to the schedule in the approved proposal. The student prepares and submits the
dissertation and presents and defends the
dissertation.
The dissertation is written as a fully independent research report in accordance with
the standard academic design.
A dissertation should contain the following
standard components:
15.1.1. Title Page (example — Appendix 4)
The title page must include the following
information:
••the name of the Degree Programme;
••the names of the Consortium Partners;
••the title of the dissertation and its subtitle (if relevant);
••the name of the student;
••the student’s email address;
••the name(s) of the supervisor(s);
••the date of completion.
15.1.2. Abstract
An abstract or executive summary should
provide an overview of the study in all its aspects. It should be around 250 to 300 words
and should answer the following questions.
••What does this research set out to do and
why?
••How did it seek to do it?
••What is the research model, strategy, qualities etc.?
••What are the analysis and general findings?
••What do these suggest?
••What conclusions are reached?
••What are the implications of these?
••What is the outline of the dissertation?
15.1.3. Acknowledgements (if applicable)
In this section the student may express thanks
to those who assisted in the research. These
should be kept to a minimum and include only

academic supervisors and people who participated in the fieldwork. Most people also like
to thank family.
15.1.4. Chapters
Introduction
In the introduction the student should introduce the reader to the background of the study
and the nature of the problem being considered. It should therefore set the study in context explaining why this study is important
and highlighting the significant issues, problems and ideas. The aim and objectives should
be stated clearly in this chapter.
Literature Review
In a dissertation a student is expected to provide a critical review of the existing literature
(published and unpublished) on the research
topic being studied. This does not mean that
the student has to indicate every book and
article that has been written on the subject,
but any the student does read should be referenced appropriately. Nevertheless, the review
should indicate that the student has studied
existing and recent work in the field. The literature review should be:
••Relevant: literature used should support
the student’s arguments relating to the
student’s research question and the aim
and objectives of the study
••Up-to-date: the literature must be recent
(most literature used has to have been published in the past five years); however, it
is important that seminal and important work is also included in the literature review.
Research Methodology
The purpose of the methods chapter is to give
a well-documented outline of the methods
used so that any other researcher can understand and maybe even replicate the research
and assess its validity.

81 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

The following elements may be considered
with the supervisor’s advice:
••A discussion of the chosen methodology
relevant to the student’s area of research
and a discussion of why other methodologies were rejected or not applicable to his/
her research.
••Secondary data: (an analysis of the supporting data to be used in the research,
such as published
••studies etc.)
••Primary data: where an in-depth description is given of the tools used (such as fieldwork, document analysis, surveys carried
out, etc.) when fieldwork was conducted,
its duration, etc.
••The criteria for sample selection: a detailed
description of how the sample for the study
was chosen. This applies for both qualitative as well as quantitative research.
••Pilot study: study prior to actually collecting the data on which the student is going
to base his/her research.
••The need to test the tool for clarity, use of
terminology; if this is a pilot study, any
changes made to the original tool need to
be documented.
••Methods of analysis: a discussion of the
methods of analysis used, such as SPSS,
content analysis, deconstruction, textual
analysis, semiotics, historical analysis, etc.
••Limitations of the methods used, for example access to informants. Students should
also show how they have tried to overcome
such limitations.
••Nvivo (Qualitative Data Analysis Software)
Analysis and Results
The findings are analysed and the results are
presented and discussed with reference to
theories and ideas outlined in the literature
review.
Discussion of Results, Conclusions and
Recommendations

82 of 128

This chapter should draw together all the issues of the research and link back to the aim
and objectives which were outlined in the Introduction. Have the aims set at the beginning been met? If not, why not?
What are the implications arising from the
findings? Students should be careful with
their generalisations and interpretations.
All recommendations should be based on evidence. Does the student have suggestions for
future research in this area?
The legal framework, in particular international and human rights, obligations, should
be considered to be an important part of the
research. Conclusions and recommendations
should be compatible with European and International legal standards.
References
Full details of all the books and journal articles cited or referenced throughout the dissertation should be included in this chapter.
A reader should be able to identify the exact
source and refer to it directly.
The Legal Citation Guidelines of the College
of Europe should be used for applicable law
and EU articles, while for all other documents
the Harvard method of referencing is recommended (Harvard Guide to Using Sources
http://usingsources.fas.harvard.edu).
Appendices
The Appendices should include selective, supplementary material which is distracting
when placed in the main body of text. Only
material which is necessary for a full understanding of the study should be included.
These include important forms, questionnaires or interview schedules, description of
equipment or settings, tables and lists of data
supportive of the study. The appendices are not
part of the dissertation wordage.

Dissertation Guidelines

15.2. Word Count
The dissertation should have a word count of a
minimum of approximately 20 000 words and a
maximum of 25 000 words (i.e. 50 to 60 pages of
text, excluding appendices); such a dissertation
load is equal to 30 ECTS credits (i.e. 840 hours of
full study time, including the research proposal).
The dissertation may describe work done in conjunction with a supervisor or any other person,
but the extent of the student’s personal contribution must be certified by the supervisor concerned. Including feedback, here is an example
of how a student might allocate his/her time:
••140 hours of literature study;
••200 hours of data collection;
••200 hours to analyse/synthesise data;
••160 hours to write (draft) chapters;
••60 hours to produce the final version;
••20 hours to prepare the presentation;
••60 hours face-to-face contact.

Font
••Text must be in an embedded, 11 point or
12 point font (Times New Roman).
••A smaller font size may be appropriate for
footnotes or other material outside of the
main text.
••Black text is recommended, although colour may be appropriate in some limited
parts of the document.
••Font requirements apply to all text including captions, footnotes, citations, etc.
Spacing
Document must be double-spaced, with the
exception of quotations as paragraphs, captions, lists, graphs, charts, footnotes/endnotes, bibliographic entries, items within
tables, and lists in appendices.
Tables
Tables should be consecutively numbered and
labelled.

15.3. Typing and Proof reading
Typographic and other technical errors should
be avoided by leaving sufficient time for proofreading the final draft dissertation; it is not
the supervisors’ remit to act as proof-readers. It is the students’ responsibility to ensure
that a high-quality piece of work is presented
to the supervisors and, more importantly, to
the Board of Examiners.

15.4. Formatting Requirements
Language
The dissertation must be written in English
Page Size and Margins
••Page size must be in the A4 format with a
left-hand margin of 3.5 cm and a top and
right-hand margin of 1.5 cm.
••A top margin of 5 cm must be to the left on
the first page of every division, i.e. chapters, bibliography, etc. Footnote(s) should
appear at the bottom of the relevant page
or after every chapter.

Figures
••Figures should be consecutively numbered
and labelled.
••All figures, diagrams, illustrations, tables
or charts will be considered to have the
same word count as the page space they
occupy (one page is equivalent to approximately 200 words).
Pagination
••The main text, including the introduction
(if any), the bibliography and any appendices of the dissertation must have Arabic
numerals (1,2,3,4,5).
••The title page, dedication (if any), preface,
acknowledgements, table of contents, etc.
preceding the main text, must have Roman
numerals (i,ii,iii,iv,v).
Quotations
Quotations of more than thirty words should
be single spaced and form a distinct paragraph without indentation. Do not use quotation marks in such cases.

83 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

Quotation Marks
Use single quotation marks throughout, but
doubles for a quote within a quote.
Alignment
Text should be left aligned and not justified.
Spelling
Follow the Oxford English Dictionary.
Dates
Use day, month, and year without commas:
e.g. 25 December 1930.
Textual Reference Numbers
••Continuous for each chapter.
••Use superscript, without brackets, and following punctuation.
Bibliography
For applicable EU law materials the Legal Citation Guidelines of the College of Europe
should be used, while for all other documents
the Harvard method of referencing is recommended (Harvard Guide to Using Sources
http://usingsources.fas.harvard.edu).
For full details on citing EU law materials see
the Legal Citation Guidelines included in the
Appendix 12.

16. Plagiarism
16.1. Plagiarism is not acceptable in any dissertation. All sources which are utilised in the
course of the dissertation must be acknowledged. Plagiarism is the representation of
another person’s work, without the acknowledgement of the sources. It means using the
work of others as if it is one’s own without explicitly acknowledging, or referencing, where
it came from.
16.2. Plagiarism can also mean not acknowledging
the full extent of indebtedness to a source.

84 of 128

16.3. Work can be plagiarised from various sources
including books, articles, the Internet, and
other students’ assignments. Plagiarism can
also occur unconsciously or inadvertently.
16.4. Direct copying is definitely plagiarism. Paraphrasing of another work without attribution is also plagiarism.
16.5. Submitting someone else’s work or ideas without acknowledgement or attribution is not
evidence of the student’s own grasp of the
material and cannot earn the student any
marks.
16.6. Further detailing of the procedure on Plagiarism, Collusion and Cheating can be found in
the Student Handbook.

17. Turnitin
17.1. Turnitin is a web-based originality checking service that is used by many universities
worldwide. When a student’s work is submitted to Turnitin, it is matched against millions
of Internet pages, electronic journals, books,
and a database of all previously and concurrently submitted assignments. Turnitin then
generates an originality report providing a
summary of matching or similar text found
in the submitted paper.
17.2. Turnitin can be used to check sources have
been correctly acknowledged and cited. The
student should ensure that, irrespective of the
results of the Turnitin originality report, all
copyright requirements and the Programme’s
standard on avoiding plagiarism are met.

18. Important Tips
Last-minute delays through printer failure,
corrupted files or breakdowns of computers,

Dissertation Guidelines

unforeseen problems with statistical software,
staff or interviewees being unavailable, or just
running out of time to complete writing or
analysis are not exceptional circumstances.
••Students should start the dissertation early
and have a week-by-week time plan, modify it, but not lose sight of the end date or
objective.
••Remember to keep backups of all electronic
working and supporting files
••Plan interviews in advance, test the recording device, and check knowledge of when
key people will be away
••Students should keep the academic supervisor informed of major delays and interruptions as they occur.
••Allow time for proofreading and printing:
these always take longer than one thinks.

19. Dissertation Submission
Checklist
The following is a general checklist that students may make use of to ensure that all the
main content of their dissertation have been
included for final submission:

ü

Title Page: the title of the dissertation, as submitted when
seeking approval from the Research Ethics Committee

ü

Declaration: the students must include the official declaration form
clearly confirming that the dissertation is his/her own work

ü

Dissertation submission form

ü

Abstract: structured, no more than 300 words
long and not longer than one page

ü

Table of Contents: the table of contents should give chapter
headings and sub-headings with page numbers. Separate
listings should be given for lists of figures and tables.

ü

Abbreviations and acronyms

ü

Definitions of any abbreviations or acronyms used throughout
the dissertation, listed in alphabetical order

ü

Definitions of key concepts: definitions of key words and concepts
being used throughout the dissertation, listed in alphabetical order.

ü

Chapter 1: Introduction

ü

Chapter 2: Literature Review

ü

Chapter 3: Research Methodology

ü

Chapter 4: Analysis and Results

ü

Chapter 5: Discussion of Results, Conclusions and Recommendations

ü

Chapter 6: References

ü

Appendices

20. Final Submission
of Dissertation for
Examination
20.1. Before submitting his/her dissertation, the
student should apply for an assessment of the
dissertation by submitting a completed dissertation submission form at least 15 working

85 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

days prior to the oral examination or as specified by the Programme Board.
20.2. The following should be attached to the dissertation submission form:
••an electronic copy of the dissertation;
••documentation of required permissions;
••documentation that the Degree requirements have been met;
••a declaration confirming that the dissertation is the student’s own work.
20.3. The student must bring one of his/her spiral
bound copies of the dissertation to the oral
examination (defending).

21. Extension of the
Dissertation Submission
Deadline
In exceptional cases, an extension to the dissertation submission deadline may be given.
The student must take the initiative and apply in writing to the Board of Examiners for
the extension. If the Board of Examiners is of
the opinion that the conditions for extension
are met, the Board informs the student via the
Programme Administrator. For more information please refer to the Student Handbook.

22. Intellectual Property
Rights
22.1. All industrial and intellectual property rights
to all works and materials created or developed for the purposes of the Programme belong exclusively to Frontex, subject to specific
agreements, where required, for the protection of industrial and intellectual property
rights previously owned by the authors.

86 of 128

22.2. Frontex commits to respect the right of the
authors (e.g. teachers, professors, academics, students) of the materials by indicating
their names on the work created by them.

23. Access to Dissertations
23.1. Dissertations are kept by Frontex and are
made available for consultation, inter-library
loan and photocopying with the approval of
Frontex.
23.2. Any staff member who publishes results from
a dissertation is required to make a proper reference to the student’s work.
23.3. Abstracts of the dissertations are available
from the Academic Partner’s librarians.

24. Assessment
24.1. Before being admitted to the oral examination, the dissertation must be approved by
the Chair of the Dissertation Board.
24.2. The dissertation assessment includes an assessment of the dissertation and the oral
examination. The oral examination is the
defence of the dissertation that is preceded
by the student presenting the results of his/
her dissertation.
24.3. The oral examination has a maximum duration of one hour:
••a maximum 15 minutes for the presentation;
••a maximum 45 minutes for questioning.
24.4. After the oral examination the Dissertation
Board deliberates and then communicates the
decision to the student.

Dissertation Guidelines

24.5. The Board of Examiners assigns a date for an
oral examination and informs the student of
that date at least three weeks before.
24.6. When there are mitigating circumstances,
the student can request that the date of the
oral examination be changed.
24.7. The oral examination is not open and will
be announced as such. Only, teachers, other
students, Module Convenors and other people approved by Frontex can observe the oral
examination.
There are three stages that are assessed:
24.7.1. Assessment during the research process:
To properly involve the learning process in the
final assessment, the supervisor discusses his/
her assessment on the progress of the learning
process with the student at every supervisory
session. The learning process can be assessed
by paying attention to the following points:
••personal input into the drawing up of the
learning objective;
••critical evaluation of personal learning
objective;
••critical evaluation of own activities;
••making use of references in the literature;
••making use of the feedback of the
supervisor(s);
••putting critical and reflective questions to
the supervisor(s);
••providing input during sessions (face-to
face and online sessions).
24.7.2. Assessment of the Dissertation proposal
The dissertation proposal will be assessed as
a Go or No Go by the supervisor and the Research Ethics Committee and the content of
the dissertation proposal should be taken into
account after the five first weeks (see content
in previous section).

24.7.3. Assessment of the Dissertation
The dissertation will be assessed. This dissertation experience examines the extent to
which students can independently deal with
complex problems and uncertain information.
The defence is divided into an assessment of
criteria and an oral examination. The oral examination has a maximum duration of one
hour (a maximum of 15 minutes for the presentation and a maximum of 45 minutes for
questioning). With regard to the task of assessing the Master’s dissertation the examination board will be guided by:
••the expected learning outcomes of the programme (see the first section);
••the standard components of the dissertation (see the first section)
The following aspects will also be taken into
account:
1. Intrinsic:
••academic contribution;
••originality and creativity;
••independence;
••productivity;
••analytical and synthetic ability;
••methodological approach to the
research;
••structure;
••readability;
••presentation;
2. Oral presentation:
••structure;
••clarity for a wider audience;
••use of audio-visual aids;
••defence
••argumentation of results
••reference to theory
24.8. Detailed information on the assessment criteria can be found as an appendix in the Teaching and Examination Regulations and in this
Handbook as Appendix 13.

87 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

25. Dissertation Board
25.1. For the assessment of dissertations, the Board
of Examiners appoints a separate Dissertation Board for each dissertation. The Dissertation Board is accountable, via the Programme
Board, to the Board of Examiners.
25.2. Module Convenors recommend members of the
given Dissertation Board to the Programme
Board. The Programme Board proposes to the
Board of Examiners the composition of the
Dissertation Board, and the proposal should
include a description of how the proposed committee composition covers the relevant subject area. This committee proposal should be
submitted together with the dissertation.
25.3. Every Dissertation Board consists of four
members:
••the primary supervisor of the student
••a professor (or associate professor) in a relevant discipline (as the chair)
••one other member from a partner border
security organisation or from another Academic Partner depending on the nature
of the given dissertation
••an external examiner

88 of 128

25.4. At least two of the board members should not
be from the same Academic Partner.
25.5. Board members should hold a PhD or have similar qualifications within the relevant field.
25.6. The candidate’s supervisor is prohibited from
being the board’s chair. The supervisor shall
have no voting rights but can answer questions from other members.
25.7. All members of the Dissertation Board must
read and assess the quality of the dissertation as an ordered and logical exposition of
the application of knowledge, methods and
techniques in the subject of the course to the
task performed or to the problem investigated.
25.8. The (associate) professor must be present or
be replaced by another (associate) professor.
The Dissertation board assesses the student’s
competence with regard to research skills, the
professional field, problem-solving skills and
practical orientation.
25.9. Further information on the processes of the
Dissertation Board can be found in the Quality Assurance Handbook.

Dissertation Guidelines

Appendices
(available in electronic form in the programme’s virtual learning environment
Moodle)
Appendix 1: Student Dissertation Progress
Sheet — 1st Supervisory Meeting
Appendix 2: Student Dissertation Progress
Sheet — 2nd Supervisory Meeting
Appendix 3: Student Dissertation Progress
Sheet — 3rd Supervisory Meeting

Appendix 6: Student Progress Report
Appendix 7: Student Declaration Regarding
Authenticity
Appendix 8: Form Regarding Replacement of
Supervisors
Appendix 9: Research Ethics Committee
Procedures
Appendix 10: Academic Journals and Other
Resources
Appendix 11: Timeline

Appendix 4: Sample Title Page
Appendix 12: Legal Citation Guidelines
Appendix 5: Submission of the Dissertation
for Examination

Appendix 13: Assessment Criteria; Examination Form

89 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

90 of 128

European Joint Master’s
in Strategic Border Management

Policies & Procedures

Teaching
& Examination
Regulations

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

1. Standards and Learning
Outcomes

1.2. The learning outcomes for the taught component of the Degree Programme are defined as:
Knowledge

Given the extent of the European dimension
of the Consortium, academic standards for
the Programme are aligned to the Sectoral
Qualifications Framework for Border Guarding and the Dublin Descriptors.
1.1. The learning outcomes for the European Joint
Master’s in Strategic Border Management are
defined as:
Knowledge

•	Critically evaluate organisational development potential in the context of
management principles as applied to border management
•	Communicate effectively in multi-professional and multicultural contexts

Skills

•	Work effectively, independently and in collaboration with members with
responsibility for management of border security from other states
•	Integrate and promote respect for fundamental rights, professional and
ethical standards, across border guarding activities
•	Employ appropriate tools and techniques to manage all resources,
maximising utilisation while balancing organisational goals with national,
European and international stakeholder expectations

Competence

•	Ensure an intelligence-driven, strategic approach to European border control
management
•	Promote European cooperation, harmonisation and interoperability in
Border Guarding activities

•	Critically evaluate organisational development potential in the context of
management principles as applied to border management

•	Continuously engage in learning opportunities and promote professional
development across the organisation

•	Communicate effectively in multi-professional and multicultural contexts
•	Work effectively, independently and in collaboration with members with
responsibility for management of border security from other states

Skills

1.3. The learning outcomes for Stage 1 of the Degree Programme are defined as:

•	Apply professional and research skills, drawing from an extensive
critical analysis of related information/data to make evidence based
recommendations to enhance border security in a European context
•	Integrate and promote respect for fundamental rights, professional and
ethical standards, across border guarding activities
•	Employ appropriate tools and techniques to manage all resources,
maximising utilisation while balancing organisational goals with national,
European and international stakeholder expectations
Competence

•	Critically evaluate a broad range of strategic management systems
Knowledge

•	Plan and evaluate Border security management activities

•	Ensure an intelligence-driven, strategic approach to European border control
management
•	Promote European cooperation, harmonisation and interoperability in Border
Guarding activities

•	Critically evaluate the integration of fundamental rights, professional
standards and ethical principles into border guarding policies, procedures
and activities

Skills

•	Apply theory, tools and techniques to human and financial resource
management
•	Manage change in the context of innovation and emerging technologies
•	Work effectively in collaboration with members with responsibility for
management of border security from other states

•	Continuously engage in learning opportunities and promote professional
development across the organisation

•	Adopt a strategic perspective to all border guarding activity
•	Implement quality management standards in border guarding activities
Competence

•	Selectively apply a range of leadership styles to achieve organisational goals
•	Ensure that the European mission, vision and values in relation to border
security are incorporated into management practices

92 of 128

Teaching & Examination Regulations

1.4. The learning outcomes for Stage 2 of the Degree Programme are defined as:
•	Critically evaluate the European approach to Border Security in the context
of global trends and threats
Knowledge

•	Critically evaluate national strategies for risk and threat management in
the context of European and international practice and the capacity for
interoperability
•	Critically review approaches to multi-agency cross-border cooperation for
the prevention, detection and investigation of cross-border related crime
•	Design intelligence-driven operational strategies for border control
and evaluate them in the context of cooperation, harmonisation and
interoperability

Skills

•	Work effectively in collaboration with members with responsibility for
management of border security from other states in a range of border
security related contexts

Competence

•	Balance the requirements of security, safety, cooperation and information
management with protection of fundamental rights and ensuring free
movement of people, goods and services within an integrated border
management framework
•	Support and facilitate a range of cooperation partnerships, procedures and
networks that enhance integrated border management

2. Requirements for the
Degree
2.1. The Degree Programme is delivered over three
(3) Stages. Each Stage represents one semester
of full-time study carrying 30 ECTS credits.
Stage 3 is comprised solely of a dissertation.
2.2. Students who successfully complete all the
modules covered during the two stages and
the dissertation stage with a letter grade of E
in each module shall be eligible for the award
of the degree.
2.3. The European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management Degree Programme consists
of 90 ECTS credits. 1 ECTS credit equates to 28
hours of learning activity directly related to
the Programme.

3. Award
3.1. European Joint Master’s in Strategic
Border Management
3.1.1. The Master’s Degree is awarded to a student
who has been officially registered on the Degree Programme and has fulfilled the assessment requirements of the Programme
comprising 90 ECTS credits.
3.1.2. Master Award parchments are issued by one
of the Consortium Partners and signed by
the Registrars and Rectors (or equivalent officials) of all Academic Partners of the Consortium and are accompanied by a Diploma
Supplement describing the nature, level, context, content and the grades obtained for the
modules and the dissertation as well as the
national equivalent of the degree of the Consortium Partners.

3.2. Transcripts
3.2.1. The transcript indicates both the part of the
Degree Programme attended successfully by
the student and the corresponding study load.
3.2.2. Students who do not complete the Degree Programme may request directly from any of the
Academic Partners or through the Programme
Administrator a transcript of successfully
completed modules.
3.2.3. In case the transcript is issued directly by one
of the Academic Partners, the Programme Administrator and the other Academic Partners
need to be informed.
3.2.4. Students who do not complete the Degree
Programme may, on re-admission, request
exemption from successfully completed modules, provided that the ECTS credits have not
been used to meet the credit requirements of
any other major award.

93 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

4. Admission to the
Programme
4.1. Academic Admissions Requirements:
4.1.1. To be admitted, candidates must possess at a
minimum a first cycle qualification comprising at least 180 ECTS credits (bachelor degree or
equivalent) obtained from a recognised higher
education institution. Moreover, your academic
degree should be obtained in an area that is related to the subject of this Degree Programme,
such as law, business administration, public administration, entrepreneurship, border
guarding, border policing, policing, criminology, military sciences, security sciences, sociology, psychology, political sciences, risk and
security management and related areas1.
4.1.2. In case the bachelor’s degree is in subject areas other than the ones mentioned above, the
Admission Panel decides whether the respective field of study is relevant for ensuring the
prerequisite learning required for enrolling
in the Master’s programme, also taking into
consideration the applicant’s overall professional experience.

4.2. Professional Experience Admission
Requirements:
4.2.1. Next to the aforementioned academic requirements, to be admitted to the Programme, the
student is also expected to have first-hand
knowledge and experience of working in the
field of Border Guarding.
4.2.2. Minimum of 3 years’ experience in an operational border guard function in at least middle
management level, including but not limited
to the following:
••Border surveillance units (all types of
borders)
1 Examples of ‘related areas’: defence studies, internal
security studies, law enforcement

94 of 128

••Border checks units (all types of borders)
••Risk analysis units
••Cross-border crime units (smuggling of
migrants, trafficking of human beings,
countering illegal migration, documents
forgery, investigation units etc.)
••Intelligence related to border crime
••Immigration control units
••Return, asylum operational units
••Headquarters structures coordinating the
operational units (as listed above)

4.3. Security clearance
4.3.1. All persons who have access to training materials and assessments related to the Degree
Programme must have an appropriate level of
security clearance issued by the competent
national authority (EU RESTRICTED).
4.3.2. The selected students will have to be in a
possession of the necessary level of security
clearance (EU RESTRICTED or equivalent) at
the beginning of their studies. The original
certificate of security clearance must be submitted to the Programme Administrator who
presents them to the Frontex Security Officer.
EU security clearance at RESTRICTED level
or equivalent level security clearance issued
by a national security authority of a Member
State (or Schengen associated country) will be
accepted.
4.3.3. In case students do not possess a valid security clearance, they will be requested to undergo a security screening procedure.

4.4. Applicants should normally be
expected to remain in service for
a period of at least 5 years after
completion of the Degree Programme.
4.4.1. Exceptions to this clause will be considered on
a case-by-case basis by the chair of the Governing Board only for candidates who meet all
the other entry requirements. In exceptional
cases, such as different type of job contracts,

Teaching & Examination Regulations

inter alia, this condition may be waived by
the Governing Board if the Board concludes
that there are justifiable reasons to warrant
such a course of action. Such cases will be reviewed on a case-by-case basis.

4.5. English Language Proficiency
Requirements
4.5.1. All elements of the Degree Programme, including the materials, teaching and delivery, are drafted and conducted in the English
language.
4.5.2. As a consequence, all lectures, assignments,
tests and the dissertation will be conducted in
English. If a student is a non-native speaker
of English (i.e. his/her first language is not
English) the student is requested to provide
recent evidence as to the level of command
of the English language at least at B2 level
as defined in the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR). The
evidence may take the following forms:
a.	Substantial education (a minimum of a
bachelor’s degree or equivalent) conducted
in English in a majority English-speaking
country.
b.	Internationally recognised, valid certificates are IELTS, TOEFL, or Cambridge. The
level obtained is referenced with the European Qualifications Framework for Languages at B2 level.
4.5.3. Applicants who cannot provide recent evidence
as to the level of their English language proficiency, will be required to sit a proficiency
assessment.
4.5.4. Candidates are required to demonstrate that
they:
••Can understand the main ideas of complex
text on both concrete and abstract topics,
including technical discussions in a subject area related to border security
••Can interact with a degree of fluency and
spontaneity that makes regular interaction

with native speakers quite possible without strain for either party
••Can produce both orally and in writing a
clear, detailed text on a wide range of subjects related to a professional field and explain a viewpoint on a topical issue giving
the advantages and disadvantages of various options
4.5.5. The English language proficiency assessment is
administered only to candidates who successfully meet all the other entry requirements.

4.6. The candidates need to be citizens of
a European Union Member State or
Schengen Associated Country.

5. Content and structure of
the EJMSBM
5.1. The content and structure of the EJMSBM is
laid down in the Implementation Regulations
included as an Appendix to Teaching and Examination Regulations (TER).

6. Assessment
6.1. Number, times and frequency of assessments
6.1.1. There are two opportunities in each stage for
sitting assessments:
••The first opportunity is usually immediately after the teaching period for the module to which the assessment in question
relates
••The second opportunity is usually during
the re-sit period (at the end of every module), unless specified otherwise in the programme schedule (academic calendar). The
frequency of assessments is laid down in
the Implementation Regulations. A timetable of all assessments is drawn up on

95 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

the basis of one iteration and made available on Moodle

gramme Administrator shares them with
Academic Partners’ registrars or equivalent
within 15 working days of the assessment date.

6.2. Sequence of assessments
6.2.1. The sequence in which students are required
to sit assessments is set out in the Implementation Regulations.
6.3. Validity of assessments
6.3.1. The result of an assessment is valid for an unlimited period
6.4. The form of assessment and method of
assessment
6.4.1. Assessments are set out as described in the
Implementation Regulations and the Module Handbooks
6.5. Oral assessment
6.5.1. Only one student at a time will sit an oral assessment, unless the teacher in question specifies otherwise.
6.5.2. A second teacher will be present during oral
assessments, unless determined otherwise
by the Board of Examiners.
6.5.3. Oral assessments will be held in public, unless determined otherwise by the Board of Examiners in a special case or unless the student
has formally objected to the public nature of
the examination.

6.8. If the teacher is not able to meet these requirements due to exceptional circumstances, he
or she must inform the Board of Examiners
and the Programme Administrator, stating
the reasons for the delay. The Programme Administrator will pass this information on to
the students.
6.9. Teachers responsible for the assessment are
required to give an explanation of the grades
awarded. Students are provided with feedback so that they may know the strengths
and weaknesses of their performance. Students are entitled to receive feedback on their
assessment after publication of the results
and before the re-sit takes place. Scripts are
retained for at least six years by Frontex and
the Academic Partners after the results are
officially recorded.
6.9.1. In case there are assessments that are not
taken orally or in writing (e.g. simulation),
the Board of Examiners will determine beforehand precisely how and within what period of time the student will be notified of the
results.
6.9.2. When receiving the result of an assessment,
the student will be made aware of his or her
right to inspect the results as well as the opportunity to lodge an appeal.
6.10. Appealing the grade

6.5.4. Prior to an oral assessment, the teacher must
ask the student to provide proof of his/her
identity.
6.6. Determining and announcing the result

6.11. The Module Board and the External Examiner representing the Board of Examiners is
responsible for dealing with student appeals
against their grades

6.7. The teacher is required to determine the result
as soon as possible after the assessment but
within 10 working days at most. The teacher
publishes the grades in Moodle and the Pro-

6.12. In order to make an appeal the student should
complete a Student Appeal Form and together
with any supporting evidence submit it to the
Programme Administrator within 1 week of

96 of 128

Teaching & Examination Regulations

receiving official notification of the results.
A member of the Module Board/External Examiner not involved in the original grading
should carry out the review of the module under appeal. The work of the original teacher
who graded the assessment is not reviewable
by the reviewing academic and a recommendation to alter the results can only be made
if the change can be justified by objective
criteria.
6.13. A student can make an appeal concerning their
assessment results on the following grounds:
a)	Academic: that the grade awarded in any
given exam or question does not reflect
the quality of the answer given
b)	That the exam(s) was (were) not conducted
in accordance with the relevant instructions, regulations or requirements
c)	Where new evidence is provided of circumstances which might have adversely
affected their performance in the exams
d)	Arithmetical grade check
6.13.1. The student can request an arithmetical grade
check if he/she believes that there has been
an administrative error when the grades were
being recorded. Students are advised that, in
the event of any form of administrative error
being discovered it must be corrected, whether
it results in the grade in question being adjusted upwards or downwards.
6.14. Students are reminded that if they believe
that their performance in exams may be affected by illness (or by other personal circumstances) they should report the matter to the
teacher/instructor before sitting the exams.
Students should not wait for their results before deciding to notify the Programme Administrator of the situation.

All appeals due to extraordinary mitigating
circumstances are only valid when accompanied by comprehensive supporting evidence,
including detailed medical certificates where
appropriate, and a full explanation of the reason for the original non-declaration.
6.16. The decision of the Module Board is communicated to the student within 5 days by the
Programme Administrator with notice of the
outcome of the appeal also communicated to
the Board of Examiners
6.17. On exhaustion of the procedures in relation
to the appeals, students are entitled to pursue any further proceedings offered by the Academic Partners.

7. Re-Assessment
7.1. Only those students who obtain a fail grade
(F) in an assessment at the first attempt are
allowed one re-assessment of the failed assessment. Such students will only be allowed
one re-assessment of the failed assessment
7.2. In principle, the re-assessment takes place at
the end of each stage, unless otherwise specified in the Programme Schedule (Academic
Calendar)
7.3. Only the final module grade will be shown on
the Transcript without indicating whether it
was obtained through a re-assessment.
7.4. Students who after re-assessment fail to obtain the ECTS for any module are deemed to
have failed the Programme and are required
to withdraw from the Programme.

6.15. Information regarding mitigating circumstances received after the exams will not be
considered as the grounds for an appeal, unless there are exceptional reasons why this information could not be provided at the time.

97 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

8. Studying with a disability
8.1. Students with a disability are defined as conditions of a chronic or permanent nature (at least
for the time being) that represent a structural
impediment to studying or taking exams,
such as all motor, sensory or psychological
disabilities, but also functional disorders for
instance dyslexia, repetitive strain injury,
chronic fatigue, depression, chronic illnesses
etc., or any temporarily disabilities might
need special arrangements to be made. All
Partner Institutions are therefore obliged to
provide facilities and services to make it possible for students with a disability to participate in the Master’s Programme.
8.2. Regarding the facilities for students with a
disability, the following three areas can be
distinguished:
a)	access to the Partners’ buildings
b)	the delivery environment of the modules
c)	adaptations to the way assessments are
taken
8.3. Students who need to make use of these additional facilities should inform the Programme
Administrator (sufficiently in advance) who
will liaise with the registrars concerning the
access to the Partner Institutions’ buildings
and/or the Programme Board if it concerns the
structure of the programme and/or the Board
of Examiners if it concerns adaption on the
way assessments are taken. If necessary, a
medical declaration should be provided, stating the nature and extent of the limitation

9. Exemptions
9.1. The Consortium recognises previous learning
for the purposes of exemption from modules
of study in the Degree Programme, where the
students can offer proof that they have previously achieved the stated learning outcomes
of those modules. Previous formal learning

98 of 128

will only be accepted as exemption from modules provided that the ECTS credits have not
been used to meet the credit requirements of
any other major award.
9.2. The Consortium conducts a graded assessment
of prior formal, non-formal or informal learning used as exemption from modules. Such
assessment is carried out in accordance with
the procedures on Recognition of Prior Learning assessment outlined in the Teaching and
Examination Regulations.
9.3. Where exemption from module(s) is requested
on the basis of Recognised Prior Learning, the
Learning Outcomes of the successfully completed module(s) will be compared against the
expected Learning Outcomes of the module(s)
on the programme. Where these are found to
be sufficient, an exemption will be awarded
and the programme module(s) will be considered to have been completed on a ‘grade neutral’ basis.
9.4. Exemption from modules with the awarding
of ECTS credits will be limited to one-sixth
of the ECTS credit in each Stage2. No exemptions will apply to the dissertation.
9.5. Students may be eligible to be exempted from
one module (5 ECTS credits) from each of the
first two stages. Possible exemptions are therefore limited to 10 ECTS credits:
a)	Stage 1: Leadership and Organizational Development in Border Management (Module 3)
b)	Stage 2: Global Context in European Border Security (Module 7)
9.6. As a student, to apply for exemption from the
respective module, you should complete and
return the form to the Programme Administrator within one week from the start of the
programme.
2 This position is adopted due to the differing
regulations on RPL between the Academic Partners.

Teaching & Examination Regulations

9.7. The Recognition of Prior Learning Subcommittee examines the requests and based on the
results of the assessment decides within two
weeks from receiving the request to exempt
the student from the assessment requirement
and require the student to audit the module.
Detailed information on the Recognition of
Prior Learning Subcommittee is included in
the Quality Assurance Handbook.

9.10. The assessment criteria are included in the
Teaching and Examination Regulations Appendix 3

9.8. Auditing the module(s) allows the student
to participate in the module without the requirement of completing assessments.

After being approved/validated by the Governing Board, the Teaching and Examination
Regulations, together with the accompanying
Implementation Regulations, will always be
published on the Moodle website.

9.9. The decision is communicated to the student
and all Academic Partners through the Programme Administrator within one month
from the start of the Programme.

10. Publication of the
Regulations

99 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

appendix 1
Rules and Guidelines — Board of Examiners (BoE)

1. The Board of Examiners
standard procedures
••The schedule of the meetings will be published for each iteration on Moodle
••The meetings are not public
••Everything discussed is recorded in the
minutes of the meeting
••Details on the Board of Examiners are included in the Quality Assurance Handbook

2. Establishing of
subcommittees, their
composition and powers
••The Board of Examiners may establish permanent subcommittees and subcommittees in an ad hoc fashion
••The permanent subcommittees makes decisions on a majority vote basis
••The meetings are not public
••Everything discussed is recorded in the
minutes of the meeting
••Details on the Board of Examiners are included the Quality Assurance Handbook

100 of 128

3. The sitting of written or
oral assessments
••All assessments constitute a search for evidence of knowledge, insight in skills on
the part of the student as well as the assessments of the results of such a search
••In cases where the same assessment is carried out by more than one teacher, such assessment will be based on predetermined
assessment strategies. Oral assessment
must be performed by two teachers

4. Conduct during
examinations
Students should adhere to the following rules
during the administration of examinations:
••During bathroom breaks, students should
not use computer terminals, telephones
(land line or cellular), or other communications devices.
••Students cannot exit the exam room for
the first 30 minutes of the examination.
••In order to avoid any possible suggestion
of improper behaviour during an examination, students should refrain from communicating with other students while an
exam is in progress.
••Students should also not retain or refer to
any books or papers during an examination
except with the express permission of the
instructor or Teaching Staff.
••Eating and drinking are not permitted in
any examination room.
••Personal belongings should be put away and
all electronic devices should be turned off.

Teaching & Examination Regulations

In the event of a fire, students should take
their personal belongings and leave their
exam and meet in the location announced at
the beginning of the exam. Students should
not discuss the exam with other students
during the emergency procedures. For violation of the examination rules or dishonesty
in an examination a student may be required
to withdraw from the Programme. Students
who fail to obey instructions are liable to disciplinary action.

5. Late Arrival to
Examination
A student who is late for an exam may be
refused admission and reported as absent.
No one will be admitted to an examination
if any student has already left the examination room. Ordinarily, latecomers will not be
allowed to make up lost time.

6. Illnesses during the
Examination
6.1. Any student who becomes ill during an exam
should report the illness immediately to the
instructor/teacher. An ill student will be kept
under supervision until able to resume the examination. Upon resumption of the examination, the student will be allowed only the
balance of time remaining.
6.2. In case the student requires immediate medical attention and thus cannot resume the examination, the procedure on Absence from
Examination or Non-Submission of Assignments applies

7. Absence from
Examinations or NonSubmission of Assignments
7.1. When students are absent from examinations
held in the pre-defined period for a proven
reason that the Board of Examiners decides
to be valid (for instance, illnesses or being
faced with an extraordinary situation), they
are allowed to take the missed examination
at a predefined later period as a first sit or second attempt depending on the case, at a time
specified by the Board of Examiners.
7.2. When the mode of assessment is by assignment, and there are valid reasons for non-submission of assignments, such validity to be
decided by the Board of Examiners, students
shall be given an extension of the deadline as
proposed by the Module Convener.
7.3. When students are ill or are faced with an extraordinary situation they (or a representative)
should always inform the Programme Administrator or Module Convener about their absence from examination or non-submission of
assignments by email within a 24-hour period.
The Programme Administrator Module Convener informs the student and the teachers by
email that he/she received this information.
A written proof for absence or non-submission of assignment (such as a medical certificate) has to be submitted to the Programme
Administrator or Module Convener as soon as
possible.
7.4. Unavoidable absence from an examination
resulting from causes other than illness
should be reported and explained in advance
to the Programme administrator or Module
Convener.
7.5. It is then for the Board of Examiners to decide whether or not to allow the student to
take the examination as scheduled or at a
later stage and/or to make up for the author-

101 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

ised absence from the modules. The student
will be informed about the decision.
7.6. A student who is absent from the examination or does not submit an excuse or the reason
brought forward is not considered sufficient to
justify the absence or non-submission, fails
the examination or assessment and receives
a failing grade (F).

8. Assessment in Absentia
8.1. In exceptional cases, students who cannot be
present at the time of an exam or reassessment
examination may request permission from the
Board of Examiners to take the examination
in absentia. Applications are available from
the Programme Administrator. Before petitioning to take an examination in absentia,
students should consult the Mentor.

9. Suspension of Studies
9.1. For well-justified reasons a student may be
granted a suspension of studies for a definite
period. In such cases, the period of suspension is not taken into consideration for calculating the period of enrolment in the Degree
Programme.
9.2. If it is not practicable for the student to join
the Degree Programme following the suspension, the student may be allowed to join
a next iteration if and when the Degree Programme is next offered.
9.3. Requests for suspension of studies must be
signed by the students and the respective
Sending Authority, and be submitted to the
Programme Administrator.
9.4. Any request approved by the Programme Board
is shared with the University registrars and
the Sending Authority.

8.2. Ordinarily, an examination administered in
absentia must be given on the same day and
at the same time as the scheduled examination of the Programme at a place acceptable
to the Board of Examiners.

10. Questions and
Assignments

8.3. Students are responsible for arranging for a
proctor at the examination site. The proctor
is subject to approval by the Board of Examiners. Ordinarily, he/she would be a professional
in education (an instructor or administrator).
The rules and regulations that apply to examinations within the Programme also apply to
in absentia examinations.

10.1. None of the questions and assignments included in the exam must deal with subjects
external to the sources which have been detailed beforehand as examinable. Furthermore, these sources must be largely made
known prior to the commencement of the
module leading up to the exam in question

8.4. Frontex is not responsible for any fees incurred
in the administration of examinations taken
in absentia, including proctoring fees, postage, and any extraordinary costs incurred in
the delivery or administration thereof (room
rentals, media rentals, etc.).

102 of 128

10.2. The questions and assignments in the exam
must constitute a balanced representation of
the material studied
10.3. As regards content and form, the exam must
represent the appropriate educational goals
as formulated in the module handbook

Teaching & Examination Regulations

10.4. The questions and assignments must be clear
and unambiguous. The instructions pertaining to the evaluation of the questions and
assignments must also be clear and unambiguous and formulated in such a way that
it is obvious to the student just how extensive and detailed the answers must be.

national grading levels in each of the Consortium Partners. More information on the
grading system is included in the Quality Assurance Handbook.
11.4. Detailed information on the common grading system is included in the Quality Assurance handbook.
11.5. If an examination section consists of several
parts, the weighting of these separate parts
in constituting the final grade is explained in
the Component Assessment Breakdown document attached as Appendix in the Teaching
and Examination Regulations.

11. Evaluation — grading
11.1. The duration allowed for the examination/assignment must be such that students will, by
all reasonable standards, have sufficient time
to complete it
11.2. The assessment method must be transparent
enough for the student to comprehend how
the examination result has been arrived at

12. The retaining of written
assessment papers and
examination results

11.3. The following system of letter grades is used
to evaluate the student’s work. The 6-stage
matrix draws together the 6-level descriptors proposed by the Consortium (Excellent
— Fail) and refers them to the corresponding

12.1. In conjunction with possible appeal procedures
and the periodic review of the programme,
all written work must be kept for at least six

Consortium

Consortium A

Consortium B

Consortium C

Consortium D

Consortium E

Consortium F

Learning
Descriptor

Work of excellent
quality.

Work of very good
quality.

Work of good
quality.

Work of fair but below
average quality

Pass. Work that only just meets the
passing (threshold) standards

Unsatisfactory failing
work in any study-unit.

Superior performance
showing a comprehensive
understanding and
application of the subject
matter. Evidence of
considerable additional
reading/research/work

Performance is typified
by a very good working
knowledge of subject
matter. Evidence of a
considerable amount of
reading/ research/work.

Above average
performance, with
a good working
knowledge of subject
matter. Evidence of
sufficient reading/
research/work.

Considerable
but incomplete
understanding of the
subject matter. Evidence
of a fair amount of
reading/research/work.

Performance demonstrates an
Fail
understanding of the basic concepts
of the subject; evidence of limited
additional reading/research/work
This grade can also be used for work that
is assessed on a pass/fail basis. In this
case, the result is Grade Neutral — i.e.
does not impact positively or negatively
on the student’s grade average.

Estonia

A
Suurepärane

B
Väga hea

C
Hea

D
Rahuldav

E
Kasin (Avestus for Pass/Fail)

F
Puudulik

Lithuania

10
Puikiai

9
Labai Gerai

8
Gerai

7
Pakankamai

6–5
Patenkinamai* – Silpnai

1–4
Visai Blogai – Nepakankamai

Netherlands

10
Uitmuntend

9
Zeer Goed

8
Goed

7
Ruim Voldoende

6.0–5.5
Voldoende

1–5.4
Zeer Slecht – Bijna Voldoende

Spain

10
Matrícula de Honor

9
Sobresaliente

8
Notable

6.5
Aprobado

5
Aprobado

0–4
Suspenso

Latvia

10–9
izcili (with distinction) –
teicami (excellent)

8
ļoti labi (very good)

7
labi (good)

6
5–4
gandrīz labi (almost good) viduvēji (satisfactory) – gandrīz viduvēji
(almost satisfactory)

1–3
neapmierinoši
(unsatisfactory)

* This ‘telescoping’ of the Pakankamai (6) grade and the Silpnai (5) grade is seen in some international programmes where Lithuania is a participant
to fit a 5-stage grading structure

103 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

years after the results have been officially recorded by Frontex and the Academic Partners.

13. Passing on and publicising
the results of assessments
13.1. The teacher is required to determine the result as soon as possible after the assessment
but within 10 working days at most.
13.2. The teacher publishes the grades in Moodle
and the Programme Administrator shares
them with Academic Partners’ registrars or
equivalent within 15 working days of the assessment date.
1.3. If the teacher is not able to meet these requirements due to exceptional circumstances, he
or she must inform the Board of Examiners
and the Programme Administrator, stating
the reasons for the delay. The Programme Administrator will pass this information on to
the students.

14. Dissertation
14.1. Before embarking on Stage 3 of the Programme
— the dissertation, the student must complete
the form which can be obtained from the programme administrator or online from Moodle. On the basis of this form, the board of
examiners will then check, or otherwise ensure, that the student has successfully completed the first two stages and can commence
the Dissertation stage.
14.2. Detailed information on the dissertation can
be found in the Dissertation Guidelines

104 of 128

15. Dissertation board
15.1. For the assessment of the dissertation the
Board of Examiners appoints a separate Dissertation Board for each dissertation. The committee is accountable, via the Programme
Board, to the Board of Examiners.
15.2. Module Convenors recommend members of the
Dissertation Board to the Programme Board.
The Programme Board proposes to the Board of
Examiners the composition of the Dissertation
Board which should include the description of
how the proposed committee composition covers the relevant subject area. This committee
proposal should be submitted together with
the dissertation.
15.3. Every Dissertation Board consists of four
members:
••The first (primary) supervisor of the student
••(associate) professor in a relevant discipline (as chair)
••one other member from a partner border
security organisation, Complementary Entity or from another Academic Partner depending on the nature of the Dissertation
••external examiner
15.4. At least two of the Board members should not
be from the same Academic Partner.
15.5. Board members should hold a PhD or have similar qualifications within the relevant field.
15.6. The candidate’s supervisor is prohibited from
being the Board’s chairman. The supervisor
shall have no voting rights but can answer
questions of other members.
15.7. All members of the Dissertation Board shall
read and assess the quality of the dissertation as an ordered and logical exposition of
the application of knowledge, methods and
techniques in the subject of the course to the
task performed or to the problem investigated.

Teaching & Examination Regulations

15.8. The (associate) professor has to be present
or be replaced by another (associate) professor. The Dissertation board shall assess the
student’s competence in research skills, professional field, problem-solving skills and
practical orientation.

15.9. Further information on the processes of the
Dissertation Board is included in the Quality
Assurance Handbook

105 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

appendix 2
The Implementation Regulations

1. The study load
The study load for the full time EJMSBM programme is 90 credits and can be completed
in one and a half years

••Cooperation In Strategic Border Management (10 ECTS credits)
••Researching Integrated Practices in Border
Management (10 ECTS credits)

2.3. Stage 3
••Dissertation (30 ECTS credits)

2. The composition of the
programme
2.1. Stage 1
••Strategy, Planning and Evaluation in Border Guarding (5 ECTS credits)
••Fundamental Rights and Ethics in European Border Security Management (5 ECTS
credits)
••Leadership and Organisational development in Border Management (5 ECTS
credits)
••EU Borders Policies and Strategies, (5 ECTS
credits)
••Innovation and Technology In Border Security (5 ECTS credits)
••Researching Management practices in Border Security, (5 ECTS credits)

2.2. Stage 2
••The Global Context of European Border Security (5 ECTS credits)
••Strategic Risk & Threat Management for
European Border Security (5 ECTS credits)

106 of 128

3. Assessment
The assessments linked to the different modules are to be completed in the way laid down
in the module handbook pertaining to the
module in question

4. Frequencies, times
and sequences of the
assessments
The frequencies, times and sequences of the
assessments are included in the Programme
Timeline
In principle, the re-assessment periods are at
the end of the stage in which the module was
taught, unless specified otherwise in the Programme Schedule (Academic Calendar)

Teaching & Examination Regulations

appendix 3
Assessment Grid (including RPL assessments)
(available in electronic form in the programme’s virtual learning environment Moodle)

appendix 4
Timetable
(available in electronic form in the programme’s virtual learning environment Moodle)

appendix 5
Component Assessment Breakdown document
(available in electronic form in the programme’s virtual learning environment Moodle)

107 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

108 of 128

European Joint Master’s
in Strategic Border Management

Policies & Procedures

Teaching
Staff
Handbook

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

This Teaching Staff Handbook for the European Joint
Master’s in Strategic Border Management should be
read in conjunction with the Quality Assurance Handbook for the Programme, the Student Handbook, Dissertation Guidelines and the Teaching and Examination
Regulations (available on Moodle). It is essential that
all members of staff working on the programme are
fully aware of and implement the principles of these

110 of 128

manuals. If you should have any questions in relation
to this or the other Handbooks, please contact the Programme Administrator at ejmsbm@frontex.europa.eu.
All other issues not addressed in the above-mentioned
Handbooks are decided by the Governing Board on a
case-by-case basis.

Teaching Staff Handbook

Definition of terms
Academic Partners are the signatories to the Consortium Agreement, which according to their respective national laws are permitted to deliver
validated programmes and are ultimately responsible to confer awards.
Access is construed to mean the right to apply for the Degree Programme, whereas admission means
the process by means of which a student satisfies the entry requirements.
Admissions Panel assesses all potential candidates in
order to determine eligibility for admission
to the Degree Programme in accordance with
the admission requirements.
Board of Examiners decides whether students have satisfactorily completed the Degree Programme
requirements.
Consortium is the association comprising all Partners collectively. For all intents and purposes,
it does not possess any legal personality,
which is vested in each Partner individually/
independently.
Consortium Agreement is a legal contract between all
Partners of the Consortium to deliver the Degree Programme.
Complementary Entities are the affiliate institutions
at national level, commonly being the training institutions within the national authority
with border security responsibilities, which
contribute to the ultimate delivery of the Degree Programme.
Dissertation Coordinator is one of the Module Convenors appointed by the Governing Board to coordinate and oversee the smooth running of
the dissertation stage

ECTS — European Credit Transfer System is a studentcentred system based on the student workload
required to achieve the learning outcomes of
the Degree Programme
Enrolment is the process by which a student is formally
accepted by the Governing Board onto the Degree Programme.
External Examiner is a professional academic responsible for monitoring the reliability and validity of assessment procedures and assessment
standards.
Governing Board is the central administering organ
of the Degree Programme.
National Frontex Point of Contact (NFPOC) is a single
point of contact between Frontex and the national services of Member States responsible
for border control.
National Training Coordinator (NTC) acts as a permanent contact in training matters between
Frontex and the national services of Member
States responsible for border control.
Module Convenor is a professional academic responsible for the module delivery.
Partners are all the signatories to the Consortium Agreement, including Frontex and the Academic
Partners.
Programme Administrator is a Frontex representative
in charge of all administrative responsibilities of the Degree Programme.
Programme Board, inter alia, is responsible for monitoring, delivery and the implementation of
the on-going Degree Programme. The composition, functions and the specific responsibilities of the Programme Board are described in
the Quality Assurance Handbook.

111 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

Programme Coordinator is a representative of an Academic Partner in charge of administrative,
logistical and organisational matters in their
Institution.

Sending Authorities are the national services of Member States responsible for border control under
their national law as represented in the Management Board of Frontex and other relevant
Frontex Partner Organisations.
The word ‘Student’ has the same meaning as the term
‘learner’ as defined in the Bologna process.

112 of 128

Teaching Staff Handbook

1. Roles and Responsibilities
and Academic and
Administrative Staff
1.1. Programme Administrator
The Frontex representative who acts as the
Programme Administrator is in charge of all
administrative responsibilities of the Degree
Programme and is appointed by Frontex.
1.1.1. Roles and Responsibilities
a)	Collects, collates and appropriately disseminates all information related to the
Programme including student records, assessments, quality assurance reports;
b)	Liaises with the Frontex Project Manager;
c)	Liaises with each Module Convenor and
Programme Coordinators;
d)	Acts as a central point of contact for
students and Teaching Staff on the
programmes;
e)	Acts as secretary to the Governing Board,
Programme Board, Board of Examiners
and the Quality Assurance Committee;
f)	Gathers and reports on student and Teaching Staff feedback for the Programme;
g)	Ensures distribution of all reports.

1.2. Programme Coordinator
The Programme Coordinator is a representative of an Academic Partner, a single point of
contact for the Programme Administrator in
all matters related to the Degree Programme
from the Academic Partner’s side.
1.2.1. Roles and Responsibilities
a)	Liaises with the Programme Administrator and Frontex Project Manager
b)	Liaises with the Module Convenors on
all matters related to the delivery of the
modules
c)	Acts as a single point of contact for the Programme Administrator and Frontex Project Manager on all non-academic matters

related to the delivery of a module in his/
her Partner Institution, including but not
limited to: administrative, logistical, organisational issues
d)	Prepares the orientation session for students and external Teaching Staff at the
beginning of the module week: arranges
access to all resources and services available to all students and Teaching Staff at
the Partner Institution
e)	Ensures that the Teaching Staff has the
required prior security clearance
f)	Ensures smooth implementation of the
Degree Programme

1.3. Teaching Staff and Module Convenors
There are three categories of Teaching Staff
that may be contracted by Frontex:
a)	Academic Staff of Academic Partners and
Complementary Entities
b)	Border Guard Officers, operational experts,
and other staff of training institutions
within the national authorities with border management responsibilities
c)	Other teachers, researchers and experts
external to the complementary partners
and border guard agencies
In order to ensure quality, continuity and
teacher mobility, a minimum of one teacher
assigned to each module is from an institution other than the one responsible for the
module delivery.
Furthermore, provisions will be made by the
Module Convenor for substitute Teaching Staff
to deliver a (particular part of) the given module in case of unavailability of previously assigned staff.
1.3.1. Teaching Staff Roles and Responsibilities
1.3.1.1. Assignment as Teaching Staff carries with it
the rights and responsibilities set forth in this
Teaching Staff Handbook, in individual Letters
of Assignment and in the Module Handbook.

113 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

1.3.1.2. Closely related to and complementing teaching is the mentoring of students, which is a
critical part of a Teaching Staff assignment;
mentoring plays a key role in the students’
academic progress.
1.3.1.3. The Mentor system is implemented in order
to provide information and supervision regarding the educational progress for students.
Mentors act as academic counsellors and play
a role in study counselling as well as on any
problems experienced with regard to study
progress. Module Convenors (who are usually
Mentors) are assigned a number of students
who remain under their supervision throughout the programme. Detailed information on
the mentoring system is included in the Quality Assurance and Student Handbooks.
1.3.1.4. Teaching Staff responsibilities include but are
not limited to:
a)	Instructing on assigned module(s) as
scheduled, on the assigned subject, at the
assigned level, and according to the degree
standards appropriate to that level as specified in the Module Handbook’s documents
b)	Fostering discussion, inquiry and expression while maintaining the module’s academic standards
c)	Being available to students outside of the
module contact time on a regular and reasonable basis throughout the duration of
the module and/or throughout the dissertation supervision
d)	Completing in a professional, timely, and
responsible manner all teaching, assessing and academic assignments which the
member of the Teaching Staff has been assigned, including but not limited to, submitting grades, mentoring or supervising
dissertations.
e)	Positively contributing to the ongoing
quality enhancement measures associated with the Programme
f)	Refraining from using their position to
influence students

114 of 128

g)	Acting as an advisor and mentor to students; providing academic guidance, information and general assistance
h)	Complying with the Module Handbook,
Module documentation (template) and
Teaching and Examination Regulations
in relation to teaching and assessment
instructions
i)	Following the policies and procedures of
the EJMSBM whenever applicable to programme-related activity
j)	Keeping abreast of developments in the
academic domain(s), assigned module(s)
and/or dissertation themes drawn upon
k)	Taking part in the various Subcommittees (permanent and ad hoc), if necessary,
when assigned
1.3.1.5. Teaching Staff responsibilities include providing grades in the manner and within the
deadlines specified in the Academic Calendar, doing so honestly, without bias, and using appropriate criteria and following stated
procedures.
1.3.1.6. The grade submitted by the Teaching Staff may
be adjusted as a result of an appeal procedure,
which is designed to protect students against
evaluation in which the Teaching Staff uses
inappropriate criteria or non-application of
the stated procedures and grading system.
1.3.1.7. Teaching Staff have a responsibility to cooperate fully with the decisions of the Module
Boards regarding the grade appeals conducted
according to the procedures.
1.3.1.8. The Module Convenor may invoke the provisions of the employing Institution where
Teaching Staff fail to turn in grades within
the allotted time schedule.
1.3.1.9. Detailed description of the assessment regulations is included in the Student Handbook
and in the Teaching and Examination Regulations and the Module Handbook.

Teaching Staff Handbook

1.3.2. Module Convenor Roles and Responsibilities
In addition to the Teaching Staff responsibilities and roles, the Module Convenor:
a)	Coordinates, leads and organises delivery
of the Module of Study
b)	Assumes full responsibility for the Module Quality Assurance and ensures that
quality assurance procedures are implemented at module level
c)	Chairs the Module Boards
d)	Liaises with External Examiners
e)	Liaises with the Programme Coordinator
f)	Liaises with the Programme Administrator and the Frontex Project Manager
g)	Collects, collates and disseminates all records relating to the Module
h)	Serves on the Programme and Examination Boards
i)	Prepares reports in relation to the Module
and disseminates them
j)	Ensures that the Teaching Staff complies with the all the programme quality
standards, including English language
proficiency
k)	Acts as an advisor and mentor to students;
provides academic guidance, information
and general assistance
l)	Takes part in the various Subcommittees
(permanent and ad hoc)
m)	Serves on the Quality Assurance Committee (when assigned)
n)	Acts as Dissertation Coordinator (when
assigned)
In addition, for each module, the Module
Convenor:
o)	Collects and collates student feedback for
the module
p)	Collects and collates feedback from all persons involved in the delivery of the module
q)	Considers the assessment performance
from a QA and academic standards
perspective
r)	Forwards a module report of all QA measures to the Programme Administrator for

onward consideration by the Quality Assurance Committee
s)	Ensures that any decisions they make are
transparent and recorded accurately in the
minutes of the meeting.
t)	Ensures the overall quality of the module
delivery with respect to teaching, learning
and assessment strategies and methods as
specified in the programme curriculum.

2. Professional Standards
2.1. Academic Qualifications
EJMSBM Teaching Staff and assessors have
the necessary academic qualifications and
professional experience to deliver the Programme. All Module Convenors must hold
a PhD, or at a minimum be registered and
near completion of a doctorate programme.
They are significantly experienced in the academic domain the module draws upon as reflected in relevant publications in their field
of research interests.

2.2. English Language Proficiency
EJMSBM Teaching Staff and Module Convenors
must satisfy the minimum level of C1 of English language according to the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages
(CEFR). All nominated Teaching Staff are required to sign a personal declaration on English language competency upon assignment,
which can be accessed via Moodle through the
respective Module Convenor.
All Teaching Staff and Module Convenors are
encouraged to use the language self-assessment tool which is available in Moodle before
signing the declaration of English language
proficiency at the required minimum level.
The Consortium aims at increasing the academic credentials before the next re-valida-

115 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

tion of the Degree Programme by increasing
the number of PhD holders on the Teaching
Staff by 10 per cent and by increasing the number of PhD holders on the Module Convenors
to 100 per cent as well as encouraging the development of a research community by Academic Partners.

3. Selection and Assignment
of Module Convenors:
3.1. The assignment is offered for a period of one
iteration of the Programme (two years) and includes the concrete tasks, responsibilities and
entitlement to compensation for the work.
3.2. Assigned Module Convenors will have to be in
a possession of the necessary level of security
clearance (RESTRICTED EU or equivalent). The
original certificate of security clearance shall
be submitted to the Programme Administrator who will present it to the Frontex Security
Officer. EU security clearance at RESTRICTED
EU level or equivalent level security clearance
issued by a national security authority of a
Member State (or Schengen associated country) will be accepted.
3.3. In case Module Convenors do not possess a valid
security clearance, they will be requested to
undergo a security screening procedure.
3.4. At least 26 weeks before the start of the academic year, the Governing Board members
propose one Module Convenor from their respective delivering Academic Partner in accordance with the allocation of the modules.
An additional Module Convenor should be
nominated as a reserve, in case the proposed
Module Convenor is unavailable.
3.5. The Governing Board ensures that the nominated Module Convenors fulfil the required
criteria and that are available for the deliv-

116 of 128

ery of the Programme according to the established schedule.
3.6. The Chair of the Governing Board makes a decision on the final list of the Module Convenors to be assigned by Frontex, following the
allocation of the modules for the respective iteration. The decision of the Governing Board
is binding.

3.7. The assignment of the Module
Convenors includes:
a)	Concrete tasks and responsibilities
b)	Europass CV
c)	Copy of Security Clearance or a proof that
the Module Convenor is in a process of obtaining it
d)	Signed declaration on English language
proficiency at C1 level according to the
European Framework of Reference for
Languages
e)	Schedule of the module delivery (including the contact week) with identification
of each session
f)	Estimated lump-sum compensation
3.8. At least 24 weeks prior to the start of the degree
programme, all the proposed Module Convenors should have their assignments completed
by Frontex.

4. Selection and Assignment
of Teaching Staff:
4.1. The assignment is offered for a period of one
iteration of the Programme (two years) and includes the concrete tasks, responsibilities and
entitlement to compensation for the work.
4.2. Assigned Teaching Staff will have to be in
possession of the necessary level of security
clearance (RESTRICTED EU or equivalent). The
original certificate of security clearance shall
be submitted to the Programme Administra-

Teaching Staff Handbook

tor who will present it to the Frontex Security
Officer. EU security clearance at RESTRICTED
EU level or equivalent level security clearance
issued by a national security authority of a
Member State (or Schengen associated country) will be accepted.
4.3. In case Teaching Staff do not possess a valid
security clearance, they will be requested to
undergo a security screening procedure.
4.4. Frontex launches calls for proposals for external experts to be assigned as teachers. The
calls are addressed to the National Frontex
Points of Contact (NFPOC) and relevant international organisations and institutions and
copied to the National Training Coordinators
(NTC). In case of Partner Organisations the
calls are addressed to the countries’ relevant
authorities.
4.5. At least 17 weeks before the start of the academic year, the Module Convenors together
with the Frontex Project Manager prepare a
list of potential Teaching Staff attached to
the respective modules, ensuring the fair representation of staff from the delivering Academic Partner, staff from the other Academic
Partners (e.g. the ones delivering the module
in another iteration), staff from Complementary Entities, as well as any additional experts
involved in the development of the Programme
or to be engaged in the Programme delivery
that are necessary.
4.6. A minimum of one teacher assigned to each
module must be from a different institution
than the one responsible for the Module delivery. Module Convenors and the Frontex
Project Manager also prepare a reserve list
composed of all Teaching Staff categories in
case assigned Teaching Staff are not available.

4.8. Once the final draft list is agreed by the Module Convenor and the Frontex Project Manager, the Module Convenors provide the
Programme Administrator with the list of
potential teaching staff, along with the accompanying documents:
a)	Europass CV
b)	Copy of Security Clearance or a proof that
the teacher is in the process of obtaining it
c)	Signed declaration on English language
proficiency at C1 level according to the
European Framework of Reference for
Languages
d)	Schedule of the module delivery (contact
week) with identification of each session
4.9. The Programme Administrator forwards the
proposals to the Programme Board. The Programme Board, based on the specified criteria, evaluates nominations and proposes
the final list of teaching staff, their concrete
tasks, responsibilities and entitlement to
compensation.
4.10. At least 14 weeks prior to the start of each Programme, the Governing Board establishes
the composition of the Teaching Staff of each
module based on the final proposal by the Programme Board.
4.11. The Programme Administrator, on behalf of
the Governing Board, informs the Academic
Partners on the decision regarding the selection and assignment of the teaching staff.
4.12. The Governing Board’s decision on the composition of the Teaching Staff is binding.
4.13. At least 11 weeks prior to the start of each
Programme, all the selected Teaching Staff
should have their assignments completed.

4.7. Modules Convenors ensure their nominated
Teaching Staff fulfil the required criteria and
are available for delivery of the Programme
according to the established schedule.

117 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

5. Compensation of Teaching
Staff and Module
Convenors
5.1. The Teaching Staff and Module Convenors are
compensated with a lump sum corresponding to their workload and responsibilities,
as stipulated in the assignment letter, after
verification of fulfilment of the tasks and responsibilities assigned by the Module Convenor (in case of Teaching Staff) or the Frontex
Project Manager (in case of Module Convenors)
and in accordance with the required quality
standards.
5.2. The amount of the compensation is based on
the nature and the amount of tasks assigned
to the Teaching Staff and Module Convenor.
All Teaching Staff and Module Convenors receive a lump sum that covers the teaching sessions during the module contact time as well
as online availability and support to students
throughout the duration of the module, as
well as participation in various committees
and/or Boards, if necessary.
5.3. Additional compensation is envisaged for
Teaching Staff who assume the role of dissertation supervisors.
5.4. Module Convenors receive a supplementary
amount to cover their increased tasks and
responsibilities.
5.5. The compensation entitlement is calculated according to the specific financial procedure developed for this programme and is paid to the
private accounts of Teaching Staff and Module Convenors unless national legislation necessitates a different procedure, as indicated
by the assigned persons.

6. Teachers’ Mobility
6.1. The Consortium recognises the added value of
teacher mobility to the Degree Programme,
the Partners and the European Border Security Sector and facilitates teacher mobility
in so far as possible for degree programme
delivery.
6.2. A minimum of one teacher assigned to each
Module is from a different institution than
the one responsible for the Module delivery.
6.3. All costs related to the Degree Programme including compensation, travel expenses (including local travel), accommodation and
meals are covered by Frontex.
6.4. Once assigned to teach in the Degree Programme, the Teaching Staff will be provided
with detailed information related to administrative and logistical arrangements related
to the Degree Programme.

7. Reimbursement of
Teachers’ mobility
7.1. When the Academic Partner or Complementary Entity does not cover expenses related to
teacher’s mobility, Teaching Staff have the
right to receive reimbursement of costs related to teachers’ mobility: accommodation,
travel expenses and the daily subsistence allowance according to relevant Frontex rules
on reimbursement of expenses, attached to
the invitation to the activity, incurred by persons invited to Frontex meetings (according
to EU ceilings).
7.2. All reimbursements are paid to the bank account of the assigned Teaching Staff or to the
authority which has covered these costs.

118 of 128

Teaching Staff Handbook

8. Feedback
8.1. The Consortium accepts that the involvement
of students and Teaching Staff is key to quality enhancement and will seek feedback from
students and Teaching Staff relating to the
development of the degree programme, the
curriculum and its delivery, as well as operational and non-academic support issues.
8.2. Students and Teaching Staff play a critical
part in the evaluation, development and enhancement of the quality of this learning experience. Feedback from Teaching Staff allows
the Consortium to evaluate how its service
provision is viewed by its stakeholders.
8.3. Further detailing of the procedures can be
found in the Quality Assurance Handbook

9. Agreement between the
teaching staff’s authority
and the Academic Partner
When the Teaching Staff involved in the delivery of a module are external to the Academic
Partner, both the Academic Partner and the
employing authority of the Teaching Staff
conclude additional contractual/assignment
obligations, if necessary.

10. Insurance
The Teaching Staff and Module Convenors must
obtain at their own expense, and keep in effect
during the duration of the module they have
been assigned to, liability insurance covering
bodily injuries and property damage to others,
arising out of their activities within the Degree
Programme unless this liability is already covered by their employer or another authority.

11. Resignation
When resigning from their assignment,
Teaching Staff and Module Convenors should
submit a Notice of Resignation at least 2
months before the effective date of resignation unless a shorter notice is mutually agreed
in writing by the Frontex Project Manager and
the teaching staff.

12. Termination
12.1. The assignment of Teaching Staff and Module Convenors may be terminated in writing
by the Chair of the Governing Board; such
written termination must be communicated
at least 2 weeks before the termination takes
effect.
12.2. In exceptional situations when the conduct
of the Teaching Staff and Module Convenors
concerned is in contradiction with the Frontex
Code of Conduct, the Chair of the Governing
Board may terminate the assignment without prior notice.

13. Absence
13.1. Teaching Staff and Module Convenors are expected to meet their academic responsibilities
throughout the duration of the programme.
However, absences may be necessary and are
permissible provided that suitable arrangements can be made to ensure that these academic responsibilities can be adequately
covered by Teaching Staff and Module Convenors from the reserve list for that particular module.
13.2. The request for absence should be submitted
to the relevant Module Convenor in case of
the Teaching Staff and to the Frontex Project
Manager in case of Module Convenor at least 2

119 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

months before the planned absence. The Module Convenor or the Project Manager informs
the Programme Administrator.
13.3. In case of unforeseen circumstances (i.e.
illness, etc.) the Teaching Staff or Module
Convenors should immediately inform the
Module Convenor or the Frontex Project Manager respectively.

14. Frontex Code of Conduct
14.1. All Programme staff (academic and administrative staff and students of the Degree Programmes) shall observe the articles as stated
in the Frontex Code of Conduct during their
periods of study or work on the Programme.
14.2. The Frontex Code of Conduct is available at
http://www.frontex.europa.eu/assets/Publications/General/Frontex_Code_of_Conduct.
pdf and is also available on Moodle.

15. Fair Treatment
All Teaching Staff have the right to be treated
fairly, courteously, and professionally by students, peers and all members of the Degree
Programme management and leadership, and
to be protected from arbitrary or capricious actions on the part of such persons.

16. Academic Authority
16.1. Module Convenors and teaching staff, by virtue of their status, wield significant authority over the students.
16.2. Module Convenors and Teaching Staff may
not require students to perform service that

120 of 128

is outside the scope of their module work or
assigned responsibilities.
16.3. To avoid unfairly exploiting the power of
their position, or appearing to do so, Module
Convenors and Teaching Staff are cautioned
against asking or allowing students to perform any service for them outside the scope
of their module work or duties. If a student
performs such a service, the Module Convenor
and Teaching Staff should ensure that the arrangement is voluntary and beneficial to the
student, that it does not interfere with the individual’s workload for the programme, and
that it does not influence the teaching staff’s
evaluation of the student. For similar reasons, Teaching Staff and Module Convenors
are cautioned against accepting more than
token gifts from students or supervisees.
16.4. If a Module Convenor and/or a member of
Teaching Staff has any relationship with a colleague or student outside of the Programme
professional relationship that might affect
their impartiality, the Teaching Staff must
disclose the relationship to his or her Module Convenor and in the case of a Module Convenor to the Frontex Project Manager; he/she
may be required to be excluded from certain
academic responsibilities with respect to that
colleague or student.

17. Confidentiality
All material produced or communicated by
students related to the Programme must be
treated as ‘restricted/limited to law enforcement only’, unless marked otherwise. As such,
student work, discussions, comments or communication in any format may not be re-used,
cited, or included in any publication in any
format without the advance written permission of Frontex, the Student, the Student’s
Sending Authority and any other Institution
mentioned or implied.

Teaching Staff Handbook

18. Confidentiality of Student
Records
18.1. Student records are maintained by the Programme Administrator to facilitate the educational development of students and to provide
transparent, timely and correct information
on study progress.
18.2. Teaching Staff may also keep informal records
relating to their functional responsibilities
with individual students.
18.3. Information from records, files, and data directly related to a student may not be disclosed
by any means to anyone outside of the Programme without the prior written consent
of the student and the Programme Board.
Information contained in such records may
be shared within the Programme with programme staff having legitimate educational
interest related to this Degree Programme in
receiving such information.

19. Intellectual Property
Rights

20. Academic Calendar
20.1. The academic calendar and schedule for assessments, re-assessments and dissertations
will be published on Moodle for each academic
year.
20.2. Provisional timeline of the Degree Programme
is annexed to the Teaching and Examination
Regulations.

21. Moodle
21.1. The Consortium uses Moodle as its Virtual
Learning Environment. The system is administered and supported by Frontex.
21.2. Frontex offers support and assistance to Teaching Staff and students in using Moodle. If help
is needed, in the first instance, Teaching Staff
should either contact the Moodle administrator, whose details may be found under the
help link or visit the Moodle service support
pages. If you are still unsure, please contact
ejmsbm@frontex.europa.eu.

22. Graduation Ceremony
19.1. All industrial and intellectual property rights
to all works and materials created or for the
purposes of the Programme belong exclusively
to Frontex, subject to specific agreements,
where required, for the protection of industrial and intellectual property rights previously owned by the authors.
19.2. Frontex commits to respect the rights of the
authors (e.g. teachers, professors, academics,
students) of the materials by indicating their
names on the work created by them.

Module Convenors and Teaching Staff are invited to attend the graduation ceremony as directed by the Governing Board.

23. Opening Ceremony
23.1. The Module Convenors and other staff invited
by the Frontex Project Manager are expected
to attend the opening ceremony for each iteration of the degree programme.
23.2. The opening ceremony will be held at the Frontex HQ in Warsaw where all the students, fel-

121 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

low Teaching Staff, and representatives of the
programme will meet for the first time. All the
necessary information about the programme
will be provided, including all the relevant
rules and regulations, training in use of Moodle
and the Frontex Code of Conduct, among others. Module Convenors will meet the students
to whom they have been assigned as Mentors.

24. Orientation Session
24.1. All Teaching Staff and the Module Convenor
involved in the delivery of the module have to
participate in the general orientation sessions
carried out before the start of every module at
the premises of the Partner where the module takes places.
24.2. Every Programme Coordinator will organise an
orientation session for students and external
Teaching Staff at the beginning of the module week and arrange access to all resources
and services available to students and Teaching Staff at the Academic Partner/Complementary Entity.
24.3. The orientation programme includes:
a)	Meeting the students, the Module Convenor, fellow Teaching Staff and a Programme Coordinator
b)	Learning about the Partner’s services
c)	Information about services and resources
a)	Information about the Staff and Office
directory
b)	A Campus Tour
c)	Information about disability Services
d)	Information about IT Services
e)	Information about ID Cards
f)	Information about library Services
g)	Information about other resources
h)	Information about Module resources
i)	Information about the neighbourhood and
surroundings, local attractions, things to
do, etc.
j)	Any other necessary issues

122 of 128

25. Teacher of the Year Award
25.1. The Teacher of the Year Award is given each
year to acknowledge and emphasise excellence
in teaching. Other scholarly activity such as
research and publication records may become
a consideration in the selection process, but
the main emphasis will be on teaching and
mentoring excellence as judged by Teaching
Staff and students.
25.2. The Governing Board is to appoint a committee made up of students, Module Convenors,
and the Project Manager to select outstanding teachers from the Programme. The Evaluation Committee then selects the Teacher of
the Year from up to 5 nominees. This teacher’s accomplishments will be acknowledged at
the annual European Day for Border Guards,
an annual event organised by Frontex.
25.3. The following criteria for selection of the nominees are recommended:
a)	Excellence in teaching and mentoring as
supported by standard module evaluations
and letters from peers.
b)	The inclusion of other evidence of teaching excellence in addition to module evaluations and letters from peers.
c)	Because so many individuals are potentially deserving of the Teacher of the
Year Award, past recipients will not be
considered.
25.4. In order to provide greater uniformity in the
nomination materials provided to the Committee, the following must be prepared:
a)	A statement from the candidate summarising his or her objectives as a teacher.
b)	A summary of evaluation scores
c)	Letters of support from students
d)	A letter of nomination from the Module
Convenor spelling out the candidate’s
teaching responsibilities and influence
on teaching.
e)	A short CV that emphasises teaching roles.

Teaching Staff Handbook

26. Teaching Staff and Module
Convenor Grievance
procedure
26.1. If the rights of a member of the teaching staff
or Module Convenor are violated by an administrative action, they may seek remedy
through the Grievance procedure.
26.2. The Grievance procedure is available to any
member of the Teaching Staff or a Module
Convenor who feels they have been adversely
affected in their professional activities as a
result of an arbitrary act or failure to act or a
violation of the Programme’s policies by any
member of the Programme while acting in
an official capacity (e.g. a faculty member,
an administrator, a staff member, a student).
The Grievance process is as follows:
26.3. Phase One: Informal Resolution
A member of the Teaching Staff or a Module
Convenor wishing to file a grievance shall first
contact, within 2 weeks of any occurrence
giving rise to the grievance (or the time they
could reasonably have learned of such occurrence), the person responsible for the matter being objected to and attempt to resolve
the problem informally. Any Teaching Staff
or Module Convenor who is uncertain about
how to proceed may consult the Programme
Administrator who identifies the appropriate
person. At the request of the grievant or respondent, the Programme Administrator arranges for a meeting of the parties and will
attend such meeting(s), and the Frontex Project Manager who assumes the role of a Mediator will attempt to resolve the problem.
26.4. Phase Two: Formal Review
If the attempt to resolve a matter informally
is unsuccessful, the Teaching Staff or Module Convenor may submit to the Programme
Administrator (preferably within 15 working
days of the first direct contact they had with

the Programme Administrator, provided that
it was possible to hold the informal mediation within that time period) a formal written grievance. The Programme Board forms
a subcommittee including the Module Convenor, who will investigate the grievance.
When the Grievant is a Module Convenor,
or if the Module Convenor is the cause of the
grievance, he/she cannot be a member of the
Subcommittee and is excluded from the decision-making process of the Programme Board.
Detailed description of the Grievance Subcommittee including its composition is included
in the Quality Assurance Handbook.
26.4.1. A grievance report must consist of the
following:
••The specific written Programme policy (policies)/procedure(s) allegedly violated
••A description of the facts and evidence supporting the allegation
••A brief history of the attempts to resolve
the grievance
••A description of the redress that the Grievant seeks
26.4.2. The Subcommittee shall meet (including virtually — online meetings) with the Grievant
and with such other persons as deemed appropriate for the purpose of ascertaining the
facts and attempting to resolve the grievance.
26.4.3. The Subcommittee may declare the grievance:
••Valid, which means that the grievance is
accepted
••Invalid, which means that the grievance
is rejected
••Inadmissible, which means that as a result of procedural shortcomings, the objection will not be taken into consideration
26.4.4. The decision may also be divided: the grievance may be deemed partially invalid and/
or partially inadmissible. This will be clearly
stated in the decision.

123 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

26.4.5. The term within which a written decision on
a grievance must be made known is 30 days,
starting from the date on which the complaint
is registered by the Programme Administrator with copies to the grievant, the person
deemed responsible, the Programme Board
and the Governing Board. The decision shall
include findings of fact, a statement of the
policy that is alleged to have been violated, an
opinion on the validity of the grievance and,
if appropriate, remedial recommendations.
26.4.6. In special circumstances the procedure may
take longer. The member of Teaching Staff or
the Module Convenor will be kept informed
on a regular basis.
26.5. Phase Three:
The Teaching Staff or Module Convenor may
appeal the decision of the Programme Board
to the Governing Board by submitting both
the written decision and a letter of complaint
to the Chair of the Governing Board within 5
working days of receiving the written decision from the Programme Board.
26.5.1. A complaint must consist of the following:
••The written decision of the Programme
Board that is being appealed against
••The specific written Programme policy(ies)/
procedure(s) allegedly violated
••A description of the facts and evidence supporting the allegation
••A description of the redress that the Grievant seeks
26.5.2. The role of the Governing Board in such matters is narrow and strictly procedural. Its function is limited to rendering a decision as to
whether the Programme Board did or did not
substantively adhere to the specific written
policies or procedures cited by the Grievant
in its management of a matter.
26.5.3. The Governing Board cannot consider a complaint asking for a review of the fairness,

124 of 128

merits, or other subjective aspects of the decision nor can it substitute its judgment for
that of the Programme Board. Moreover, the
Governing Board cannot consider any issues
or policies other than those presented in the
original grievance. The Governing Board’s
decision is relevant only to the specific policy/procedure questions cited in the grievance and should not be construed as being a
statement on the overall manner in which a
matter should be managed or as limiting the
Programme Board’s authority to apply its policies, procedures and judgment.
26.5.4. The Governing Board forms a subcommittee
to review the written materials. Detailed description of the Grievance Appeal Subcommittee is included in the Quality Assurance
Handbook. The subcommittee may declare
the appeal:
••Valid, which means that the grievance is
accepted
••Invalid, which means that the grievance
is rejected
••Inadmissible, which means that as a result of procedural shortcomings, the appeal will not be taken into consideration
26.5.5. The decision may also be divided: the appeal
may be deemed partially invalid and/or partially inadmissible. This will be clearly stated
in the decision.
26.5.6. The subcommittee advises the Governing Board
on how to deal with the appeal, following
which the Governing Board makes a decision. The Teaching Staff or the Module Convenor will be informed of the decision within
four weeks following the decision.
26.5.7. The decision of the Governing Board is final.

Teaching Staff Handbook

27. Misconduct
27.1. Where there is an allegation of misconduct
that does not fall within the remit of the
teaching staff’s or Module Convenor’s employer, the Governing Board reserves the right
to conduct an administrative inquiry.
27.2. The purpose of this procedure is to help and
encourage Teaching Staff and the Module Convenor to comply with the required standards
of programme conduct and quality including
but not limited to declared English language
competency.
27.3. Failure to fulfil their responsibilities may subject the Teaching Staff to administrative inquiry. The Teaching Staff will be advised of
the nature of the complaint and given an opportunity, within reasonable notice, to state
their case at an administrative inquiry (including virtually).
27.4. There may be occasions when, depending on
the seriousness of the misconduct involved,
it will be appropriate to terminate the assignment without prior notice.

28. Administrative Inquiry
28.1. Where there are grounds for considering misconduct by a member of Teaching Staff or the
Module Convenor, the Programme Board may
appoint a subcommittee to investigate the circumstances. The Subcommittee includes the
Frontex legal representative. When the Grievant is a Module Convenor, he/she cannot be a
member of the Subcommittee and is excluded
from the decision-making process of the Programme Board.
28.2. The purpose of the administrative inquiry is
to gather evidence and to enable a decision to
be taken.

28.3. If there are witnesses to an incident, or a person makes an allegation against someone else,
such persons will be interviewed and notes
of the interview or a statement from the individual interviewed will be produced by the
Programme Administrator.
28.4. The subcommittee informs the Teaching Staff
in writing, at least one week before the date
of the administrative inquiry:
••that there will be an administrative
inquiry;
••of the date, time and venue of the administrative inquiry (including online);
••of the allegations;
••of the possible outcomes under the disciplinary procedure;
••enclosing a copy of any statements from
witnesses and other relevant evidence;
28.5. The purpose of the administrative inquiry is
to give the Teaching Staff or Module Convenor
the opportunity to state their case and to answer the allegations that have been made.
28.6. When the administrative inquiry is concluded,
the Programme Board may decide:
••to take no action; or
••to give the Teaching Staff or Module Convenor notice of no compensation for the assignment and issuing of an official Frontex
letter to the home organisation/authority detailing the non-compliance with
the prescribed conduct and/or the quality
standards of the programme; in the case
of Teaching Staff assigned to teach during
more than one module, the termination of
the assignment takes place before the next
module starts; or
••to terminate the assignment without notice when there has been gross misconduct.
28.7. The decision of the Programme Board will be
communicated to the Teaching Staff by the
Programme Administrator.

125 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

29. Appeals
29.1. The purpose of the appeal procedure is to determine whether appropriate procedures were
followed in making decisions, rather than to
re-evaluate the merits of the decisions themselves. The standard for deciding the appeal
shall be limited to determining whether there
were procedural errors (such as the failure to
bring proper facts and criteria to bear on a decision, or the introduction of improper facts
and criteria, or the existence of other procedural defects) that substantially affected the
outcome to the detriment of the appellant.
29.2. The right of appeal must be exercised within
one week of receipt of the Programme Board
decision of disciplinary action.
29.3. The appeal, stating the grounds on which it
is made, must be in writing addressed to the
Chair of the Governing Board.

126 of 128

29.4. An appeal will be considered by a Governing
Board Subcommittee within 3 weeks from the
appeal being submitted, unless otherwise
agreed.
29.5. The subcommittee may:
••uphold the disciplinary action taken; or
••withdraw the disciplinary action taken
29.6. The appeal will be a review of the decision
taken by the Programme Board. No new evidence may be presented to the Subcommittee, nor any witnesses called.
29.7. The subcommittee advises the Governing Board
on how to deal with the appeal, following
which the Governing Board makes a decision. The Teaching Staff or Module Convenor
will be informed of the decision within two
weeks following the decision.
29.8. The decision of the Governing Board is final.

Teaching Staff Handbook

127 of 128

European Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management

128 of 128

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States
of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

