Training strategy
European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, POLAND
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

2|3

This strategy supports the implementation
of Frontex’s Multi Annual Plan and
promotes the achievement of the Agency’s
mission and strategic objectives. It sets
out the objectives and measures to be
taken to implement Frontex’s training
mandate, establishing the basis for
further developing the Agency’s training
activities. This strategy does not address
the corporate training of Frontex staff.

1
Legal Basis

borders in the context of operational cooperation coordinated by Frontex2. These rules specify that border guards and other staff participating in a sea operation shall be trained with
regard to relevant provisions of fundamental
rights, refugee law and the international legal
regime of search and rescue.

Frontex’s mandate in the field of training is defined in Articles 2, 5 and 14 of the Frontex Regulation1. According to the Regulation, Frontex
shall assist Member States in training national
border guards, including establishing and further developing common training standards.
The Agency shall establish and develop common core curricula for the training of border
guards and provide training at European level
for instructors of Member States’ national border guards, including training on fundamental
rights, access to international protection and
relevant maritime law.

Furthermore, the Agency is tasked to provide
training at the European level for trainers of the
national border guards of the Member States.
Additional training courses and seminars are
also to be offered to officers of the competent
national services of the Member States on subjects related to Frontex’s main tasks. An exchange programme for EBGT members shall
also be established to allow them to acquire
knowledge or specific know-how from experiences and good practices abroad, by working with border guards in a Member State other than their own.

In addition, the Agency shall, when needed,
provide members of the European Border Guard
Teams (EBGT) with advanced training relevant
to their tasks and powers, and shall conduct
regular exercises with those border guards. The
Agency is also obliged to ensure that prior to
participating in operational activities organised
by the Agency, all participants receive training
in relevant Union and international law, including fundamental rights and access to international protection and guidelines for the purpose
of identifying persons seeking protection and
directing them towards the appropriate facilities. This obligation is further emphasised in
article 4(8) of the Regulation, which establishes rules for the surveillance of the external sea

According to the article 14(2) of the Frontex
Regulation, the Agency may, within the framework of working arrangements, cooperate with
the authorities of the third countries competent in matters covered by this regulation. Furthermore, Frontex may invite observers from
third countries and other European Agencies
to participate in the training activities referred
to in Article 5.

1 Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 of 26 October
2004, establishing a European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders
of the Member States of the European Unit, with amendments Regulation (EC) No 863/2007, 11.7.2007; Regulation
(EU) No 1168/2011, 25.10.2011.

Finally, according to article 14(5), the Agency may launch technical assistance projects in
third countries. In this regard, training activities
are an important element of the support on capacity building Frontex provides to the competent authorities of third countries.
2 Regulation (EU) No 656/2014 of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 15 May 2014 establishing rules for
the surveillance of the external sea borders in the context
of operational cooperation coordinated by the European
Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the
European Union.

4|5

2
Basic Principles
and Contextual
Framework

Frontex supports the Member States3 to achieve
an efficient, high and uniform level of border
control, and develops capacities to tackle challenges focusing on migration flows. The Agency contributes to the fight against serious
cross-border crime and terrorism at external
borders. Its mission in the field of training is to
contribute to these long-term objectives by utilising cooperative networks. In all of its activities,
a European approach is emphasised, focusing on
the operational needs and the specific context
of the stakeholders, including Partner Countries4.
Frontex strives to fulfil its training mission by
providing education and training for border
guards in the Member States, aligned to the
Bologna and Copenhagen principles and the
European Qualifications Framework for Lifelong Learning (EQF). As an overarching frame
of reference for all border guard education and
training, Frontex has developed the European
Sectoral Qualifications Framework for Border
Guarding (SQF).
3 The term “Member State” includes the Member States
of the European Union and the Schengen Associated
Countries
4 A “Partner Country” is a third country with which Frontex
has agreed on a Working Arrangement

The SQF is a platform for a coherent strategy
that links all training products and contributes
to the harmonisation of Border Guard education and training. It supports the national integration of all common curricula, as it offers
specific reference points for all border guard
learning requirements, consistent and aligned
with the EQF. The SQF is thus ensuring comparability of qualifications and creating the
premise for the recognition of learning in all its
forms – formal, informal and non-formal. For
Frontex, the SQF is an instrument for reviewing training and for quality assurance that will
lead to the development of courses that can be
accredited. SQF-aligned curricula and courses
are competence-driven, focusing on learning
outcomes based on curriculum design and integration of fundamental rights across all learning, as an underpinning principle.
Frontex’s vision in the field of training is to
represent excellence in border guard education and training, promoting the development
of a common European border guard culture
with high professional and ethical standards.
This is achieved by supporting capacity building in Member States and Partner Countries,
and by developing and implementing harmonised, learner-centred and cost-effective training products, based on the implementation of
an integrated border management approach.
Frontex common values also provide guidance
in the field of training:
n Humanity – Our training has a strong formative part, making border guards aware of their
responsibilities and able to understand people and the communities. Respecting fundamental rights is a natural part of all activities.

n Professionalism – Our work has to reach

the highest standards and has to make use
of the most recent means and tools associated with the professional identity awareness in the context of education and training.
n Open communication – Our organisation promotes communication both internally and externally. New ideas and critical
views are welcomed and freely discussed in
all training activities.
n Teamwork – Working at the borders is designed and developed as teamwork. This is
also visible in the way training activities are
designed.
Trustworthiness
– We promote solidarity,
n
commitment and respect at work, in training as well as at all other levels of professional cooperation.
These values are also applicable to the activities carried out in the cooperation with third
countries.
To fulfil the mission based on the principles outlined above, Frontex’s strategic objectives in the
field of training are to be:
1.	a promoter of excellence in border guard education and training;
2.	a developer and provider of harmonised,
learner-centred, accreditable and cost-effective training products of high professional quality and ethical standards, supporting
operational needs;
3.	a facilitator of the development and the
implementation of professional standards
aligned with the SQF for border guarding
and the Bologna/Copenhagen principles, and
a promoter of the alignment of national curricula, and
4.	a supporter of capacity building in the Member States and Partner Countries.

6|7

3
Areas of Activities
and Organisation
of Work

Frontex strategic objectives constitute the basis for the four central areas of the Agency’s
training activities:
n Educational Standards: Educational
standards are cornerstones in building harmonised competencies within border guard
education and training. They promote quality assurance principles for learning development and recognition at national and European levels. Such standards support the
integration of the SQF, including the curriculum review and alignment process, as
well as the integration of the quality assurance principles for course design, delivery, and certification. They also include sets
of common core curricula and courses for
border guard education and training that
are competence-driven and learning outcomes-based, covering all stages of career
development.

n EBGT Training: European Border Guard

Teams (EBGT) are a pool of border guards
who, when needed, receive specialised profile training before being deployed for Frontex Joint Operations, Pilot Projects or Rapid Border Interventions. Training focuses on
the specific needs of the EBGT pool members for carrying out their duties effectively,
according to the profile defined for their deployment. It ensures flexible and up-to-date
delivery according to the situation, and envisages direct access to trained human resources during operations.
n Thematic Training Support: Frontex complements national training programmes for
border guards by providing thematic training support. The aim of this support is to ensure the availability of specially trained professionals to perform border guard activities.
This is achieved through the development
of common training tools, and by qualifying national multipliers and trainers. Based
on the input from Frontex Risk Analysis, lessons learnt from Frontex-coordinated Joint
Operations, Member States and prior needs
assessment, the thematic training support
measures offer common training tools in
specific areas.
n Training infrastructures and networks:
The Training Infrastructures activities aim
to promote excellence in Border Guard education and training by maintaining effective
cooperation with European stakeholders in
Law Enforcement education and training.
This goal is achieved by establishing reliable and effective networks of partnerships
with relevant authorities of Member States
and Partner Countries and by maintaining
an ICT network for education and training.

Frontex Training activities are carried out on
the basis of regular activities and training projects. Regular activities refer to the continuous
process of training implementation and delivery, in the context of curricula and course programmes, which are designed through joint efforts of Frontex and experts from the Member
States, supported by other EU Agencies and international organisations. Outcomes of these
activities are (common) curricula, courses/
course programmes, manuals, and other tools
supporting the scope of work, such as computer-based simulations, software for self-directed learning or reference tools.
All training activities follow a systematic approach: identifying training needs and target
groups; planning and designing training by establishing a methodology and tools; delivery
by selected trainers and experts, then implementation. The process ends with evaluation
of training outcomes and quality control.
Planning, development and further revision of
training activities will be linked to prior needs
assessment, carried out together with Member States and Partner Countries. During or at
the end of a regular activity or project, evaluation is carried out and leads to a periodical
report, circulated to and discussed by relevant
stakeholders.
Activities are planned, budgeted and presented
in the annual Programme of Work, which is accompanied by a portfolio of activities. Frontex
also maintains readiness to manage and coordinate training financed from external sources.

8|9

4
Training Design
and Delivery

Frontex training products are developed and
implemented on the basis of course programmes and curricula designed jointly by
Frontex and experts from Member States, supported by other agencies and international organisations. Frontex supports lifelong learning
through professional development and training of border guards, improving quality by making use of synergies in Law Enforcement training. Focus is set on the development of training
tools to be implemented by the Member States
and on the support to Joint Operations. Information and communication technologies (ICT)
play a significant role.
To enhance interoperability Frontex supports
and complements national border guard education and training. The capacity to work
together is achieved by developing common
training standards. Frontex also trains multipliers – national trainers who train border guards
in their home countries. This approach is recognised as the most efficient way to cascade
competences to all Member States. Standardised results are ensured through the use
of Frontex training tools and through guidelines given to multipliers. With this approach,

translating the training products and qualifying the national multipliers, all Border Guard
officers can be trained in the same training
standards in their mother tongue.
Training products and standards are developed
using the expertise available within Member
States’ border guard authorities (law enforcement organisations with border guarding responsibilities). This approach ensures that the
training tools and methodologies are tailored
to the needs of the stakeholders and represent
identified best practices. Training at European level is delivered by Frontex-certified trainers. The trainers and national experts are nominated by the Member States as contributors to
Frontex activities. The availability of high-level
expertise is additionally ensured by maintaining a pool of external experts, selected based
on open calls for expression of interest.
Training is delivered through different phases: independent learning, a contact phase and
experiential learning. The training for border
guards is carried out in a participatory environment, using methodologies that support the
learners in upgrading their qualifications and
performing their responsibilities effectively and
professionally. For doing so different approaches are applied: training sessions (e.g. face-toface, blended or online), self-directed learning
e.g. eLearning tools and mobility/exchange programmes.

Training aims to facilitate learning, taking into
account the characteristics of adult learning.
This means adopting a problem-based and interactive approach to learning, recognising
learners’ experience in terms, for instance, of
accountability for training, applying life experience, current needs and relevant work-related issues, as well as use of training to manage
professional challenges.
The learning outcomes shall not be perceived by
the amount of information transferred or memorised, but by knowledge, skills and competences achieved. To this end, encouraging critical
reflection and decision-making skills are important elements of the training process. Frontex trains border guards to understand and apply procedures and working methodologies to
quickly find solutions to any kind of operational
problem they encounter in a responsible, powerful and positive way.
Frontex uses different training approaches:
Training sessions e.g. face-to-face, blended or
online, self-directed learning e.g. eLearning
tools and mobility/exchange programmes. All
Frontex training aims to meet the educational needs and objectives of stakeholders and to
promote the development of an efficient, high
and uniform level of border control at the external borders, and the evolution of a common European border guard culture with high ethical
standards. Evaluation is essential for improving the effectiveness and quality of the training
programmes whereas an important role is given to the assessment of learning as well.

10 | 11

5
Quality Assurance

Frontex strives to continuously enhance the
quality of its training processes and products,
applying relevant European standards for quality assurance. As well as allowing all types of
learning delivered by Frontex to be recognised
in national training systems, this approach enabling the accreditation of the courses developed
at national level based on the Frontex training
curricula and learning standards.
The quality assurance concept focuses on certain key principles:
n Commitment to a culture of peer review and
quality enhancement, engaging all relevant
stakeholders (internal and external quality
assurance);
n Formal mechanisms and standards for design, quality check, evaluation, approval,
monitoring and periodic review of the courses and curricula;
n Collaborative curriculum design driven by
learning outcomes, based on the SQF for
Border Guarding and updated methodologies for teaching, learning and assessment;
n Consistent application of transparent, fair
and standardised criteria, regulations and
procedures for assessment of learning;
Systematic
follow-up on the implementan
tion of recommendations resulting from the
periodic reviews and evaluation, and timely
reporting;

n Quality assurance of teaching staff: ensuring

they are suitably qualified and competent,
implementing policies and procedures to ensure teaching staff are properly selected, developed, monitored and evaluated;
Effective
management of the course delivery,
n
ensuring course participants have the necessary learning support in all relevant forms;
effective management of the entry and access to Frontex courses, and
n Monitoring the implementation and integration of Frontex courses and curricula at
national level and reporting on the status
of accreditation and recognition of learning
and exit qualifications, aiming at consistently validating the EQF – SQF referencing
of learning descriptors.

12 | 13

6
Stakeholders
and Cooperation

Training is understood as a shared responsibility
for all involved stakeholders (Frontex, Member
States, training providers, learners) to identify
and develop relevant competences that must
be considered within the training programmes,
along with the necessary skills to apply this
knowledge effectively.
The principal stakeholders of Frontex training
products are:
n Border guard authorities in Member States
and Partner Countries, along with their border guard officers;
n Frontex operational units;
n Partnership Academies, and national education and training institutions;
Members
of the European Border Guards
n
Teams (EBGT);
n National multipliers, in charge of organising
and carrying out training at national level,
while acting as multipliers for the dissemination of Frontex training products;
EU
institutions, Justice and Home Affairs
n
agencies and international organisations
dealing with migration.

The expertise available in the Member States
is utilised in all training activities to ensure a
European approach. Close contact and direct
involvement of the national stakeholders are
maintained through a formal network of National Training Coordinators (NTC), who play
a key role in training cooperation between
Frontex and Member States. Frontex Partnership Academies, a network of national border
guard/law enforcement academies from Member States, allow the sharing of experiences and
best practices in an authentic training environment, by supporting exchange and other training activities. Frontex also maintains a reliable
and effective network of partnerships with relevant authorities of Partner Countries.

14 | 15

7
Strategic Measures

The strategic measures needed to implement
this training strategy will be carried out within
the framework of allocated resources.
The main strategic measures to be implemented are:
n To enhance the capabilities of the Member
States to respond to the operational needs
at the external borders;
n To ensure that border guard officers deployed in joint operations are properly
trained;
To
design and deliver high-level specific
n
training products for national border guards
and trainers of border guards, based on prior needs assessment;
n To strengthen the interaction and establishment of current training networks and
to utilise the support from the educational community;
To
align Frontex curricula and courses with
n
the SQF and support the Member States in
the alignment of their national curricula;
To
develop and implement a quality assurn
ance mechanism for Frontex training;

n To develop and implement exchange and

mobility programmes;
To
maintain a powerful state-of-the-art
n
platform for knowledge management and
learning, supporting effective online learning and shared resources;
n To promote training cooperation among Justice and Home Affairs agencies and international partner organisations, sharing good
practices and
n To cooperate with Partner Countries in the
field of training, based on EU standards.
These measures will be reflected in the annual
Programme of Work of the Agency.

