Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2094(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Smart specialisation: networking excellence for a sound cohesion policy

Subject
4.70.02 Cohesion policy, Cohesion Fund (CF)
4.70.05 Regional cooperation, cross-border cooperation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
REGI

Regional Development

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE WINKLER Hermann

18/03/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D NILSSON Jens
ALDE GODMANIS Ivars
Verts/ALE CHRYSOGELOS
Nikos
ECR VLASÁK Oldřich
GUE/NGL ERNST Cornelia

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Regional and Urban Policy

HAHN Johannes

Key events
10/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/11/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

16/12/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/01/2014

Debate in Parliament

14/01/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

14/01/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/01/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0462/2013

Summary

T7-0002/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2094(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

REGI/7/12766

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE519.699

24/09/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE521.796

22/10/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0462/2013

16/12/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0002/2014

14/01/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)320

26/05/2014

2013/2094(INI) - 16/12/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Regional Development adopted the own-initiative report by Hermann Winkler (EPP, DE) on smart specialisation:
networking excellence for a sound Cohesion Policy. It noted that Smart specialisation strategy meant the national or regional innovation
strategies which set priorities in order to build competitive advantage by developing and matching research and innovation (R&I) own strengths
with business needs to address emerging opportunities and market developments. Members also noted that regions should formulate a smart
specialisation strategy and also draw up investment plans for the use of all available regional, national and EU funding for R&D&I, and that the
Commission might withhold interim payments of ERDF funding for the thematic objective of strengthening R&D&I if these pre-conditions were
not met. Members considered that, aside from the need to fulfil the ex-ante-conditionality, developing such a strategy could offer regions
significant advantages in terms of the effectiveness of their R&D&I, and they called on each region to view such a strategy not only as a
statutory obligation but also as a source of opportunity. All regions should press ahead with formulating their smart specialisation strategies, so
as not to risk delays in receiving EU funding for the relevant operational programmes owing to the lack of such a strategy.
The right priorities: Members called on the regions to make their own appropriate choice of actions by focusing on strengthening their
regionally-based characteristics, rather than by simply copying the successful strategies of other regions. They encouraged the regions to
invest in cross-sector and cross-technology activities that could generate cross-cutting links throughout the regional economy so that a variety
of businesses, could contribute to as well as benefit from the generation of more growth and jobs. However, regions should not focus solely on
technology-based innovation, but rather base their strategies on as broad a notion of innovation as possible, taking account not merely of
high-tech but also of low-tech and, indeed, non-technical innovation, such as process optimisation and organisational transformation. When
selecting their priorities, regions should in addition to strengthening their innovation systems with a view to achieving greater competitiveness
undertake actions that address structural and societal challenges within society, such as unemployment, poverty, energy security and
demographic change.
Closer involvement of actors within regions: Members stressed the importance of consulting with businesses, and with SMEs in particular,
local and regional policy-makers, universities, research and innovation centres and businesses, as well as civil society and social actors. They
called on public and private stakeholders to use the many opportunities to fund actions under the ERDF for 2014-2020, including by supporting
the establishment of regional innovation incubators and by developing links and synergies between universities, other research and higher
educational institutes, innovative and creative entrepreneurs and businesses, and business support providers and investors, as e.g. in the
case of creative and cultural industries.
Achieving funding programme synergies: the report urged the regions to make full use of all funding, cooperation and investment opportunities,
in order to promote synergies between European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIFs) and Horizon 2020 and, in so doing, to close the
innovation gap between regions. In addition, all regional and national actors in charge of devising and implementing the RIS3 strategy, the
European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures (ESFRI) road map, the ESIFs and Horizon 2020 were asked to cooperate more closely
as regards planning and coordination, and, where necessary, to develop appropriate structures to integrate the various tiers of government
action. Member States should exchange best practises on such structures.
Close cooperation of regions: the external dimension: the report called on the regions not only to improve their internal links between
education and research institutions, businesses and the administration, but also to build alliances with other regions so as to supplement their
own value chain. Opportunities would be fostered if close cooperation were established between the Knowledge and Innovation Communities
(KIC) partners in the regions and the organisations involved in designing and delivering the RIS3 strategies.
Lastly, Members pointed out that, in border areas, the challenges were often the same on both sides of the border and they called for
cross-border smart specialisation strategies, and cross-border clusters, making use of EU interregional cooperation funding.

2013/2094(INI) - 14/01/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 578 votes to 23 with 39 abstentions a resolution on smart specialisation: networking excellence for a
sound Cohesion Policy.
A Smart specialisation strategy meant the national or regional innovation strategies which set priorities in order to build competitive advantage
by developing and matching research and innovation (R&I) own strengths with business needs to address emerging opportunities and market
developments. Regions must formulate a smart specialisation strategy and also draw up investment plans for the use of all available funding
for R&D&I. The Commission might withhold interim payments of ERDF funding for the thematic objective of strengthening R&D&I if these

pre-conditions were not met. Parliament called on each region to view such a strategy not only as a statutory obligation but also as a source of
opportunity. All regions should press ahead with formulating their smart specialisation strategies, so as not to risk delays in receiving EU
funding for the relevant operational programmes owing to the lack of such a strategy.
The right priorities: Members called on the regions to make their own appropriate choice of actions by focusing on strengthening their
regionally-based characteristics, rather than by simply copying the successful strategies of other regions. They encouraged the regions to
invest in cross-sector and cross-technology activities that could generate cross-cutting links throughout the regional economy so that a variety
of businesses, could contribute to as well as benefit from the generation of more growth and jobs. However, regions should not focus solely on
technology-based innovation, but rather base their strategies on as broad a notion of innovation as possible, taking account not merely of
high-tech but also of low-tech and, indeed, non-technical innovation, such as process optimisation and organisational transformation. When
selecting their priorities, regions should in addition to strengthening their innovation systems with a view to achieving greater competitiveness
undertake actions that address structural and societal challenges within society, such as unemployment, poverty, energy security and
demographic change.
Closer involvement of actors within regions: Members stressed the importance of consulting with businesses, and with SMEs, policy-makers,
universities, research and innovation centres and businesses, as well as civil society and social actors. They called on public and private
stakeholders to use the many opportunities to fund actions under the ERDF for 2014-2020, including by supporting the establishment of
regional innovation incubators and by developing links and synergies between universities, other research and higher educational institutes,
innovative and creative entrepreneurs and businesses, and business support providers and investors, as e.g. in the case of creative and
cultural industries.
Achieving funding programme synergies: Parliament urged the regions to make full use of all funding, cooperation and investment
opportunities, in order to promote synergies between European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIFs) and Horizon 2020 and, in so doing,
to close the innovation gap between regions. In addition, all regional and national actors in charge of devising and implementing the RIS3
strategy, the European Strategy Forum on Research Infrastructures (ESFRI) road map, the ESIFs and Horizon 2020 were asked to cooperate
more closely as regards planning and coordination. Those regions lagging behind in terms of building research infrastructure and capacity
must foster collaborative arrangements with research establishments of excellence in order to build up centres of excellence on their own.
Close cooperation of regions: the external dimension: Parliament called on the regions not only to improve their internal links between
education and research institutions, businesses and the administration, but also to build alliances with other regions so as to supplement their
own value chain. Opportunities would be fostered if close cooperation were established between the Knowledge and Innovation Communities
(KIC) partners in the regions and the organisations involved in designing and delivering the RIS3 strategies.
Lastly, Members called for cross-border smart specialisation strategies, and cross-border clusters, making use of EU interregional cooperation
funding.

