Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Directive

2013/0124(COD)

Procedure completed

Free movement of workers: measures facilitating the exercise of rights
conferred on workers
See also Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 2010/0110(COD)
Subject
1.20.05 Public access to information and documents, administrative practice
2.30 Free movement of workers
2.80 Cooperation between administrations
4.10.08 Equal treatment between persons, non-discrimination
4.15.04 Workforce, occupational mobility, job conversion, working conditions
4.15.08 Work, employment, wages and salaries: equal opportunities women
and men, and for all
4.15.12 Workers protection and rights, labour law
7.40.02 Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE BAUER Edit

17/04/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D CHRISTENSEN Ole
ALDE DE BACKER Philippe
Verts/ALE CORNELISSEN
Marije
GUE/NGL HÄNDEL Thomas
Committee for opinion
CULT

LIBE

FEMM

PETI

Culture and Education

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Women's Rights and Gender Equality

Petitions

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
Verts/ALE CORNELISSEN
Marije

29/05/2013

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
ANDOR László

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
26/04/2013

Legislative proposal published

21/05/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

05/11/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

COM(2013)0236

Summary

14/11/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

11/03/2014

Debate in Parliament

12/03/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

12/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/04/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

16/04/2014

Final act signed

16/04/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

30/04/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

A7-0386/2013

Summary

T7-0224/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0124(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Directive
See also Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 2010/0110(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 046

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/7/12593

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0236

26/04/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0148

26/04/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0149

26/04/2013

EC

PE516.670

05/08/2013

EP

CES3905/2013

19/09/2013

ESC

PE519.521

24/09/2013

EP

PE516.697

22/10/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0386/2013

14/11/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0224/2014

12/03/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)455

10/06/2014

Committee draft report
Economic and Social Committee: opinion,
report
Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

FEMM

Summary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Directive 2014/54
OJ L 128 30.04.2014, p. 0008 Summary

2013/0124(COD) - 26/04/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to ensure the better application of EU legislation on peoples right to work in another Member State than their own and thus to
make it easier for people to exercise their rights in practice.
PROPOSED ACT: Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: freedom of movement for workers is one of the four fundamental freedoms on which the Single Market is based. It is one of
the core values of the European Union and a fundamental element of EU citizenship. Article 45 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union (TFEU) enshrines the right of EU citizens to move to another Member State for work purposes. It specifically includes the
right not to be discriminated against on the grounds of nationality as regards access to employment, remuneration and other conditions of
work. It also includes the removal of unjustified obstacles to the freedom of movement of workers within the European Union.
Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 details the rights derived from the freedom of movement of workers, and defines the specific areas where
discrimination on the grounds of nationality is prohibited, in particular as regards: (i) access to employment; (ii) working conditions; (iii) social
and tax advantages; (iv) access to training; (v) membership of trade unions; (vi) housing; and (vii) access to education for children. Article 45
TFEU and Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 are directly applicable in all Member States.
Nevertheless, EU citizens who want to move or who actually move from one Member State to another for work purposes continue to face
problems in exercising their rights. The difficulties they face go some way to explaining why geographical mobility between EU Member States
has remained at a relatively low level: according to the EU-Labour Force Survey, in 2011, only 3.1% of the working-age European citizens
(15-64) lived in an EU Member State other than their own.
In April 2009, Parliament adopted a resolution detailing persisting obstacles to the cross-border enjoyment of rights. It called on the
Commission to produce a list of obstacles to the exercise of EU citizens' rights, based on the results of a public consultation, and to make
specific proposals to address those obstacles. More recently, in another resolution on promoting workers' mobility within the Union, Parliament
called on the Commission and Member States to take measures in order to "to guaranteethe correct implementation of the existing legislation
on non-discrimination, to take practical measures to enforce the principle of equal treatment of mobile workers" and also highlighted the gap
between the rights that EU citizens have in theory and what happens in practice.
There are diverse examples of obstacles and problems faced by citizens, such as:
public authorities not complying with EU law (non-conforming legislation or incorrect application) and the effect on EU migrant
workers;
employers and legal advisors not complying with EU law;
EU migrant workers not having access to information or the means to ensure their rights.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: in line with its policy on better regulation, the Commission conducted an impact assessment of policy alternatives,
based on an external study, which concluded in April 2012. The different policy alternatives contain a range of options representing different
degrees of EU intervention:
Option 1: maintaining the status quo;
Option 2: effecting change without regulation, or
Option 3: regulating.
The Impact Assessment demonstrated that a binding legislative initiative would impact tangibly on the exercise of free movement rights.
The preferred option is a Directive combined with other initiatives, such as common guidelines on specific subjects to be adopted by the
Technical Committee on free movement of workers (already set up under Regulation (EU) No 492/2011. A Common Guidance document
would address the specific issue of the application of EU law in the field of the free movement of workers.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 46 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: this proposal for a Directive aims to improve and reinforce the way in which Article 45 TFEU and Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 are
applied in practice across the European Union by establishing a general common framework of appropriate provisions and measures for
facilitating a better and more uniform application of rights conferred by EU law on workers and members of their families exercising their right
to free movement.
Scope: the proposal covers the following matters: (i) access to employment; (ii) conditions of employment and work in particular as regards
remuneration and dismissal; (iii) access to social and tax advantages; (iv) membership of trade unions; (v) access to training; (vi) access to
housing; and (vii) access to education for workers' children.

It does not modify the scope of application of the Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 and only applies in cases of discrimination on the grounds of
nationality in relation to the matters covered by that Regulation, by introducing the provisions of protection, information and support. It
underpins the guarantee of equal treatment and reinforces remedies in cases of unjustified obstacles in relation to eligibility and access to
employment for workers exercising their right to free movement within the European Union.
The proposal introduces legal obligations in regard to the following:
means of redress: the Directive would guarantee EU migrant workers an appropriate means of redress at national level. Any EU
worker who believes that he/she has been the victim of discrimination on the grounds of nationality should be able to make use of
appropriate administrative and/or judicial procedures to challenge the discriminatory behaviour; the proposal covers both judicial and
extra-judicial means of redress, including alternative dispute settlement mechanisms, such as conciliation and mediation; time limits
for bringing actions as regards the principle of equal treatment, provided that these time limits are such that they cannot be regarded
as capable of rendering virtually impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of rights conferred by Union law on free movement of
workers;
role of associations, organisations or other legal entities: the Directive would further protect workers by ensuring that associations,
organisations or other legal entities with a legitimate interest in the promotion of the rights to free movement of workers may engage in
any administrative or judicial procedure on behalf or in support of EU migrant workers where there has been a violation of their rights;
national structures to provide information, support and assistance: the Directive would set up structures or bodies at a national level to
promote the exercise of the right to free movement by providing information and supporting and assisting EU migrant workers who
suffer from nationality based-discrimination; the proposal details the tasks of these devolved structures;
awareness raising: the Directive would raise awareness by providing employers, workers, and any other interested parties with easily
accessible relevant information. The proposal leaves the choice of information tools to the Member States, but on-line or digital
information with links to the existing information tools at EU level, Your Europe and EURES websites would be made compulsory;
dialogue: the Directive would require Member States, in accordance with national traditions and practices, to take adequate measures
to encourage and promote dialogue with social partners and non-governmental organisations which have, in accordance with their
national law and practice, a legitimate interest in contributing to the fight against discrimination on grounds of nationality.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: this proposal is expected to have limited implications on the Union budget. Expenses for an evaluation study in
2015 are estimated to not exceed EUR 300 000 and will be covered by funds available from the budget line financing the free movement of
workers, coordination of social security systems and measures for migrants, including migrants from third countries.
Costs for human resources (EUR 131 000 p.a.) will be covered under heading 5 of the Multiannual Financial Framework.

2013/0124(COD) - 14/11/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the report by Edit BAUER (EPP, SK) on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council on measures facilitating the exercise of rights conferred on workers in the context of freedom of
movement for workers.
The committee recommended that Parliaments position adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission proposal as follows:
Scope: the proposed directive aims to facilitate uniform application and enforcement in practice of rights on freedom of movement for workers
within the Union, including frontier workers, without discrimination based on residence.
Members clarified that the directive must apply to the following aspects of the free movement of workers:
·

conditions of employment and work, in particular as regards remuneration, dismissal and health and safety at work;

·

conditions of reinstatement or reemployment;

·

membership of trade unions, bodies responsible for collective bargaining and collective measures, and other work-related bodies;

·

access to training and further training;

·

access to education, including early childhood education;

·

access to public employment services, including those that are privately-provided;

·

benefits and programmes intended to foster integration and mobility.

Remedies for victims of discrimination: the committee specified that workers initiating judicial or administrative proceedings shall not receive
any unfavourable treatment by their employer as a consequence of such action. It also strengthened the role of the social partners (NGOs,
associations, trade unions) in supporting such victims in any judicial or administrative procedure.
Structures and bodies promoting equal treatment: Member States shall designate one or more structures or bodies for the promotion, analysis,
monitoring and support of equal treatment and shall ensure that all workers have access to those bodies. The competences of these bodies
must include: the provision of independent assistance provided free of charge, covering all the relevant aspects of national labour law, to
workers or the members of their family in pursuing their complaints, and informing young graduates and students in their final year of their
education, of their rights when working abroad.
Improve cooperation on and information to workers: the committee asked that Member States :
provide, through national contact points, clear, free, easily accessible, comprehensive, up-to-date and multilingual information on the
rights conferred by Union law concerning the free movement of workers and on available means of protection and redress for those
rights.
ensure that existing or newly created bodies are aware of the existing information and assistance services at national
level through contact points and at Union level, such as Your Europe, SOLVIT, EURES, Enterprise Europe Network, the Points of

Single Contact and the European network of national contact points, and that they cooperate with them;
ensure cooperation with existing information and assistance services provided by social partners, associations, organisations and
other relevant interested legal entities, such as labour inspectorates, where applicable.
provide, upon request, clear, easily accessible, comprehensive and up-to-date information on the rights on free movement of EU
workers to its own citizens who wish to enjoy the right to freely move to another Member State.
Report: in its report on the implementation of the regulation, Commission shall pay extra attention to possible difficulties young graduates
encounter when moving across the Union, whether on a permanent or temporary basis. It shall also analyse the particular difficulties
that third-country spouses of workers encounter.

2013/0124(COD) - 12/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 566 votes to 92, with 25 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council on measures facilitating the exercise of rights conferred on workers in the context of freedom of
movement for workers.
Parliament adopted its position at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary are the result
of an agreement reached between the European Parliament and the Council. They amended the proposal as follows:
Subject matter: the proposed Directive lays down provisions which facilitate the uniform application and enforcement in practice of the rights
conferred by Article 45 TFEU and Articles 1 to 10 of Regulation (EU) No 492/2011. It should apply to Union citizens exercising those rights and
to members of their family ('Union workers and members of their family').
Scope: the scope of this Directive is identical to that of Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 in the area of freedom of movement for workers:
access to employment;
conditions of employment and work, in particular as regards remuneration, dismissal, health and safety at work, and, if Union workers
become unemployed, reinstatement or re-employment;
access to social and tax advantages;
membership of trade unions and eligibility for workers representative bodies;
access to training;
access to housing;
access to education, apprenticeship and vocational training for the children of Union workers;
assistance afforded by the employment offices.
Defence of rights: Member States should ensure that after possible recourse to other competent authorities including, where they deem it to be
appropriate, conciliation procedures, judicial procedures, for the enforcement of obligations under Article 45 TFEU and Articles 1 to 10 of
Regulation (EU) No 492/2011, are available to all Union workers and members of their family. The role of associations, organisations,
including the social partners, or other legal entities, which have a legitimate interest in ensuring that this Directive is complied with, has been
strengthened.
The Directive should apply without prejudice to national rules of procedure concerning representation and defence in court proceedings.
Collective redress: with a view to ensuring effective legal protection, and without prejudice to the existing collective defence mechanisms
available to the social partners and national law or practice, Member States are invited to examine the implementation of common principles
for injunctive and compensatory collective redress mechanisms.
Adverse consequence following a complaint: Member States should introduce in their national legal systems such measures as are necessary
to protect Union workers from any adverse treatment or adverse consequence as a reaction to a complaint or proceedings aimed at enforcing
compliance with the rights to free movement.
Defence structures and bodies: each Member State should designate one or more structures or bodies for the promotion, analysis, monitoring
and support of equal treatment of Union workers and members of their family without discrimination on grounds of nationality, unjustified
restrictions or obstacles to their right to free movement and shall make the necessary arrangements for the proper functioning of such bodies.
The competences of those bodies should include:
providing or ensuring the provision of independent legal and/or other assistance to Union workers and members of their family;
acting as a contact point vis-à-vis equivalent contact points in other Member States in order to cooperate and share relevant
information;
conducting or commissioning independent surveys and analyses concerning unjustified restrictions and obstacles to the right to free
movement, or discrimination on grounds of nationality.
Member States should communicate to the Commission the names and contact details of the contact points. They should also promote
cooperation between the bodies designated by them under this Directive.
Report: the Commission should prepare a report on the implementation of the future Directive, evaluating in particular the opportunity to
present any necessary proposal aiming to guarantee a better enforcement of Union law on free movement. In that report, the Commission
should address the possible difficulties faced by young graduates looking for employment across the Union and by third-country spouses of
Union workers.

2013/0124(COD) - 16/04/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to ensure the better application of EU legislation on peoples right to work in another Member State than their own and thus to
make it easier for people to exercise their rights in practice conferred by Article 45 of the TFEU.

LEGISLATIVE ACT: Directive 2014/54/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on measures facilitating the exercise of rights
conferred on workers in the context of freedom of movement for workers.
CONTENT: this Directive lays down provisions which facilitate the uniform application and enforcement in practice of the rights conferred by
Article 45 TFEU and Articles 1 to 10 of Regulation (EU) No 492/2011. It should apply to Union citizens exercising those rights and to members
of their family.
Scope: the scope of this Directive is identical to that of Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 in the area of freedom of movement for workers:
access to employment;
conditions of employment and work, in particular as regards remuneration, dismissal, health and safety at work, and, if Union workers
become unemployed, reinstatement or re-employment;
access to social and tax advantages;
membership of trade unions and eligibility for workers representative bodies;
access to training;
access to housing;
access to education, apprenticeship and vocational training for the children of Union workers;
assistance afforded by the employment offices.
Defence of rights: Member States should ensure that after possible recourse to other competent authorities including, where they deem it to be
appropriate, conciliation procedures, judicial procedures, for the enforcement of obligations under Article 45 TFEU and Articles 1 to 10 of
Regulation (EU) No 492/2011, are available to all Union workers and members of their family. The role of associations, organisations,
including the social partners, or other legal entities, which have a legitimate interest in ensuring that this Directive is complied with, has been
strengthened.
The Directive should apply without prejudice to national rules of procedure concerning representation and defence in court proceedings.
However, those national time-limits shall not render virtually impossible or excessively difficult the exercise of those rights.
Collective redress: with a view to ensuring effective legal protection, and without prejudice to the existing collective defence mechanisms
available to the social partners and national law or practice, Member States are invited to examine the implementation of common principles
for injunctive and compensatory collective redress mechanisms.
Adverse treatment following a complaint: Member States shall introduce in their national legal systems such measures as are necessary to
protect Union workers from any adverse treatment or adverse consequence as a reaction to a complaint or proceedings aimed at enforcing
compliance with the rights.
Defence structures and bodies: each Member State should designate one or more structures or bodies for the promotion, analysis, monitoring
and support of equal treatment of Union workers and members of their family without discrimination on grounds of nationality, unjustified
restrictions or obstacles to their right to free movement and shall make the necessary arrangements for the proper functioning of such bodies.
The competences of those bodies should include:
providing or ensuring the provision of independent legal and/or other assistance to Union workers and members of their family, without
prejudice to their rights, and to the rights of associations, organisations and other legal entities;
acting as a contact point vis-à-vis equivalent contact points in other Member States in order to cooperate and share relevant
information;
conducting or commissioning independent surveys and analyses concerning unjustified restrictions and obstacles to the right to free
movement, or discrimination on grounds of nationality, of Union workers and members of their family;
ensuring the publication of independent reports and making recommendations on any issue relating to such restrictions and obstacles
or discrimination;
publishing relevant information on the application at national level of Union rules on free movement of workers.
Member States should communicate to the Commission the names and contact details of the contact points.
Member States should ensure the promotion of synergies with existing information and support tools at Union level and, to that end, should
ensure that existing or newly created bodies work closely with the existing information and assistance services, such as Your Europe, SOLVIT,
Enterprise Europe Network, the Points of Single Contact.
Dialogue and access to information: Member States should promote dialogue with the social partners and with appropriate non-governmental
organisations to address and combat unjustified restrictions and obstacles to the right to free movement or different forms of discrimination on
the grounds of nationality. This information should also be easily accessible through Your Europe and EURES.
Minimum requirements: Member States may introduce or maintain provisions which are more favourable to the protection of the principle of
equal treatment than those laid down in this Directive for example by authorising the competences of the bodies referred to in this Directive to
promote also the equal treatment without discrimination on grounds of nationality of all Union citizens exercising their right to free movement
and the members of their family, in accordance with Directive 2004/38/EC.
The implementation of this Directive shall under no circumstances be sufficient grounds for a reduction in the level of protection of Union
workers and members of their family, in the areas to which it applies.
Reporting: by 21 November 2018, the Commission shall submit a report on the implementation of this Directive, with a view to proposing,
where appropriate, the necessary amendments.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 20.05.2014.
TRANSPOSITION: 21.05.2016.

