Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Directive

2013/0407(COD)

Procedure completed

Criminal proceedings: strengthening of certain aspects of the presumption of
innocence and of the right to be present at trial

Subject
1.10 Fundamental rights in the EU, Charter
7.40.04 Judicial cooperation in criminal matters

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
22/07/2014

GRIESBECK Nathalie
Shadow rapporteur

GÁL Kinga

SIPPEL Birgit

UJAZDOWSKI
Kazimierz Michał

DE JONG Dennis

ALBRECHT Jan Philipp

FERRARA Laura
Former committee responsible
LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Committee for opinion
JURI

ALDE WEBER Renate

21/01/2014

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

Legal Affairs

03/09/2014
DURAND Pascal

Former committee for opinion
JURI

Legal Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Justice and Consumers

ALDE THEIN Alexandra

20/01/2014

Commissioner
REDING Viviane

Key events
27/11/2013

Legislative proposal published

13/01/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

10/10/2014

Debate in Council

COM(2013)0821

Summary

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

04/12/2014

Debate in Council

31/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

31/03/2015

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

21/04/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

19/01/2016

Debate in Parliament

20/01/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

20/01/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/02/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

12/02/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

09/03/2016

Final act signed

11/03/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0133/2015

Summary

T8-0011/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0407(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Directive

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 082-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/00267

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0821

27/11/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0478

27/11/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0479

27/11/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0500

27/11/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE546.756

21/01/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE546.821

06/03/2015

EP

PE546.831

26/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0133/2015

21/04/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0011/2016

20/01/2016

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

JURI

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)191

16/03/2016

Additional information
European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Directive 2016/343
OJ L 065 11.03.2016, p. 0001 Summary

2013/0407(COD) - 27/11/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to ensure the right to a fair trial by setting out common minimum standards on certain aspects of the presumption of innocence
and of the right to be present at trial in criminal proceedings
PROPOSED ACT: Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the Stockholm Programme put a strong focus on the strengthening of the rights of individuals in criminal proceedings. The
European Council invited the Commission to consider establishing minimum procedural rights for suspects or accused persons, and to
address the issue of presumption of innocence, in order to promote better cooperation in that area.
Up to now, three measures have been adopted: Directive 2010/64/EU on the right to interpretation and translation, Directive 2012/13/EU on
the right to information and Directive 2013/48/EU on the right of access to a lawyer in criminal proceedings.
The proposal continues this work and is part of a series of measures on criminal justice which includes: (i) a directive on provisional legal aid
for suspects or accused persons deprived of liberty and legal aid in European arrest warrant proceedings; (ii) a directive on procedural
safeguards for children suspected or accused in criminal proceedings
Moreover, on 14 June 2011, the Commission published a Green Paper on the application of EU criminal justice legislation in the field of
detention to reflect on ways to strengthen the application of the principle of mutual recognition in the area of detention, within the limits of the
EU's competence.
The principle of presumption of innocence has been developed over the years. The European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) has held that
Article 6(2) of the ECHR encompasses three key requirements: (i) the right not to be publicly presented as convicted by public authorities
before the final judgment; (ii) the fact that the burden of proof is on prosecution and that any reasonable doubts on guilt should benefit the
accused; and (iii) the right of the accused to be informed of the accusation against him.
The right to be present at trial is also an essential right of defence.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the Commissions analysis considers that there exist points in which legal safeguards should be improved with regard
to certain aspects the presumption of innocence to strengthen this fundamental right.
CONTENT: the draft directive aims to lay down minimum rules concerning certain aspects of the right of suspects and accused persons to be
presumed innocent unless proven guilty by a final judgment.
The proposal covers the following rights:
1) The right not to be presented guilty by public authorities before the final judgment: the ECtHR established as one of the basic aspects of the
principle of presumption of innocence the fact that a court or public official may not publicly present the suspects or accused persons as if they
were guilty of an offence if they have not been tried and convicted of it by a final judgment.
2) The burden of proof is on prosecution and any reasonable doubts on the guilt should benefit the accused: this presupposes that a court's
judgment must be based on evidence as put before it and not on mere allegations or assumptions.
3) The right not to incriminate one-self and not to cooperate and the right to remain silent: these rights lie at the heart of the notion of a fair trial
under Article 6 of the ECHR.
·

the right not to incriminate oneself presupposes that the prosecution in a criminal case seeks to prove the case against the accused
without resort to evidence obtained through methods of coercion or oppression;

·

the right to remain silent must be ensured and any inferences drawn from the fact that suspects make use of this right should be
excluded.

Suspects should be promptly informed of their right to remain silent. Such information should also refer to the content of the right to remain
silent and of the consequences of renouncing to it and of invoking it.
4) Right to be present at one's trial: the proposal lays down this right, established by the ECtHR, of an accused to be present at the trial and
also establishes limited exceptions to this right, in line with the Charter, the ECHR and EU law. It provides that Member States must ensure
that the right to be present applies to any trial aiming at assessing the question of the guilt of the accused person (both conviction and acquittal
decisions).

Non-regression clause: the proposal aims to ensure that setting common minimum standards does not have the effect of lowering standards in
certain Member States and that the standards set in the Charter and in the ECHR are maintained.

2013/0407(COD) - 21/04/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the report by Nathalie GRIESBECK (ADLE, FR) on the proposal for a
directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the strengthening of certain aspects of the presumption of innocence and of the
right to be present at trial in criminal proceedings.
The committee recommended that Parliaments position adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission proposal as follows:
Scope: Members specified that the Directive should apply to criminal proceedings, as well as similar proceedings of a criminal nature
leading to comparable sanctions of a punitive and deterrent nature, such as deprivation of liberty, irrespective of whether or not the
proceedings were classified as criminal. Suspects must be presumed innocent until proven guilty by a final decision delivered according to
law, in a trial at which they have had all the safeguards necessary for their defence.
Public references to guilt before proven guilty: statements must not reflect an opinion that the person was guilty and be of such a nature as to
potentially encourage the public to believe the person was guilty. Public authorities must be prohibited from providing to the media any
information concerning ongoing criminal proceedings that might undermine the principle of the presumption of innocence.
In the event of a breach of those requirements, independent investigations must take place on the breach and ensure that the suspect or
accused person whose right to the presumption of innocence had been violated had access to an effective remedy.
Suspects must not presented in court or in public in a manner that suggested their guilt, before final conviction.
Burden of proof: Members considered that the reversal of the burden of proof in criminal proceedings was unacceptable. The principle that the
burden of proof rested with the prosecution must be left untouched. The burden of proof in establishing the guilt of suspects or accused
persons is on the prosecution and any doubt is to benefit the suspect or accused person.
Use of force: Members stressed that authorities must not use coercion in order to obtain information from a suspect or an accused person. The
Directive must state clearly that the use of physical or psychological violence or threats against suspects or accused persons was banned, on
the grounds that it constituted a violation of the right to human dignity and the right to a fair trial.
Right not to incriminate oneself and not to cooperate: the suspect or accused persons must be informed of their right not to incriminate
themselves and not to cooperate, prior to any questioning by public authorities, and prior to the suspect giving testimony in court as well as at
the moment of the arrest. Exercise of the right not to incriminate oneself and not to cooperate shall never be considered as a corroboration of
the facts or as a reason in itself to adopt or maintain measures which restrict liberty before the final decision on the issue of guilt is taken.
Nevertheless cooperative behaviour by the suspect or accused person might be taken into account as a mitigating factor, when deciding
the actual penalty.
Right to remain silent: the report sets out what constituted in practice the exercise of the right to silence and stated that the exercise of this
right must never be considered as a corroboration of the facts, nor as a reason in itself to adopt or maintain measures which restricted liberty
before the final decision on the issue of guilt was taken.
Right to be present at one's trial: Members wanted to place strict limits to cases where judgment might be rendered in the absence of the
accused. Accordingly, proceedings might be conducted in the absence of the accused person only if:
the accused person, after being duly informed that he or she faced trial, explicitly and unequivocally renounced the right to be present,
and only if he or she were represented in the proceedings;
if the offence which gave rise to the proceedings was punishable by a fine, and the suspect or accused person must always be
present if the offence was punishable by a term of imprisonment.
Right to a new trial: with a view to preserving the right to a fair trial, Members established that examination of new evidence might take place.
Where the suspects were not present at the trial, the person concerned had the right to a new trial which allowed a fresh determination of the
merits of the case with the opportunity to secure new evidence and, if appropriate, to call the previous evidence into question through
cross-examination.
Vulnerable persons: in the implementation of the Directive the particular needs of vulnerable persons who became suspects or accused
persons must be taken into account.
Report: 2 years after the deadline for transposition, the Commission shall submit a report assessing the extent to which the Member States
had taken the necessary measures to comply with the Directive.

2013/0407(COD) - 20/01/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 577 votes to 48 with 86 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the strengthening of certain aspects of the presumption of innocence and of the right to be present
at trial in criminal proceedings.
Parliaments position, adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Scope: the Directive applies to natural persons who are suspects or accused persons in criminal proceedings. It applies at all stages of the
criminal proceedings, from the moment when a person is suspected or accused of having committed a criminal offence, or an alleged criminal
offence, until the decision on the final determination of whether that person has committed the criminal offence concerned has become
definitive.

Legal actions and remedies that are available only once that decision has become definitive, including actions before the European Court of
Human Rights, should not fall within the scope of the Directive.
Public references to guilt: public statements made by public authorities, and judicial decisions, other than those on guilt, must not refer to that
person as being guilty for as long as a suspect or an accused person has not been proved guilty according to law, appropriate measures must
be available in the event of a breach of the obligation.
However, the obligation not to refer to suspects or accused persons as being guilty should not prevent public authorities from publicly
disseminating information on the criminal proceedings where this is strictly necessary for reasons relating to the criminal investigation, such as
when video material is released and the public is asked to help in identifying the alleged perpetrator of the criminal offence or to the public
interest.
Presentation of suspects and accused persons: competent authorities should abstain from presenting suspects or accused persons as being
guilty, in court or in public, through the use of measures of physical restraint, such as handcuffs, glass boxes, cages and leg irons),
Member States may apply measures of physical restraint that are required for case-specific reasons, relating to security or to the prevention of
suspects or accused persons from absconding or from having contact with third persons.
Burden of proof: the text states that that the burden of proof for establishing the guilt of suspects and accused persons is on the prosecution.
However, in various Member States not only the prosecution, but also judges and competent courts are charged with seeking both inculpatory
and exculpatory evidence. Parliament provided that Member States which do not have an adversarial system should be able to maintain their
current system provided that it complies with the Directive and with other relevant provisions of Union and international law.
In addition, any doubt as to the question of guilt must be to benefit the suspect or accused person, including where the court assesses whether
the person concerned should be acquitted.
Right to remain silent and right not to incriminate oneself: suspects and accused persons will have the right to remain silent in relation to the
criminal offence that they are suspected or accused of having committed, and have the right not to incriminate themselves. These rights imply
that competent authorities should not compel suspects or accused persons to provide information if those persons do not wish to do so.
The exercise of the right to remain silent or the right not to incriminate oneself should not be used against a suspect or accused person and
should not, in itself, be considered to be evidence that the person concerned has committed the criminal offence concerned. This should be
without prejudice to national rules concerning the assessment of evidence by courts or judges, provided that the rights of the defence are
respected.
Judicial authorities may take into account, when sentencing, cooperative behaviour of suspects and accused persons.
Right to be present at the trial: the amended text states that it should also be possible to hold a trial which may result in a decision on guilt or
innocence in the absence of a suspect or accused person where that person has been informed of the trial and has given a mandate to a
lawyer who was- appointed by that person or by the State - to represent him or her at the trial and who represented the suspect or accused
person.
Where Member States provide for the possibility of holding trials in the absence of suspects or accused persons but the conditions for taking a
decision in the absence of a particular suspect or accused person are not met, for example because the person has fled or absconded, the
amended text states that it should nevertheless be possible to take a decision in the absence of the suspect or accused person and to enforce
that decision.
In that case, Member States should ensure that when suspects are informed of the decision, in particular when they are apprehended, they
should also be informed of the possibility of challenging the decision and of the right to a new trial or to another legal remedy . In case of a new
trial, Member States shall ensure that those suspects and accused persons have the right to be present, to participate effectively, in
accordance with procedures under national law, and to exercise the rights of the defence.
Remedies: Members stipulated that in the assessment of statements made by suspects or accused persons or of evidence obtained in breach
of the right to remain silent or the right not to incriminate oneself, the rights of the defence and the fairness of the proceedings must be
respected.

2013/0407(COD) - 09/03/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to ensure the right to a fair trial by setting out common minimum standards on certain aspects of the presumption of innocence
and of the right to be present at trial in criminal proceedings.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Directive (EU) 2016/343 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the strengthening of certain aspects of
the presumption of innocence and of the right to be present at the trial in criminal proceedings.
CONTENT: this Directive lays down common minimum rules concerning: (a) certain aspects of the presumption of innocence in criminal
proceedings; (b) the right to be present at the trial in criminal proceedings. It upholds the fundamental rights and principles recognised by the
Charter and by the ECHR. It aims to enhance the right to a fair trial in criminal proceedings by laying down common minimum rules concerning
certain aspects of the presumption of innocence and the right to be present at the trial.
This Directive aims to strengthen the trust of Member States in each other's criminal justice systems and thus to facilitate mutual recognition of
decisions in criminal matters.
Scope: this Directive applies to natural persons who are suspects or accused persons in criminal proceedings. It applies at all stages of the
criminal proceedings, from the moment when a person is suspected or accused of having committed a criminal offence, or an alleged criminal
offence, until the decision on the final determination of whether that person has committed the criminal offence concerned has become
definitive.
Presumption of innocence: Member States shall ensure that suspects and accused persons are presumed innocent until proved guilty
according to law.

Under this Directive:
Member States shall take the necessary measures to ensure that, for as long as a suspect or an accused person has not been proved
guilty according to law, public statements made by public authorities, and judicial decisions, other than those on guilt, do not refer to
that person as being guilty. This shall be without prejudice to acts of the prosecution which aim to prove the guilt of the suspect or
accused person, and to preliminary decisions of a procedural nature, which are taken by judicial or other competent authorities and
which are based on suspicion or incriminating evidence;
public statements made by public authorities, and judicial decisions, other than those on guilt, must not refer to that person as being
guilty for as long as a suspect or an accused person has not been proved guilty according to law;
the competent authorities should abstain from presenting suspects or accused persons as being guilty, in court or in public, through
the use of measures of physical restraint, unless the use of such measures is required for case-specific reasons, either relating to
security;
the burden of proof for establishing the guilt of suspects and accused persons is on the prosecution, and any doubt should benefit the
suspect or accused person.
Right to remain silent and right not to incriminate oneself: the exercise by suspects and accused persons of the right to remain silent or of the
right not to incriminate oneself shall not be used against them and shall not be considered to be evidence that they have committed the
criminal offence concerned.
With regard to minor offences, the conduct of the proceedings, or certain stages thereof, may take place in writing or without questioning of the
suspect or accused person by the competent authorities in relation to the offence concerned, provided that this complies with the right to a fair
trial.
Right to be present at the trial: Member States shall ensure that suspects and accused persons have the right to be present at their
trial. They may provide that a trial which can result in a decision on the guilt or innocence of a suspect or accused person can be held
in his or her absence, provided that:
the suspect or accused person has been informed, in due time, of the trial and of the consequences of non-appearance; or
the suspect or accused person, having been informed of the trial, is represented by a mandated lawyer, who was appointed either by
the suspect or accused person or by the State.
Where Member States provide for the possibility of holding trials in the absence of suspects or accused persons but it is not possible to comply
with the conditions because a suspect or accused person cannot be located despite reasonable efforts having been made, Member States
may provide that a decision can nevertheless be taken and enforced. In that case, Member States shall ensure that when suspects or accused
persons are informed of the decision, in particular when they are apprehended, they are also informed of the possibility to challenge the
decision and of the right to a new trial or to another legal remedy.
As regards the right to a new trial, Member States shall ensure that those suspects and accused persons have the right to be present, to
participate effectively, in accordance with procedures under national law, and to exercise the rights of the defence.
Remedies: Member States shall ensure that suspects and accused persons have an effective remedy if their rights under this Directive are
breached.
Data collection and reporting: Member States shall, by 1 April 2020 and every three years thereafter, send to the Commission available data
showing how the rights laid down in this Directive have been implemented.
The Commission shall, by 1 April 2021, submit a report on the implementation of this Directive.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 31.3.2016.
TRANSPOSITION: 1.4.2018.

