Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2100(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Future of Europe's horticulture sector - strategies for growth

Subject
3.10.06 Crop products in general, floriculture

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

Rapporteur

Appointed

ECR MCINTYRE Anthea

31/01/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE AYUSO Pilar
S&D RODUST Ulrike
ALDE REIMERS Britta
GUE/NGL RUBIKS Alfreds

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Agriculture and Rural Development

CIOLOŞ Dacian

Key events
10/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

21/01/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

27/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

10/03/2014

Debate in Parliament

11/03/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

11/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/03/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0048/2014

Summary

T7-0205/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2100(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AGRI/7/11986

Documentation gateway

Committee draft report

PE506.199

28/08/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE523.010

13/11/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0048/2014

27/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0205/2014

11/03/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)457

11/08/2014

2013/2100(INI) - 27/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted the own-initiative report by Anthea McINTYRE (ECR, UK) on the future of
Europes horticulture sector strategies for growth.
The report recalled that the horticulture industry comprises fruit, vegetables, potatoes, salads, herbs and ornamentals, and whereas the
horticulture sector incorporates nurseries, perennial nurseries, gardening services, cemetery gardening, gardening supplies retailers, garden
centres, florists and landscape gardening. The fruit and vegetables (F&V) sector receives about 3% of Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) aid
yet accounts for 18% of the total value of agricultural production in the EU. It represents 3% of the EUs usable agricultural area and is worth
more than EUR 50 billion.
Promoting the horticultural sector: Members stressed the importance of promoting the EU horticulture sector and enabling it to compete better
in the global marketplace. They emphasised the need to make it easier for producers to gain access to third-country markets and called on the
Commission to increase its efforts to support exporters of fruit, vegetables, flowers and ornamental plants to overcome the increasing number
of non-tariff barriers, such as some third-country phytosanitary standards that make export from the EU difficult, if not impossible.
They also called on the Commission to establish the same market access conditions, as regards marketing standards, designations of origin,
etc. for all market participants in the EU and to carry out checks to ensure that those conditions are observed, in order to prevent distortions of
competition.
Promoting POs: Membership of producer organisations (POs) should also be increased by making the system more attractive, in view of the
fact that more than half of all EU growers still do not belong to a PO despite the Commissions objective of an average rate of 60 % PO
membership by 2013. The low rate of organisation in some Member States has been partly caused by the suspension of POs, which creates
uncertainty among producers. Given that POs play a key role in enhancing the negotiating power of F&V organisations, it is essential to
prevent uncertainty among producers by clarifying European legislation on the recognition of POs.
Members stressed however that the establishment of a Union instrument for managing serious crises affecting a number of Member States
and stresses that it should be open to all producers, irrespective of whether or not they are members of a PO.
Plant protection products (PPPs): the report stressed that horticulture is reliant on a variety of PPPs. The Commission needs to take a
risk-based approach to the regulation of these products. Minor uses are particularly vulnerable owing to the scarcity of the relevant active
substances.
Integrated pest management (IPM): the Commission and the Member States are called upon to promote integrated pest management (IPM),
support innovation and entrepreneurship through increased research into and development of non-chemical alternatives, such as natural
predators and parasites of pest species, and use the Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation to fund applied
research that supports the development of integrated strategies for pest, disease and weed control.
The Commission is called upon to:
prioritise horticultural crops for funding and research using new and innovative plant breeding techniques (NBTs), provide clarity
about the regulatory status of plants produced using these techniques and ensure that any NBTs that are found not to lead to GMOs
will be treated like conventional breeding techniques, and will therefore not be subject to any process based pre-market authorisation
procedures;
differentiate between cisgenic and transgenic plants and to create a different approvals process for cisgenic plants so as to recognise
that cisgenesis is an accelerated form of conventional plant breeding;
include protected cultivation in Horizon 2020 calls in order to stimulate innovation regarding, for example, sustainable crop protection,
sustainable water and nutrient usage, energy efficiency, advanced cultivation and production systems, and sustainable transport;
facilitate access to long-term funding for investment in modern horticultural production technologies.
As regards waste, Members are deeply concerned that between a third and a half of edible produce is wasted because of its appearance.
They called on the Commission to create, as a matter of urgency, possibilities for marketing a wider range of quality specifications of produce.
They drew attention to trials conducted in Austria and Switzerland involving the sale of blemished fruit and vegetables and called on
supermarkets to take into account market research which shows that many consumers are not necessarily worried about the cosmetic
appearance of fruit and vegetables and are happy to purchase lower grade produce, particularly if this may appear to be cheaper.
Lastly, the report called on the Commission and the Member States to make the legislative and political environment as supportive as possible
for uses of horticultural waste.

2013/2100(INI) - 11/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 354 votes to 285 with 21 abstentions, a resolution on the future of Europes horticulture sector strategies
for growth.

The horticulture industry comprises fruit, vegetables, potatoes, salads, herbs and ornamentals, and whereas the horticulture sector
incorporates nurseries, perennial nurseries, gardening services, cemetery gardening, gardening supplies retailers, garden centres, florists and
landscape gardening. The fruit and vegetables (F&V) sector receives about 3% of Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) aid yet accounts for 18%
of the total value of agricultural production in the EU. It represents 3% of the EUs usable agricultural area and is worth more than EUR 50
billion.
Promoting the horticultural sector: Parliament stressed the importance of promoting the EU horticulture sector and enabling it to compete
better in the global marketplace and continuing efforts to eliminate the imbalance between operators and suppliers. It emphasised the need to
make it easier for producers to gain access to third-country markets and called on the Commission to increase its efforts to support exporters
of fruit, vegetables, flowers and ornamental plants to overcome the increasing number of non-tariff barriers, such as some third-country
phytosanitary standards that make export from the EU difficult, if not impossible.
The Commission was called on to establish the same market access conditions for all market participants in the EU, as regards marketing
standards, designations of origin, etc. and to carry out checks to ensure that those conditions are observed, in order to prevent distortions of
competition.
Promoting producer organisations (POs): membership of producer organisations (POs) should also be increased by making the system more
attractive, in view of the fact that more than half of all EU growers still do not belong to a PO despite the Commissions objective of an average
rate of 60 % PO membership by 2013. Given that POs play a key role in enhancing the negotiating power of F&V organisations, Parliament
judged it essential to clarify European legislation on the recognition of POs to prevent uncertainty among producers.
Members stressed that a Union instrument established for managing serious crises affecting a number of Member States should be open to all
producers, irrespective of whether or not they are members of a PO.
Plant protection products (PPPs): underlining that horticulture is reliant on a variety of PPPs, the resolution called on the Commission to take a
risk-based approach to the regulation of these products. Minor uses are particularly vulnerable owing to the scarcity of the relevant active
substances. The Commission was urged to review the operation of the arrangements for mutual recognition of PPP authorisations.
Members took the view that the private standards for pesticide residues that have been adopted by many large retail chains are
anti-competitive and detrimental to the interests of F&V growers. The Commission was asked to put an end to such practices, given that the
pesticide residue levels laid down in EU legislation provide adequate protection for the health of both consumers and producers.
Integrated pest management (IPM): Parliament called on the Commission and the Member States: i) to promote integrated pest management
(IPM), support innovation and entrepreneurship through increased research into and development of non-chemical alternatives, such as
natural predators and parasites of pest species, and ii) to use the Horizon 2020 Framework Programme for Research and Innovation to fund
applied research that supports the development of integrated strategies for pest, disease and weed control.
The Commission is, inter alia, called on:
·
to safeguard the freedom of plant breeders to use existing plant materials freely to develop and market new ones, regardless of any
patent claims extending to plant materials;
·
to support the development of local fruit and vegetable markets and of short supply chains, thereby ensuring product freshness;
·
differentiate between cisgenic and transgenic plants and to create a different approvals process for cisgenic plants so as to recognise
that cisgenesis is an accelerated form of conventional plant breeding;
·
include protected cultivation in Horizon 2020 calls in order to stimulate innovation regarding, for example, sustainable crop protection,
sustainable water and nutrient usage, energy efficiency, advanced cultivation and production systems, and sustainable transport;
·
facilitate access to long-term funding for investment in modern horticultural production technologies.
As regards waste, Members are deeply concerned that between a third and a half of edible produce is wasted because of its appearance.
They called on the Commission to create, as a matter of urgency, possibilities for marketing a wider range of quality specifications of produce.
They drew attention to trials conducted in Austria and Switzerland involving the sale of blemished fruit and vegetables and called on
supermarkets to take into account market research which shows that many consumers are not necessarily worried about the cosmetic
appearance of fruit and vegetables and are happy to purchase lower grade produce, particularly if this may appear to be cheaper.
Lastly, the Commission and the Member States were asked to make the legislative and political environment as supportive as possible for
uses of horticultural waste.

