Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Decision

2013/0238(COD)

Procedure completed

European Year for Development (2015)
See also 2015/2994(RSP)
Subject
6.30 Development cooperation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
DEVE

Development

Rapporteur

Appointed

ALDE GOERENS Charles

28/05/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE BOULLAND Philippe
S&D BERMAN Thijs
Verts/ALE TAYLOR Keith
ECR DEVA Nirj
GUE/NGL GUSTAFSSON
Mikael
Committee for opinion
FEMM

Women's Rights and Gender Equality

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
International Cooperation and Development

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

PPE MATERA Barbara

10/09/2013

Commissioner
PIEBALGS Andris

Key events
10/07/2013

Legislative proposal published

10/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

05/11/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

14/11/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

02/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

02/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/04/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

16/04/2014

Final act signed

16/04/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

09/05/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

COM(2013)0509

Summary

A7-0384/2013

Summary

T7-0269/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0238(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Decision
See also 2015/2994(RSP)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 209-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

DEVE/7/13482

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0509

10/07/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0265

10/07/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE516.776

28/08/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE521.748

16/10/2013

EP

PE519.683

25/10/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0384/2013

14/11/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0269/2014

02/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Follow-up document

COM(2016)0525

01/12/2016

EC

Summary

Follow-up document

SWD(2016)0286

01/12/2016

EC

Committee opinion

FEMM

Summary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Decision 2014/472
OJ L 136 09.05.2014, p. 0001 Summary

2013/0238(COD) - 10/07/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish a European Year of Development (2015).
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the EU is the biggest donor of official development aid (ODA) in the world, providing more than half of all aid given worldwide.
Its strong commitment to supporting partner countries dates back to 1957, when the Treaties of Rome first established a European

development policy.
Despite this strong commitment to supporting partner countries, EU citizens often lack information on development cooperation, why it is
needed and on the added value of development policies at EU level. The October 2012 Eurobarometer survey highlighted significant areas of
ignorance, with 53 % of respondents indicating that they know nothing about where EU aid goes (44 % are unaware of where their countrys
bilateral aid goes).
It is important to raise European citizens awareness of global interdependence. People need information as to how an outward-looking Europe
can help to ensure global sustainability.
Against this background, The EYD2015 is an opportunity to improve the level of information in all Member States
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: in October 2012, the European Parliament called on the Commission to make 2015 the European Year for
Development, expressing its hope that this would raise the profile of development cooperation.
The Commission services and the External Action Service have been informally consulted on the idea of the EYD2015.
The European Parliament and Member States have been informally contacted on the organisation of the EYD2015. Furthermore, the issue is
on the agenda for the regular meeting with Member States Directors-General responsible for development in June 2013.
Given the external relations dimension of the EYD2015, informal discussions have also taken place with international organisations.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 209 and Article 210(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: the aim of this proposed Decision is to establish a European Year of Development in 2015.
Objectives: the general purpose of the European Year shall be:
to inform EU citizens about EU development cooperation, highlighting what the European Union can already achieve as the biggest
aid donor in the world;
to stimulate the active interest of European citizens in development cooperation and foster a sense of responsibility and opportunity as
regards their participation in policy formulation and implementation; and
to raise awareness of the role of EU development cooperation.
Initiatives involved: the proposal presents the measures taken to achieve the objectives. These may include the following initiatives organised
at Union, national, regional or local level:
communication campaigns to disseminate key messages targeted at the general public and more specific audiences, including
through social media;
the organisation of conferences, events and initiatives with all relevant stakeholders, to promote active participation and debate, and to
raise awareness at European level;
concrete initiatives in the Member States aimed at promoting the objectives of the European Year, in particular through the exchange
of information and sharing of experience and good practices among national, regional, local administrations and other organisations;
and
undertaking studies and surveys and disseminating their results.
A detailed Annex outlines the actions proposed and the operational means as to how the objectives may be achieved. 3 different types of
actions are laid down:
1. direct Union initiatives;
2. co-financing Union initiatives;
3. co-financing Member States initiatives.
The Commission may identify other activities as contributing to the objectives of the European Year and may allow references to the European
Year to be used in promoting those activities, insofar as they contribute to achieving the objectives of the Decision.
Coordination with Member States: each Member State is invited to appoint a national coordinator to be responsible for organising its
involvement in the European Year, and shall inform the Commission of that appointment. The national coordinators shall, in close coordination
with the Commission, consult and cooperate with a wide range of relevant stakeholders, including civil society, national parliaments, social
partners and, where appropriate, the national agencies or contact points for the relevant Union programmes.
By 1 June 2014, Member States are invited to transmit to the Commission their proposed work programme, which shall set out details of the
national activities planned for the European Year of Development.
Participating countries: participation in the activities of the European Year to be financed shall be open to: (i) Member States; (ii) candidate
countries benefiting from a pre-accession strategy.
Coordination at Union level and implementation: the Commission shall implement this Decision at the level of the Union, in particular by
adopting the necessary financing decisions in accordance with the Regulations establishing the Financing Instruments relevant to the actions
concerned. It shall cooperate closely with Member States, the European Parliament, the European Economic and Social Committee, the
Committee of the Regions and the bodies and associations active in development issues.
The Commission shall make the theme of the European Year a priority in the communication activities of its Representations in the Member
States and the European Union Delegations in partner countries.
Consistency and complementarity: the Commission shall ensure that the measures provided for in this Decision are consistent with any other
Union, national and regional schemes and initiatives that help attain the objectives of the European Year.
Specific provisions on financial and non-financial support: measures are provided to define the mode of access to financing of measures
related to the European Year (depending on the case, procurement or the award of grants financed from the general budget of the Union.
Non-financial support may be granted by the Commission for activities undertaken by public and private organisations which comply with
certain conditions laid down in the Decision (use of the logo etc).

Measures are provided as regards the protection of the Unions financial interests and the fight against fraud.
Monitoring and evaluation: by 31 December 2016, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council on the
implementation, results and overall assessment of the initiatives provided for in this Decision.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: no additional funding is sought for the European Year of Development. The flexibility for annual priority settings
based on the budget lines and programmes of the Communication provides sufficient margin for running the Year on a EUR 15 million scale.
For 2013 and 2014, the amounts under management of DG DEVCO amount to EUR 14.20 million enabling the financing of the operational
activities of the European Year.

2013/0238(COD) - 14/11/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Development adopted the report by Charles GOERENS (ADLE, LU) on the proposal for a decision of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the European Year of Development (2015).
The committee recommended that Parliaments position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission proposal as follows:
Title of the European Year: Members wanted the European Year to be designated the European Year for Development (hereinafter referred to
as the European Year). The motto of the European Year would be "Dignity for all".
Objectives: the European Year should pursue the following objectives:
·

to inform Union citizens about development cooperation, in particular those living in Member States without a long-standing tradition
in that area, highlighting what the Union can achieve as the biggest aid donor in the world;

·

to engage Union citizens in issues of development cooperation, encourage their participation in policy formulation and
implementation and fully involve them in the political discussion on global development;

·

to ensure, in particular, the participation of young citizens;

·

to increase Union citizens' awareness of their stake in global development and of possibilities to contribute to more equitable global
development and make development an integral part of national education programmes;

·

to foster a sense of joint responsibility and solidarity among Europeans and people in developing countries;

·

to support and facilitate dialogue with partners in developing countries about the global development agenda after 2015;

·

to raise awareness and foster debate about the impact which individual, local, regional, national and Union decisions and choices
may have on global development and on people living in developing countries, so as to achieve a broader understanding of Policy
Coherence for Development;

·

to raise awareness of the role of Union development cooperation, where equity and fairness are perceived as the main values
underpinning development cooperation;

·

to empower Union citizens to make informed purchasing decisions that directly contribute to the objectives of the European Year.

Union measures: the measures taken to achieve these objectives shall include certain initiatives, which may be organised at Union, national,
regional or local level within the Union, in associated overseas countries and territories, and in developing countries, as provided for in the
Annex to the Decision.
Members stressed the need to support: (i) improve pedagogic means in particular in the education sector; (ii) set up a website presenting the
development cooperation projects of all Member States so as to enable all Union citizens to keep up to date with Member States´ aims,
performance, and success.
The report wanted the European year to award a prize for innovative and successful communication concepts and campaigns that help to
raise awareness and foster reflection about development issues in unusual or original ways.
Participation of overseas territories: it was made clear that initiatives can be carried out both within the EU and in overseas countries and
territories and developing countries, and overseas countries and territories would be able to take part in activities related to the European Year
of Development.
Meetings of national coordinators: Members wanted meetings of national coordinators set up to coordinate implementation of the European
Year, to include representatives of civil society and regional and local authorities and Members of the European Parliament.
EEAS support: EU Delegations should support development partners in third countries with a view to their participation in activities related to
the European Year, whether those activities take place in the Union or in third countries. The European External Action Service (EEAS) and
the EU Delegations shall make the European Year an integral part of their dialogue with developing countries and enhance the visibility of the
Union as an actor for peace, development, human rights and democracy.
Coherence with development policy: the Commission shall ensure that all policy initiatives during 2015 meet the standards of Policy
Coherence for Development as outlined in the Lisbon Treaty.
Priority for donors: the Commission may award co-financing to each national coordinating body in accordance with the procedure set out in the
Annex, whereby priority shall be given to those Member States which have become development aid donors more recently or where
appreciation and awareness of development challenges among the population is particularly low.
Annexes: the annexes have been amended in line with the amendments made in the main body of the text.

2013/0238(COD) - 02/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 546 votes to 48, with 38 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the European Year of Development (2015).
Parliament adopted its position at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary are the result of
an agreement reached between the European Parliament and the Council. They amended the proposal as follows:
Title of the European Year: the year 2015 should be designated the European Year for Development and the motto should be Our world, our
dignity, our future.
Objectives: the European Year should pursue the following objectives:
to inform Union citizens about the Union 's and the Member States' development cooperation, highlighting the results that the Union,
acting together with the Member States, has achieved as a global actor and that it will continue to do so in line with the latest
discussions on the overarching post-2015 framework;
to foster direct involvement, critical thinking and active interest of Union citizens and stakeholders in development cooperation
including in policy formulation and implementation;
to raise awareness of the benefits of the Union's development cooperation not only for beneficiaries of the Union's development
assistance but also for Union citizens and to achieve a broader understanding of policy coherence for development , as well as to
foster among citizens in Europe and developing countries a sense of joint responsibility, solidarity and opportunity in a changing and
increasingly interdependent world.
Union measures: the measures taken to achieve the objectives of the European Year should include the following measures, which may be
organised at Union, national, regional or local levels, and in partner countries:
communication campaigns to disseminate key messages targeted at the general public and more specific audiences, in particular
young people and other key target groups , including through social media;
the organisation of conferences, events and initiatives with all relevant stakeholders, to promote active participation and debate, and to
raise awareness at all levels;
concrete measures in the Member States aimed at promoting the objectives of the European Year, in particular through development
education, the exchange of information and sharing of experience and good practices among national, regional or local
administrations and other organisations;
undertaking studies and surveys and disseminating their results.
The characteristics of these measures are detailed in the Annex to the future Decision.
Financing should take the form of the direct purchase of goods and services under existing framework contracts. It may also take the form of
grants covering up to 80% of the final cost of activities. Measures may include a prize for innovative and successful communication concepts
and campaigns which help, or which have helped, to raise awareness and foster reflection about development issues in unusual or original
ways, in particular those designed to reach target audiences which previously have had little or no exposure to global development issues.
Coordination of actions: it is provided that the national coordinators should, in close coordination with the Commission, consult and cooperate
with a wide range of relevant stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, national parliaments, social partners and, where
appropriate, the national agencies, the federal State or sub-national government level, including regional and local authorities and, where
applicable, associated Overseas Countries and Territories (OCTs).
The Commission, together with the European External Action Service (EEAS), should cooperate closely with the European Parliament, the
Council and the Member States, the European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions and the bodies and
associations active in development issues at Union level.
To this effect, the Commission should convene meetings of the national coordinators to coordinate the implementation of the European Year
and to exchange information on implementation at Union and national levels and invite representatives of civil society and regional and local
authorities and members of the European Parliament to attend those meetings as observers.
Moreover and with a view to their participation in activities related to the European Year, whether those activities take place in the Union or in
third countries, development partners in third countries should be supported through EU Delegations while OCTs should be supported through
appropriate institutional channels.
The EEAS and EU Delegations should make the European Year an integral part of their ongoing information and communication activities.
European added-value of financed actions: lastly, in order for measures to be considered eligible for financing under this Decision they should
be required to make effective use of public spending, to bring added value and to be results-orientated.

2013/0238(COD) - 16/04/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish a European Year of Development (2015).
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision No 472/2014/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Year for Development (2015).
CONTENT: this Decision establishes 2015 as the European Year for Development. The motto of the European Year shall be Our world, our
dignity, our future.
Objectives: the objectives of the European Year shall be:
to inform Union citizens about the Union's and the Member States' development cooperation, highlighting the results that the Union,
acting together with the Member States, has achieved as a global actor and that it will continue to do so in line with the latest
discussions on the overarching post-2015 framework;

to foster direct involvement, critical thinking and active interest of Union citizens and stakeholders in development cooperation
including in policy formulation and implementation; and to raise awareness of the benefits of the Union's development cooperation not
only for beneficiaries of the Union's development assistance but also for Union citizens and to achieve a broader understanding of
policy coherence for development, as well as to foster among citizens in Europe and developing countries a sense of joint
responsibility, solidarity and opportunity.
Union measures: the measures taken to achieve the objectives of the European Year shall include the following measures, which may be
organised at Union, national, regional or local levels, as set out in the Annex, and in partner countries:
communication campaigns to disseminate key messages targeted at the general public and more specific audiences, in particular
young people and other key target groups, including through social media;
the organisation of conferences, events and initiatives with all relevant stakeholders, to promote active participation and debate, and to
raise awareness at all levels;
concrete measures in the Member States aimed at promoting the objectives of the European Year, in particular through development
education, the exchange of information and sharing of experience and good practices among national, regional or local
administrations and other organisations;
undertaking studies and surveys and disseminating their results.
The characteristics of these measures are detailed in the Annex of the Decision.
Coordination of actions: the Commission shall invite the Member States to appoint each a national coordinator to be responsible for organising
the involvement of that Member State in the European Year. The national coordinators shall, in close coordination with the Commission,
consult and cooperate with a wide range of relevant stakeholders, including civil society and the private sector, national parliaments, social
partners and, where appropriate, the national agencies, the federal State or sub-national government level, including regional and local
authorities and, where applicable, associated Overseas Countries and Territories (OCTs).
The Commission, together with the European External Action Service (EEAS), shall cooperate closely with the European Parliament, the
Council and the Member States, the European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions and the bodies and
associations active in development issues at Union level. The Commission shall convene meetings of the national coordinators to coordinate
the implementation of the European Year and to exchange information on implementation at Union and national levels. The Commission may
invite representatives of civil society and regional and local authorities and members of the European Parliament to attend those meetings as
observers.
The Commission shall make the European Year a priority in the communication activities of its Representations in the Member States and of
EU Delegations in partner countries. With a view to their participation in activities related to the European Year, whether those activities take
place in the Union or in third countries, development partners in third countries shall be supported through EU Delegations while OCTs shall
be supported through appropriate institutional channels.
The EEAS and EU Delegations shall make the European Year an integral part of their ongoing information and communication activities.
Work programme: the Commission shall invite the Member States to transmit to it, by 1 September 2014, their work programme, which shall
set out details of the national activities planned for the European Year, in accordance with the details of the measures set out in this Decision.
Participation: participation in the activities of the European Year to be financed by the Union shall be open to the Member States and
candidate countries benefiting from a pre-accession strategy, in accordance with the general principles and general terms and conditions for
the participation of those countries in Union programmes.
Implementation: the Commission shall implement this Decision at Union level, in particular by adopting the necessary financing decisions in
accordance with the Regulations establishing the instruments for financing external action relevant to the actions concerned, namely the
Development Cooperation Instrument (DCI).
Consistency and complementarity: the measures provided for in this Decision shall be consistent with any other Union, national and regional
measures that help attain the objectives of the European Year, and fully complement the existing Union, national and regional measures.
Financial provisions: financial provisions are laid down as such:
measures which are Union-wide in nature (Part A of the Annex) shall lead to a procurement procedure or the award of grants financed by the
Union;
measures which are Union-wide in nature (Part B of the Annex) may be co-financed by the Union (high-visibility events on a Union scale that
aim to raise awareness of the objectives of the European Year may receive a Union grant of up to 80% of the final costs of the activities).
The Commission may award co-financing to each national coordinator.
Reporting and assessment: by 31 December 2016, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council on the
implementation, results and overall assessment of the measures provided for in this Decision in order to consider appropriate follow-up.
Annex: the Decision includes an annex outlining the types of eligible measures.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 29.05.2014.

2013/0238(COD) - 01/12/2016 Follow-up document
The Commission presented a report on the implementation, results and overall assessment of the European Year for Development 2015
(EYD2015).
The EYD2015 Decision established three key objectives for the Year:
inform citizens about the work of the EU and the Member States on development cooperation;
foster direct involvement and critical thinking about development policy;

raise awareness about the benefits of development cooperation and its global dimension among citizens in partner countries and in
the EU.
Main conclusions of the report: in drawing up its conclusions, the report based itself on an independent evaluation which, on the whole,
considered that the EYD2015 had put in place an efficient and effective campaign, combining EU and Member State input to ensure an
appropriately pitched campaign that helped to increase awareness, knowledge and understanding of the EUs development policy among the
general public and young people in particular.
As a reminder, the financial resources mobilised for the campaign totalled EUR 10.6 million.
In general, the evaluation noted that the EYD2015:
contributed to improve public and political support for development cooperation;
promoted online and social media strategy to project the EU as a global player and inform citizens about the development activities of
the EU;
promoted an efficient way to reach the development community as multipliers, the general public, and notably young people even
though more human and financial resources could have been allocated to the EYD2015;
implemented activities with high added-value in terms of sustainability through the implementation of new forms of engagement, in
particular through the use of narrative communication techniques, the use of new tools or communication with a new audience. In this
regard, the evaluation stated that additional resources should have been made available.
Lastly, in general, the Commission report stated that thanks to the EYD2015, the EU has significantly improved its capacity to communicate
with European citizens on development.

