Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Directive

2013/0371(COD)

Procedure completed

Packaging and packaging waste: reduction of the consumption of lightweight
plastic carrier bags
Amending Directive 94/62/EC 1992/0436(COD)
Subject
2.70.02 Indirect taxation, VAT, excise duties
3.40.01 Chemical industry, fertilizers, plastics
3.70.12 Waste management, domestic waste, packaging, light industrial
waste
4.60.02 Consumer information, advertising, labelling

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Rapporteur

Appointed

Verts/ALE AUKEN Margrete

28/11/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE HÖLVÉNYI György
S&D BONAFÈ Simona
ALDE GERBRANDY
Gerben-Jan
ECR GIRLING Julie
GUE/NGL FORENZA
Eleonora
EFD EVI Eleonora
Former committee responsible
ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Verts/ALE AUKEN Margrete

28/11/2013

Former committee for opinion
ECON

ITRE

IMCO

Economic and Monetary Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Environment

Commissioner
ARIAS CAÑETE Miguel

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
04/11/2013

Legislative proposal published

18/11/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

13/12/2013

Debate in Council

COM(2013)0761

Summary

10/03/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

14/03/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

15/04/2014

Debate in Parliament

16/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

16/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/06/2014

Debate in Council

24/09/2014

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations after 1st
reading in Parliament

24/11/2014

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at early 2nd reading interinstitutional
negotiations

04/03/2015

Council position published

12/03/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 2nd reading

31/03/2015

Vote in committee, 2nd reading

10/04/2015

Committee recommendation tabled for
plenary, 2nd reading

28/04/2015

Debate in Parliament

28/04/2015

Decision by Parliament, 2nd reading

29/04/2015

Final act signed

29/04/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

06/05/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

A7-0174/2014

Summary

T7-0417/2014

Summary

PE609.637 GEDA/A/(2015)002644

05094/1/2015

Summary

A8-0130/2015

Summary

T8-0101/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0371(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Directive
Amending Directive 94/62/EC 1992/0436(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ENVI/8/02412

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0761

04/11/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0443

04/11/2013

EC

Summary

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0444

04/11/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE526.120

18/12/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE528.033

27/01/2014

EP

CES7899/2013

26/02/2014

ESC

PE529.919

07/03/2014

EP

A7-0174/2014

14/03/2014

EP

CDR8067/2013

03/04/2014

CofR

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T7-0417/2014

16/04/2014

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Council statement on its position

06375/2015

25/02/2015

CSL

Council statement on its position

06605/2015

26/02/2015

CSL

05094/1/2015

04/03/2015

CSL

GEDA/A/(2015)002644

09/03/2015

CSL

COM(2015)0124

10/03/2015

EC

PE551.928

12/03/2015

EP

Committee recommendation tabled for plenary,
2nd reading

A8-0130/2015

10/04/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 2nd reading

T8-0101/2015

28/04/2015

EP

Summary

Economic and Social Committee: opinion, report
Amendments tabled in committee
Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Committee of the Regions: opinion

Council position
Coreper letter confirming interinstitutional
agreement
Commission communication on Council's position
Committee draft report

Summary

Summary

Summary

Summary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Directive 2015/720
OJ L 115 06.05.2015, p. 0011 Summary

2013/0371(COD) - 04/11/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to reduce the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags.
PROPOSED ACT: Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: Directive 94/62/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council was adopted in order to prevent or reduce the impact of
packaging and packaging waste on the environment. Although plastic carrier bags constitute packaging within the meaning of that Directive, its
provisions do not contain specific measures relating to the consumption of such bags.
The use of plastic carrier bags with a thickness below 50 microns, which are less frequently re-used than thicker plastic carrier bags, involves
a considerable amount of litter, which will increase if measures are not taken.
Consumption levels of plastic carrier bags vary considerably across the Union. Some Member States have managed to reduce consumption
levels of plastic carrier bags significantly, with the average consumption level in the seven best performing Member States amounting to only

20% of the EU average consumption.
To promote similar reductions of the average consumption level of lightweight plastic carrier bags, Member States should take measures to
reduce the consumption of plastic carrier bags with a thickness below 50 microns in line with the overall objectives of the Unions waste policy
and the Union's waste hierarchy as provided for in Directive 2008/98/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: instead of establishing a common EU target, it was considered preferable to introduce into Directive 94/62/EC the
obligation for all Member States to reduce the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags, while allowing them to set their own national
reduction targets and to choose the measures to reach those targets.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: the proposal amends Directive 94/62/EC by requiring Member States to take measures to reduce the consumption of lightweight
plastic carrier bags. It stipulates that these measures may include the use of economic instruments as well as marketing restrictions in
derogation of Article 18 of the Directive. The latter provision thus broadens the range of instruments available to Member States to address the
unsustainable consumption of plastic bags.
For the purpose of this Directive a definition of "lightweight plastic carrier bags" is introduced, and means bags made of plastic materials with a
wall thickness below 50 microns that are supplied to consumers at the point of sale of goods or products.

2013/0371(COD) - 14/03/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted the report by Margrete AUKEN (Greens/EFA, DK) on the
proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 94/62/EC on packaging and packaging waste to
reduce the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags.
The committee recommended that Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission proposal as follows:
Introducing a European reduction target on plastic bags: according to Members, lightweight plastic carrier bags with a thickness below 50
microns, which represent the vast majority of the total number of plastic carrier bags consumed in the Union, are less reusable than thicker
plastic carrier bags, thus become waste more quickly, are more prone to littering and, due to their light weight, more likely to end up scattered
through the environment, both on land and in freshwater and marine-ecosystem. Current recycling rates are very low even though plastic
carrier bags are recyclable.
Members proposed that Member States should take measures to achieve a sustained reduction in the consumption of lightweight plastic
carrier bags on their territory of at least 50% within three years and 80% within five years of the entry into force of the Directive, as compared
to the average consumption in the Union in 2010, respectively.
Paying for plastic carrier bags: under the new Directive, Member States should take measures to ensure that economic operators selling food
do not provide plastic carrier bags free of charge, except for very lightweight plastic carrier bags, or alternatives to such very lightweight plastic
carrier bags.
In addition, Member States encourage economic operators selling non-food items to charge for plastic carrier bags to an extent that is effective
and proportionate so as to achieve the reduction targets. Member States with separate collection of bio-waste should be allowed to reduce the
price of biodegradable and compostable lightweight plastic carrier bags.
Member States should take measures to ensure that very lightweight plastic carrier bags used to wrap dry loose, unpackaged foods such as
fruits, vegetables and confectionery are replaced progressively by carrier bags that are made of recycled paper, or by very lightweight plastic
carrier bags that are biodegradable and compostable. They should achieve a replacement rate of 50% by three years and of 100% by five
years after the entry into force of this Directive.
Consumers should be allowed by retailers to refuse and to leave at the point of sale any packaging they consider superfluous, in particular as
regard to carrier bags. Retailers should ensure that such packaging is either reused or recycled.
Phasing out "oxo-biodegradable" plastics: the report stressed that Oxo-biodegradable plastics do not biodegrade in the natural environment,
but only fragment into secondary microplastics. It is thus misleading to refer to such materials as biodegradable.
Fragmentation converts visible littering into invisible littering. This solution enhances pollution of the environment by plastic materials.
Oxo-biodegradable plastics should therefore not be used as a packaging material.
Substituting hazardous substances for packaging as a whole: in order to reduce the exposure of European citizens to dangerous substances
and to avoid that such substances enter the environment during the waste phase, Members proposed that packaging as a whole should no
longer contain substances that are carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction or that are endocrine disrupters.

2013/0371(COD) - 16/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 639 votes to 51, with 72 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 94/62/EC on packaging and packaging waste to reduce the consumption of
lightweight plastic carrier bags.
Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Introducing a European reduction target on plastic bags: according to Members, lightweight plastic carrier bags with a thickness below 50
microns, which represent the vast majority of the total number of plastic carrier bags consumed in the Union, are less reusable than thicker

plastic carrier bags, thus become waste more quickly, are more prone to littering and, due to their light weight, more likely to end up scattered
through the environment, both on land and in freshwater and marine-ecosystem. Current recycling rates are very low even though plastic
carrier bags are recyclable.
Parliament proposed that Member States should take measures to achieve a sustained reduction in the consumption of lightweight plastic
carrier bags on their territory of at least 50% within three years and 80% within five years of the entry into force of the Directive, as compared
to the average consumption in the Union in 2010, respectively.
Paying for plastic carrier bags: under the new Directive, Member States should:
take measures to ensure that economic operators selling food do not provide plastic carrier bags free of charge, except for very
lightweight plastic carrier bags (wall thickness below 10 microns) or alternatives to such very lightweight plastic carrier bags;
ensure that economic operators selling food charge a price for lightweight plastic carrier bags that is effective and proportionate so as
to achieve the reduction targets;
ensure that economic operators selling food charge at least the same price for thicker plastic carrier bags, and that economic
operators do not replace lightweight plastic carrier bags by very lightweight plastic carrier bags at the point of sale. Member States
shall take such measures by two years after the entry into force of this Directive.
Member States should encourage economic operators selling non-food items to charge for plastic carrier bags to an extent that is effective and
proportionate.
Member States should also take measures to ensure that very lightweight plastic carrier bags used to wrap dry loose, unpackaged foods such
as fruits, vegetables and confectionery are replaced progressively by carrier bags that are made of recycled paper, or by very lightweight
plastic carrier bags that are biodegradable and compostable. They should achieve a replacement rate of 50% by three years and of 100% by
five years after the entry into force of this Directive.
Consumers should be allowed by retailers to refuse and to leave at the point of sale any packaging they consider superfluous, in particular as
regard to carrier bags. Retailers should ensure that such packaging is either reused or recycled.
Substituting hazardous substances for packaging as a whole: Member State shall ensure that packaging is manufactured in such a way that it
does not contain substances in concentrations above 0.01% that are carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction or that are endocrine
disrupters. Member States shall ensure that packaging is manufactured in such a way that it does not contain oxo-fragmentable plastic
materials. Those measures shall be achieved by two years after the entry into force of this Directive.
Information campaigns: the Commission and the Member States shall, at least during the first year after the entry into force of the directive,
promote public information and awareness campaigns concerning the adverse environmental impact of excessive use of conventional plastic
bags. If bags are biodegradable and compostable, this should be clearly indicated on the bag with a mark, feature or colour code.

2013/0371(COD) - 04/03/2015 Council position
The Council's position fully reflects the compromise reached in the negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council, with the
agreement of the Commission.
The main elements of the compromise reached with the European Parliament are outlined below:
The measures to be adopted with a view to reduce the consumption of lightweight plastic bags: these shall include either one or both of the
following approaches:
·

the adoption of measures ensuring that the yearly consumption level will not exceed 90 lightweight plastic bags per person by 31
December 2019 and 40 lightweight plastic carrier bags per person by 31 December 2025 (or equivalent in weight);

·

the adoption of measures ensuring that by 31 December 2018 these plastic bags will not be provided free of charge for consumers
unless equally effective instruments are implemented.

Very lightweight plastic carrier bags: these may be excluded from these measures. These are defined as plastic bags with a wall thickness
below 15 microns required for hygiene purposes or provided as primary packaging for loose food when this helps prevent food wastage.
Information to the public: the Commission and the Member States will, at least during the first year of implementation of the Directive, actively
encourage public information and awareness campaigns concerning the adverse environmental impact of excessive use of lightweight plastic
bags.
Future steps:
·

two years after the entry into force of the Directive, the Commission will present a report to the European Parliament and Council,
examining the impact of the use of oxo-degradable plastic bags on the environment as well as a report on the different possibilities to
reduce the use of very lightweight plastic bags;

·

six and a half years after the entry into force of the Directive, the Commission shall present a report assessing the effectiveness of
measures at EU level, in combating littering, changing consumer behaviour and promoting waste prevention. If the assessment
shows that the measures adopted are not effective, the Commission shall examine other possible ways to achieve a reduction in the
consumption of lightweight plastic bags, including the setting of realistic and achievable targets at EU level.

All those reports will be accompanied, if appropriate, by legislative proposals.

2013/0371(COD) - 10/03/2015 Commission communication on Council's position
The Commission considers that the position of the Council reflects the political agreement reached between the European Parliament and the

Council and supports the main objective of the Commission proposal to reduce the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags, while
deviating on some aspects and introducing additional elements.
The compromise reached between the Council and the European Parliament obliges Member States to include in these measures, as a
minimum, either a national reduction target and/or mandatory pricing.
The Commission did not consider it appropriate to propose mandatory pricing or a quantified reduction target at the time of presenting the
proposal given difficulties with the availability of data and common measurement methods and because it considered that Member States are
best placed to choose the measures to reduce the consumption of plastic carrier bag.
Even though the Commission considers these provisions too prescriptive, it can, in a spirit of compromise, accept them as part of the package.
The Commission can accept additional elements introduced in the position of the Council, in particular:
·

the obligation for the Commission and Member States to actively encourage public information and awareness campaigns, at least
during the first year after the date of transposition of the Directive;

·

the possibility for Member States to implement the measures pursuant to the Directive by means of agreements between competent
authorities and the economic sectors concerned.

It can also accept the obligation of the Commission to:
·

develop and adopt in an implementing act, within 12 months of entry into force of the Directive, a methodology and reporting format
for the calculation of the annual consumption per person of lightweight plastic carrier bags;

·

develop and adopt in an implementing act, within 24 months of entry into force of the Directive, a label for biodegradable and home
compostable plastic carrier bags;

·

assess the life cycle impacts of different possibilities to reduce very lightweight plastic carrier bags and present, if appropriate, a
legislative proposal within 24 months of entry into force of the Directive;

·

the obligation for the Commission to examine the impact of the use of oxo-degradable plastic carrier bags, present a report to the
European Parliament and the Council and, if appropriate, present a legislative proposal on the issue within 24 months of entry into
force of the Directive.

Better regulation: the Commission regretted that the final text agreed between the colegislators includes certain elements that are outside the
scope of the Commission's proposal and are not in line with the principles of better regulation. This could pose problems for the future
application of the Directive, for Member States, the Commission, consumers and economic operators.
The issues that raise concerns are the following:
·

the adoption of a label for biodegradable and home-compostable bags without the impacts thereof being assessed;

·

additional administrative burden for Member States and economic operators, including new reporting obligations and labelling
requirements;

·

provisions which could better be addressed in the context of the follow-up to the Commission Green Paper on plastic waste, such as
the report on the use of "oxo-degradable" plastic bags;

·

the possibility to vary the measures taken towards plastic bags based on their environmental impact or other properties could be
problematic as regards the principles of non-discrimination and proportionality and those of the Single Market;

·

the possibility for setting consumption objectives at a level predetermined by the Directive, in the absence of relevant statistical data
for all Member States;

·

too short deadlines for development and adoption in implementing acts of a methodology for reporting on consumption of lightweight
plastic carrier bags and of labels for biodegradable plastic carrier bags.

2013/0371(COD) - 10/04/2015 Committee recommendation tabled for plenary, 2nd reading
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted the second reading recommendation contained in the report by
Margrete AUKEN (Verts/ALE, DK), on the Council position at first reading with a view to the adoption of a directive of the European Parliament
and of the Council amending Directive 94/62/EC as regards reducing the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags.
The parliamentary committee recommended agreeing to the Council position without any amendments.
As result of the negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council the main elements of the final agreement are the following:
Targets or pricing: the text now requires Member States to choose between two obligations:
·

either to adopt measures ensuring that the annual consumption level does not exceed, on average, 90 lightweight plastic carrier bags
per person by the end of 2019, and not more than 40 lightweight plastic carrier bags per person by 2025;

·

or, alternatively, to ensure that, by the end of 2018, they are no longer provided free of charge at the point of sale of goods or
products, unless equally effective instruments are applied.

Annual reporting on consumption: specific provisions on monitoring, requiring the Member States, as from 36 months after the entry into force
of the legislation, to report annually on the annual consumption of plastic carrier bags according to a common methodology to be adopted by
the Commission within 12 months after the entry into force of the legislation.
Labelling of biodegradable and compostable plastic carrier bags: the obligation for the Commission to set specifications on labelling on
biodegradable and compostable plastic carrier bags is an important means to avoid the misleading practices of false labelling of plastic carrier
bags, particularly by so called "oxobiodegradable" plastic carrier bags.

Evaluation of impacts of "oxo-degradable" plastic carrier bags on the environment: the agreed text obliges the Commission to examine the
impact of "oxo-degradable" plastic carrier bags on the environment and present a report to the European Parliament and the Council,
including, if appropriate, a set of measures to limit their consumption or to reduce any harmful impacts within 24 months of the entry into force.
Very lightweight plastic carrier bags: the final agreement introduced an obligation on the Commission to assess the life cycle impacts of
possibilities to reduce the consumption of these bags, and present a legislative proposal, if appropriate, within 24 months.
CEN standard for home composting: lastly, the final agreement stipulates that the Commission should ask CEN to develop a standard for
home-compostable packaging.
In an Annex to the draft resolution, the European Parliament notes the statement made by the Commission on the adoption of the agreement
amending Directive 94/62/EC as regards reducing the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags. The Parliament considers that the text
agreed by the co-legislators is fully in line with the aims of the Commission proposal.
The European Parliament considers that the final text agreed is based on the preferred option identified in the Commission's own impact
assessment, and establishes appropriate provisions for Member States to ensure effective reduction of the consumption of plastic bags across
the Union.

2013/0371(COD) - 28/04/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, 2nd reading
The European Parliament adopted a legislative resolution approving, unamended, the Council position at first reading with a view to the
adoption of a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 94/62/EC as regards reducing the consumption of
lightweight plastic carrier bags.
A proposal to reject the Council position, tabled by the EFDD group, was rejected in plenary by 48 votes to 590, with 53 abstentions.
The objective of the proposal is to limit negative impacts on the environment, in particular in terms of littering, to encourage waste prevention
and a more efficient use of resources, while limiting negative socio-economic impacts. More specifically, the proposal aims at reducing the
consumption of plastic carrier bags with a thickness of below 50 microns (0.05 millimetres) in the European Union.
In a statement annexed to the legislative resolution, Parliament took note of the statement made by the Commission on the adoption of the
agreement amending Directive 94/62/EC as regards reducing the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags.
Parliament considered that the text agreed by the co-legislators is fully in line with the aims of the Commission proposal. It stated that the final
text agreed is based on the preferred option identified in the Commission's own impact assessment, and establishes appropriate provisions for
Member States to ensure effective reduction of the consumption of plastic bags across the Union.
The European Parliament recalled furthermore that according to the Inter-institutional agreement on better law-making of 2003, it is within the
discretion of the co-legislators to decide whether an impact assessment should be carried out prior to the adoption of any substantive
amendment. Parliament appreciated the efforts made by the Commission in order to conclude the inter-institutional negotiations. It deplored,
however, the fact that the Commission's declaration addresses issues that have already been dealt with adequately during the legislative
procedure.

2013/0371(COD) - 29/04/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to reduce the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags in order to limit the negative impact of these bags on the
environment, to prevent littering and to reach a more efficient use of resources.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Directive (EU) 2015/720 of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 94/62/EC as regards reducing
the consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags.
CONTENT: the Directive concerns plastic carrier bags with a wall thickness below 50 microns (lightweight plastic carrier bags), which
represent the vast majority of the total number of plastic carrier bags consumed in the Union, are less frequently reused than thicker plastic
carrier bags. It amends Directive 94/62/EC which obliges Member States to take measures to reduce the consumption of lightweight plastic
carrier bags.
Prevention measures: those measures may include the use of national reduction targets, maintaining or introducing economic instruments
(such as pricing, taxes and levies) as well as marketing restrictions (such as bans). The measures taken by Member States shall include either
or both of the following:
the adoption of measures ensuring that the annual consumption level does not exceed 90 lightweight plastic carrier bags per person
by 31 December 2019 and 40 lightweight plastic carrier bags per person by 31 December 2025, or equivalent targets set in weight;
the adoption of instruments ensuring that, by 31 December 2018, lightweight plastic carrier bags are not provided free of charge at the
point of sale of goods or products, unless equally effective instruments are implemented.
Member States may choose to exempt plastic carrier bags with a wall thickness below 15 microns (very lightweight plastic carrier bags)
provided as primary packaging for loose food when required for hygiene purposes or when their use helps prevent food wastage.
From 27 May 2018 Member States shall report on the annual consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags when providing data on
packaging and packaging waste to the Commission.
The Directive stipulates that:
Member States may take measures such as economic instruments and national reduction targets, as regards any kind of plastic
carrier bags, regardless of their wall thickness;
the Commission and the Member States shall, at least during the first year following the 27 November 2016, actively encourage public
information and awareness campaigns;

by 27 May 2016, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act laying down the methodology for the calculation of the annual
consumption of lightweight plastic carrier bags per person and adapting the reporting formats.
Biodegradable and compostable plastic carrier bags: by 27 May 2017, the Commission shall adopt an implementing act laying down the
specifications of labels or marks to ensure Union-wide recognition of biodegradable and compostable plastic carrier bags and to provide
consumers with the correct information about the composting properties of such bags.
18 months after the adoption of that implementing act, at the latest, Member States shall ensure that biodegradable and compostable plastic
carrier bags are labelled in accordance with the specifications provided for in that implementing act.
The Commission should ask the European Committee for Standardization to develop a separate standard for home-compostable packaging.
Reporting on plastic bags: by 27 November 2021, the Commission shall present a report assessing the effectiveness of measures at Union
level, in combating littering, changing consumer behaviour and promoting waste prevention. If the assessment shows that the measures
adopted are not effective, the Commission shall examine other possible ways to achieve a reduction in the consumption of lightweight plastic
carrier bags, including the setting of realistic and achievable targets at Union level, and present a legislative proposal, if appropriate.
By 27 May 2017, the Commission shall:
present a report examining the impact of the use of oxo-degradable plastic carrier bags on the environment and present a legislative
proposal, if appropriate;
assess the life cycle impacts of different possibilities to reduce the consumption of very lightweight plastic carrier bags, and present a
legislative proposal, if appropriate.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 26.5.2015.
TRANSPOSITION: 27.11.2016.

