Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2178(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Optimise the potential of outermost regions by creating synergies between
the EU structural funds and other EU programmes

Subject
4.70.01 Structural funds, investment funds in general, programmes
4.70.06 Outlying and outermost regions, overseas countries and territories

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
REGI

Regional Development

Rapporteur

Appointed

GUE/NGL OMARJEE
Younous

20/06/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE TEIXEIRA Nuno
S&D ALVES Luís Paulo
ALDE GODMANIS Ivars
Verts/ALE BICEP Jean-Jacob
ECR VLASÁK Oldřich

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Regional and Urban Policy

HAHN Johannes

Key events
12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

11/02/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

17/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

26/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

26/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

26/02/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0121/2014

Summary

T7-0133/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2178(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

REGI/7/13726

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE524.718

02/12/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE526.234

08/01/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0121/2014

17/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0133/2014

26/02/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)447

22/07/2014

2013/2178(INI) - 17/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Regional Development adopted the own-initiative report by Younous OMARJEE (GUE/NGL, FR) on optimising the potential
of outermost regions (ORs) by creating synergies between the Structural Funds and other European Union programmes.
Members are convinced that the assets, resources and potential of the ORs highlighted by the European Commission, which lie in areas of
key importance to EU research, innovation and growth, attract too little support and financing under EU funds and programmes. They
considered that the volume of structural and investment funding being provided to the ORs must be adjusted or supplemented in order to
enable them to address the major challenges facing the EU.
It is for this reason that the report foresees the creation of the closest possible synergies between all EU instruments, funds and programmes
in the following areas:
Research and innovation: the Commission should make the necessary adjustments and guarantee OR access to the Horizon 2020
programme by setting up dedicated programmes that can help to foster greater OR inclusion in European and international research and
innovation networks.
Internal market: the Commission is called upon to look into the issue of the additional costs and high cost of living in the ORs and to take this
issue into account when shaping European policies.
Environment and energy: Members believed that the ORs potential in the areas of biodiversity management, conservation and rehabilitation,
adaptation to climate change and renewable energy development can be maximised through the establishment of synergies and cross-funding
arrangements between cohesion policy, the LIFE+ programme and the Energy 2020 strategy.
Youth: Members highlighted the need for greater synergies to be achieved between the Erasmus programme and the ESF in the ORs, in order
to maximise local human capital and expertise. They called for further action on the employment front in the form of an urgent pilot plan to
combat unemployment in the ORs.
Trans-European network (transport, telecommunications, energy): Members recalled that accessibility plays a key role where the development
of the ORs is concerned and that the digital divide between the ORs and mainland Europe is hampering the ORs development and
competitiveness.
Members stressed therefore the need for synergies to be created in the ORs between the trans-European networks, the Connecting Europe
Facility, the Civitas and Horizon 2020 programmes and ERDF and Cohesion Fund funding for transport, telecommunications and energy
projects.
EU Maritime policy: Members stated that the lack of synergies between cohesion policy and the Common Fisheries Policy, which still takes too
little account of conditions in the ORs. The report stressed the importance of maintaining a POSEI scheme for fisheries, and proposed that
research and innovation should be stepped up in the maritime economy, as they are a potential source of growth.
Agriculture: Members pointed to the need to ensure that POSEI has the necessary resources to help OR producers to cope with the impact of
the liberalisation of a number of sectors resulting from EU policies and international agreements concluded in the milk, sugar, rum, meat and
banana sectors in particular. They believed that synergies should be created between cohesion policy and the EAFRD.
Combat against poverty and social exclusion: Members drew attention to the fact that a number of fundamental problems exist in the ORs, one
of them being social exclusion. They advocated the establishment of a social housing investment scheme.
External policy: the Commission is called upon to take greater account of the impact that trade agreements concluded with non-EU countries
have on OR economies, with impact studies being conducted in advance of each agreement in order to ensure that any 'sensitive' products
are protected and fair compensation is provided for any losses incurred in specific sectors. The report also called for a procedure for consulting
OR regional authorities to be introduced.

2013/2178(INI) - 26/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 446 votes to 73, with 47 abstentions, a resolution on optimising the potential of outermost regions (ORs)
by creating synergies between the Structural Funds and other European Union programmes.
Members are convinced that the assets, resources and potential of the ORs highlighted by the European Commission, which lie in areas of
key importance to EU research, innovation and growth, attract too little support and financing under EU funds and programmes. They deplored

the approach advocated at European level whereby the cohesion policy alone should be used to finance virtually all OR development projects.
Stressing the importance of encouraging long-term investments and promoting innovation in the ORs, Parliament considered that the volume
of structural and investment funding being provided to the ORs must be adjusted or supplemented in order to enable them to address the
major challenges facing the EU.
With regards to meeting the objectives the EU has set as part of the Europe 2020 growth strategy, the Horizon 2020 strategy, the Energy 2020
strategy, the LIFE+ and Natura 2000 programmes and the trans-European telecommunications, transport and energy networks, the ORs are
regions of excellence making a significant contribution towards the realisation of the objectives.
It is for this reason that the resolution foresees the creation of the closest possible synergies between all EU instruments, funds and
programmes in the following areas:
Research and innovation: the Commission should make the necessary adjustments and guarantee OR access to the Horizon 2020
programme by setting up dedicated programmes that can help to foster greater OR inclusion in European and international research and
innovation networks. Members supported the further development of universities in the Ors.
Internal market: the Commission is called upon to look into the issue of the additional costs and high cost of living in the ORs and to take this
issue into account when shaping European policies and to enforce the competition rules more strictly in order to guard against monopolies and
cartels in the Ors.
Environment and energy: Members believed that the ORs potential in the areas of biodiversity management, conservation and rehabilitation,
adaptation to climate change and renewable energy development can be maximised through the establishment of synergies and cross-funding
arrangements between cohesion policy, the LIFE+ programme and the Energy 2020 strategy.
Youth: Parliament highlighted the need for greater synergies to be achieved between the Erasmus programme and the ESF in the ORs, in
order to maximise local human capital and expertise. It called for further action on the employment front in the form of an urgent pilot plan to
combat unemployment in the ORs. The resolution called for special youth employment action teams to be set up in the Commission, with a
view to implementing the Youth Guarantee scheme and mobilising the ESF and the Youth Employment Initiative (YEI).
Trans-European network (transport, telecommunications, energy): Members recalled that accessibility plays a key role where the development
of the ORs is concerned and that the digital divide between the ORs and mainland Europe is hampering the ORs development and
competitiveness. They stressed therefore the need for synergies to be created in the ORs between the trans-European networks, the
Connecting Europe Facility, the Civitas and Horizon 2020 programmes and ERDF and Cohesion Fund funding for transport,
telecommunications and energy projects.
EU Maritime policy: recalling that the ORs contribute towards the EUs status as a world maritime power, the resolution stated that the lack of
synergies between cohesion policy and the Common Fisheries Policy, which still takes too little account of conditions in the ORs. Parliament
stressed the importance of maintaining a POSEI scheme for fisheries, and proposed that research and innovation should be stepped up in the
maritime economy, as they are a potential source of growth.
Agriculture: Members pointed to the need to ensure that POSEI has the necessary resources to help OR producers to cope with the impact of
the liberalisation of a number of sectors resulting from EU policies and international agreements concluded in the milk, sugar, rum, meat and
banana sectors in particular. They believed that synergies should be created between cohesion policy and the EAFRD with a view to
modernising and extending irrigation networks and for the purposes of spatial planning, training and capitalising on the tourism potential of
sustainable agriculture and rural communities;
Combat against poverty and social exclusion: Members drew attention to the fact that a number of fundamental problems exist in the ORs, one
of them being social exclusion. They advocated the establishment of a social housing investment scheme and the introduction of special
measures under which aid in support of investment in social housing is not considered to be State aid.
External policy: Members deplored the continued lack of a proper linkage between the European funds EDF, ERDF and ETC, in particular in
cross-border cooperation projects, despite the fact that this is essential if the funds objectives are to be met.
The Commission is called upon to take greater account of the impact that trade agreements concluded with non-EU countries have on OR
economies, with impact studies being conducted in advance of each agreement in order to ensure that any 'sensitive' products are protected
and fair compensation is provided for any losses incurred in specific sectors. A procedure for consulting OR regional authorities should also be
introduced.

