Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2882(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2013 progress report on Montenegro

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Montenegro, from 06/2006

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

ECR TANNOCK Charles

02/10/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE IBRISAGIC Anna
S&D FÄRM Göran
ALDE VAJGL Ivo
Verts/ALE LUNACEK Ulrike
GUE/NGL CHOUNTIS
Nikolaos
EFD BELDER Bas

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

FÜLE Štefan

Key events
17/12/2013

Debate in Council

05/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

06/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

06/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

06/02/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

T7-0104/2014

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2882(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/7/14245

Summary

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE524.561

09/12/2013

EP

Motion for a resolution

B7-0072/2014

28/01/2014

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0104/2014

06/02/2014

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)414

18/06/2014

Summary

2013/2882(RSP) - 06/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 474 votes to 42, with 34 abstentions, a resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the
2013 progress report on Montenegro.
Accession negotiations: Parliament welcomed the opening of five new negotiation chapters in December 2013, as well as the governments
action plans on Chapters 23 and 24. It encouraged swift continuation of the accession negotiations, provided that reforms were pursued and
implemented, and concrete results delivered. Members commended the inclusion of civil society representatives in the negotiation structures
whilst noting that maximum possible transparency must be shown by engaging a broader selection of organisations in the working groups and
conducting extensive nationwide consultations.
Political criteria: Members stressed the importance of the enforcement of the rule of law, notably through judicial reform, and the fight against
corruption and organised crime. Stressing that additional efforts are needed in the fight against corruption, they insisted that impunity for
criminals convicted of corruption or organised crime offences is not acceptable;
Although welcoming the enhancing of the Montenegrin Parliaments oversight role, Parliament called, nevertheless, for reinforced follow-up of
hearing conclusions, stronger oversight of the implementation of adopted legislation, and more active parliamentary involvement in the
negotiations. It regretted the fact that a committee of inquiry formed to investigate alleged misuse of public funds for party-political purposes
failed to draw political conclusions in its final report, and that judicial follow-up remains incomplete in this regard.
Members also stressed the need to improve public confidence in the electoral system and democratic structures and called on the
Montenegrin Parliament to speed up the electoral reform in line with the long-standing OSCE/ODIHR recommendations and in full
transparency, involving civil society. Supporting the Commissions call for a clear, broadly accepted delineation between public and party
interests to be established, they wanted the Government to publish proactively information on state aid for individuals and companies,
employment in the public service sector and other expenditures that might affect voting behaviour.
Parliament insisted on the importance of public administration reform for applying the acquis, and called for further legislative and other
measures to be taken and implemented in order to diminish the politicisation of the judiciary in practice.
Expressing grave concern about the increase in verbal and physical intimidation of journalists, Parliament underlined the importance of free,
independent and unbiased media in a functioning democracy. It was deeply shocked by the fact that since August 2013 at least two bomb
attacks and around half a dozen physical attacks have been carried out against journalists, and deplored the fact that Montenegro is now
ranked 113th in the Reporters Without Borders media freedom index.
Socio-economic issues: Parliament wanted the government to focus on increasing economic growth to combat poverty and improve living
standards of all citizens. It called for enhanced efforts to tackle the large informal sector, to improve protection of intellectual property rights
and the overall legal system in order to systematically fight corruption and improve the business environment, and to implement structural
reforms with a view to attracting and sustaining foreign direct investment. It emphasised the need for commercial dispute resolution processes
to be free from political interference and based on the rule of law in order to further improve the business climate, and also encouraged a swift
resolution of the KAP aluminium plant dispute. Members expressed concerns regarding the unchanged labour market situation and high
unemployment, and wanted measures to improve the poorly performing labour market.
Regional cooperation: Parliament welcomed Montenegros proactive participation in initiatives on regional reconciliation and the Western
Balkans Six project, and called on Montenegro to enhance its cultural and economic cooperation with neighbouring EU Member States. Whilst
commending the government for maintaining good bilateral relations with all its neighbours, including Kosovo, Parliament stressed the need to
swiftly settle the dispute with Croatia on land and maritime borders, and the final delimitation of borders with Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina
and Kosovo. It also called on the to assist the Montenegrin Government to resolve the issue of internally displaced persons, and help close a
painful chapter in the regions history.
Lastly, Parliament welcomed the Montenegrin Governments commitment to joining NATO, but noted the strong divergence of opinion among
parliamentarians and in society at large. It commended Montenegros contribution, despite its limited defence resources, to UN and CSDP
missions.

