Procedure file
Basic information
2013/0177(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments
Decision

Procedure completed

Hague Convention 1965 on the service abroad of judicial and extrajudicial
documents in civil or commercial matters: ratification by Austria and
accession of Malta

Subject
7.40.02 Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
03/09/2014

USPASKICH Viktor
Shadow rapporteur

ROZIÈRE Virginie

DZHAMBAZKI Angel
Former committee responsible
JURI

Legal Affairs

Committee for opinion
LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

ALDE THEIN Alexandra

19/06/2013

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Former committee for opinion
LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Justice and Consumers

Commissioner
REDING Viviane

Key events
06/06/2013

Initial legislative proposal published

24/11/2015

Legislative proposal published

17/12/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/01/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

01/02/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

25/02/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

25/02/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

10/03/2016

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

COM(2013)0338

Summary

13777/2015

Summary

A8-0018/2016

Summary

T8-0052/2016

Summary

10/03/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

22/03/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0177(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legislative instrument

Decision

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 281-p2; Treaty on the Functioning
of the EU TFEU 218-p6a

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/00177

Documentation gateway
Initial legislative proposal

COM(2013)0338

06/06/2013

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE541.497

13/11/2014

EP

Legislative proposal

13777/2015

24/11/2015

CSL

Summary

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0018/2016

01/02/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0052/2016

25/02/2016

EP

Summary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Decision 2016/414
OJ L 075 22.03.2016, p. 0001 Summary

2013/0177(NLE) - 06/06/2013 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to authorise Austria and Malta to accede to the Hague Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents
in Civil or Commercial Matters in the interest of the European Union.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the Hague Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters seeks
to simplify the method of transmission of judicial and extrajudicial documents between the Contracting States. It thus facilitates judicial
cooperation in cross-border civil and commercial litigation. The EU in its external relations has been promoting the accession of third countries
to the Hague Service Convention. The Hague Service Convention is not open to participation by regional organisations. As a result, the
European Union is not in a position to accede to the Convention.
Given that the Hague Service Convention is important for the European Union interests, the Council should authorise the Member States
which had not concluded the Hague Service Convention before adoption of the Union measures to accede to the Convention in the interest of
the European Union, subject to certain conditions. The Member States to which this decision is addressed are Austria and Malta.

IMPACT ASSESSMENT: no impact assessment was undertaken.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 81(2) and 218(6)(a) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: under this proposal for a Council Decision, Austria and Malta would accede to the Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 on the
Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters in the interest of the European Union.
Purpose of the Convention: the Convention indicates the channels to be used for the transmission from one Contracting State to another in the
event of service abroad of judicial and extrajudicial act. The main channel of transmission, in lieu of consular and diplomatic channels, is
through a Central Authority, who shall serve the documents or shall arrange to have them served. The Convention also provides for several
other modes of transmission (for example, by post). It seeks to establish a system which, as far as possible, brings actual notice of the
document to be served to the recipient in sufficient time to enable him to defend himself.
Lastly, the Convention facilitates proof that the service has been affected abroad, by means of certificates contained in a uniform model.
EU competences: this field falls into the exclusive external competence of the European Union, because of the adoption of internal Union
legislation by means of Regulation (EC) No 1393/2007 on the service in the Member States of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or
commercial matters. As a result, Member States cannot sign this Convention without being authorised to do so. 24 Member States were
Parties to the Convention before the EU legislation was adopted. Austria and Malta remain to be authorised to accede to the Convention.
The Commission therefore proposes that the Council authorises Austria and Malta to accede to the Convention in the interest of the European
Union. The Convention does not contain any provisions allowing the European Union itself to accede to the Convention.
Declarations of the Contracting States: the Convention provides for a possibility for the Contracting States to make declarations with regard to
a number of its provisions. The EU Member States, Contracting States to the Convention, entered various declarations. The situation is not
uniform, however. Against this backdrop, it is not reasonable to require the Member States concerned to make uniform declaration(s), if any. In
conclusion, Austria and Malta should, when acceding to the Convention, make all appropriate declarations allowed under its provisions that
they deem necessary. The text of such declarations should be attached to the Council decision.
Entry into force: Austria and Malta will take the necessary measures to deposit their instruments of accession before 31 December 2014.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the proposal has no implications for the European Union?s budget.

2013/0177(NLE) - 24/11/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to authorise Austria to sign and ratify, and Malta to accede to, the Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 on the Service Abroad
of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, in the interest of the European Union.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or
Commercial Matters simplifies the methods of transmission of judicial and extrajudicial documents between the Contracting States. Thus, it
facilitates judicial cooperation in cross-border civil and commercial litigation.
The Convention does not allow for participation by regional economic integration organisations such as the Union. As a result, the Union is not
in a position to accede to the Convention. However, many countries, including the Member States except Austria and Malta, are parties to the
Convention. The latter two states have expressed their interest in becoming parties. It is in the interest of the Union that all Member States are
parties to the Convention. In addition, in the framework of Union external policy in the area of civil justice, the Union promotes accession to,
and ratification of, the Convention by third States.
CONTENT: by this draft Decision, the Council authorises Austria to sign and ratify, and Malta to accede to, the Hague Convention of 15
November 1965 on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, in the interest of the Union.
The Convention indicates the channels of transmission to be used when a judicial or extrajudicial document has to be transmitted from one
Contracting State to the Convention to another Contracting State for the service in the latter. The Convention:
simplifies the method of transmission of judicial and extrajudicial documents: the main channel of transmission, in lieu of consular and
diplomatic channels, is through a Central Authority, which serves the documents or arranges to have them served. The Convention
also provides for several alternative methods of transmission (e.g. postal channels);
aims to establish a system which, to extent possible, brings actual notice of the document to be served to the recipient in sufficient
time to enable him to defend himself;
facilitates proof that the service has been affected abroad, by mean of certificates contained in a uniform model.
Austria shall take the necessary steps to deposit its instrument of ratification within a reasonable time and at the latest by 31 December 2017.
After the Decision takes effect Malta shall notify the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Kingdom of the Netherlands of the date on which the
Convention will become applicable to Malta.
The United Kingdom and Ireland are bound by Regulation (EC) No 1393/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council1 and are
therefore taking part in the adoption and application of this Decision. On the other hand, Denmark is not taking part in it.

2013/0177(NLE) - 01/02/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the report by Viktor USPASKICH (ALDE, LT) on the draft Council decision authorising the Republic of
Austria to sign and ratify, and Malta to accede to, the Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 on the Service Abroad of Judicial and
Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, in the interest of the European Union.

The committee called on the European Parliament to give its consent to the draft Council decision.
To recall, the Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 establishes a system whereby documents can be served in another signatory state. Of
the 28 Member States, 26 are already applying the convention. Austria and Malta, as the two remaining Member States, have indicated their
wish to join.
The convention does not allow the accession of international organisations. At the same time, following the adoption of EU legislation on the
cross-border service of documents, the EU has acquired exclusive external competence for the issue in accordance with the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union.
This means that the Union must authorise the Member States in question to act on its behalf in order to accede to the convention.
Malta has already deposited its instrument of accession, but has issued a declaration that its accession will not become effective until this
decision has been adopted. Austria is waiting for this decision in order to carry out the accession formalities.
Since the Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 has proven its usefulness in the field of the cross-border service of documents, and it is in
the interest both of the Union as a whole and of the two Member States in question to have a single regime for the service of documents in
cross-border relations with third countries, it is proposed that Parliament should consent to the proposal for the decision allowing the accession
of Austria and Malta to that convention.

2013/0177(NLE) - 25/02/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 566 votes to 14, with 65 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision authorising the
Republic of Austria to sign and ratify, and Malta to accede to, the Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 on the Service Abroad of Judicial
and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, in the interest of the European Union.
Parliament gave its consent to the draft Council decision.
To recall, the 1965 Hague Convention established a system whereby Judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters can
be served in another signatory state.

2013/0177(NLE) - 10/03/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to authorise Austria and Malta to accede to the Hague Convention on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents
in Civil or Commercial Matters in the interest of the European Union.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2016/414 authorising the Republic of Austria to sign and ratify, and Malta to accede to, the
Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters, in the
interest of the European Union.
CONTENT: under this Council Decision, the Council, following the European Parliaments consent, authorised Austria and Malta to accede to
the Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters in
the interest of the European Union.
The Hague Convention of 15 November 1965 on the Service Abroad of Judicial and Extrajudicial Documents in Civil or Commercial Matters
establishes a system whereby these documents can be served in another signatory state. It simplifies the methods of transmission of judicial
and extrajudicial documents between the Contracting States. It thus facilitates judicial cooperation in cross-border civil and commercial
litigation.
The Convention does not allow for participation by regional economic integration organisations such as the Union. As a result, the Union is not
in a position to accede to the Convention. Moreover, many countries, including the Member States except Austria and Malta, are parties to the
Convention. Austria and Malta have expressed their interest in becoming parties to the Convention. It is in the interest of the Union that all
Member States are parties to the Convention.
Austria shall take the necessary steps to deposit its instrument of ratification of the Convention with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the
Kingdom of the Netherlands within a reasonable time and at the latest by 31 December 2017.
After this Decision takes effect Malta shall notify the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Netherlands of the date on which the Convention will
become applicable to Malta.
Ireland and the United Kingdom shall participate in the adoption and the application of this Decision while Denmark shall not take part nor shall
it be bound by it or subject to its application.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 23.3.2016.

