Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2130(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon with respect to the European
Parliament

Subject
8.30 Treaties in general
8.40.01 European Parliament

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFCO

Constitutional Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE RANGEL Paulo

04/09/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D LEINEN Jo
ALDE DUFF Andrew
Verts/ALE HÄFNER Gerald
ECR FOX Ashley
GUE/NGL SCHOLZ Helmut
EFD MESSERSCHMIDT
Morten
Committee for opinion

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed
14/10/2013

INTA

International Trade

S&D MOREIRA Vital

JURI

Legal Affairs

Verts/ALE LICHTENBERGER 19/06/2013
Eva

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

PPE MELO Nuno

Commission DG

Commissioner

Secretariat-General

BARROSO José Manuel

08/07/2013

Key events
04/07/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

11/02/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

17/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/03/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

13/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

13/03/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2130(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A7-0120/2014

Summary

T7-0249/2014

Summary

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFCO/7/13182

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE526.057

16/12/2013

EP

Committee opinion

INTA

PE521.695

21/01/2014

EP

Committee opinion

JURI

PE524.682

23/01/2014

EP

PE527.972

24/01/2014

EP

PE524.605

31/01/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0120/2014

17/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0249/2014

13/03/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)457

11/08/2014

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

LIBE

2013/2130(INI) - 17/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Paulo RANGEL (EPP, PT) on the implementation of the Treaty of
Lisbon with respect to the European Parliament.
Legitimacy and political accountability of the Commission: Members stressed that the potentialities for the strengthening of the European
Unions democratic legitimacy provided by the Treaty of Lisbon should be fully implemented, inter alia through the designation of candidates for
the office of Commission President by the European political parties, thus further connecting the citizens vote to the election of the
Commission President by the European Parliament.
All European political parties should appoint their candidates for President of the Commission sufficiently in advance of the scheduled date for
the European elections.
Furthermore, the way in which the Commission was formed should be re-considered with a view to reinforcing the Commissions democratic
legitimacy. Members were of the opinion that the President-elect of the Commission should act more autonomously in the process of selecting
the other Members of the Commission. They requested that as many Members of the next Commission as possible be chosen from among
elected Members of the European Parliament.
The European Council was asked to clarify, before the elections, how it will take account of the elections to the European Parliament and
honour the citizens choice when putting forward a candidate for President of the Commission.
Legislative initiative and activity: Members emphasised that the Lisbon Treaty should ensure that decision-making procedures were more
transparent and democratic, by strengthening the role of the European Parliament and of the national parliaments . Furthermore, the drive for
efficiency must not mean poorer quality of legislation or giving up Parliaments own objectives.
The committee was concerned about the problems that still existed in applying the ordinary legislative procedure, especially in the framework
of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) and the Area of Freedom. It underlined the importance of the
Councils working methods being adapted so as to make it possible for Parliament representatives to participate in some of its meetings when
this was duly justified under the principle of mutual sincere cooperation between the institutions.
The committee warned against circumventing Parliament?s right to legislate by including provisions which should be subject to the ordinary
legislative procedure in proposals for Council acts, by using mere Commission guidelines or non-applicable implementing or delegated acts or
by failing to propose the legislation necessary for the implementation of the Common Commercial Policy (CCP) or international trade and
investment agreements.
Whilst understanding that delegated acts could be a flexible and effective tool, Members stressed the importance of the choice between
delegated acts and implementing acts from the point of view of the respect of the Treaty requirements while safeguarding the rule-making
prerogatives of Parliament. They reiterated the request to the Commission and the Council to agree with Parliament on the application of
criteria for the use of Articles 290 and 291 TFEU, so that implementing acts were not used as a substitute for delegated acts. They urged the
Commission to involve Parliament adequately in the preparatory phase of the delegated acts.
International relations: the report recalled that the Lisbon Treaty increased the role and powers of the European Parliament in the field of
international agreements, which fell within the scope of ordinary legislative procedures.
It stressed the need to:

·

ensure that Parliament is informed in advance by the Commission of its intention to launch an international negotiation, that it had a
genuine opportunity to express an informed opinion on the negotiating mandates, and that its opinion was taken into account;

·

consider the participation of Members of the European Parliament as observers in negotiations on international agreements;

·

see that Parliament was immediately, fully and accurately informed at all stages of the procedures for concluding international
agreements, including agreements concluded in the area of CFSP, and be given access to the Unions negotiation texts.

The report called for the adoption of a Quadripartite Memorandum of Understanding between the European Parliament, the Council, the
Commission and the EEAS on the coherent and effective provision of information in the area of external relations.
Constitutional dynamic: Members considered that one of the major challenges to the Lisbon Treatys constitutional framework was the risk of
intergovernmentalism jeopardising the community method, thus weakening the role of Parliament and the Commission to the benefit of the
institutions representing the Member States governments.
They drew attention to the need to involve at an earlier stage not only Parliament but also the Council in the preparation of the Commissions
annual work programme, and stressed the importance of ensuring there is realistic and reliable programming that could be effectively
implemented and provide the basis for interinstitutional planning.
In order to increase the political accountability of the Commission to Parliament, a mid-term review to assess the overall fulfilment by the
Commission of the announced mandate could be envisaged.

2013/2130(INI) - 13/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted, by 288 votes to 102 with 25 abstentions, a resolution on the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon with
respect to the European Parliament.
Legitimacy and political accountability of the Commission: the resolution stressed the need to strengthen the Commissions democratic
legitimacy, independence and political role; whereby the Commission President will be elected by the European Parliament.
Members stressed that the potential for the strengthening of the European Unions democratic legitimacy provided by the Treaty of Lisbon
should be fully implemented, inter alia through the designation of candidates for the office of Commission President by the European political
parties. This would further connect the citizens vote to the election of the Commission President by the European Parliament.
In this context, all European political parties should appoint their candidates for President of the Commission sufficiently in advance of the
scheduled date for the European elections.
In addition, the way in which the Commission is formed should be considered with a view to reinforcing the democratic legitimacy of this
institution. The President-elect of the Commission should act more autonomously in the process of selecting the other Members of the
Commission. Members requested that as many Members of the next Commission as possible be chosen from among elected Members of the
European Parliament.
The European Council was called on to clarify, in a timely manner and before the elections, how it will take account of the elections to the
European Parliament and honour the citizens choice when putting forward a candidate for President of the Commission.
Legislative initiative and activity: Members are of the opinion that the Lisbon Treaty was intended as a step forward in ensuring that
decision-making procedures were more transparent and democratic by strengthening the role of the European Parliament and of the national
parliaments. The drive for efficiency must not mean poorer quality of legislation or giving up Parliaments own objectives.
Members remain concerned about the problems that still exist in applying the ordinary legislative procedure, especially in the framework of the
Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) and the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice (Stockholm
Programme). They underlined the importance of adapting the Councils working methods so as to make it possible for Parliament
representatives to participate in some of its meetings when this is duly justified under the principle of mutual sincere cooperation between the
institutions.
Moreover, Members warned against circumventing Parliament's right to legislate by including provisions which should be subject to the
ordinary legislative procedure in proposals for Council acts, by using mere Commission guidelines or non-applicable implementing or
delegated acts or by failing to propose the legislation necessary for the implementation of the Common Commercial Policy (CCP) or
international trade and investment agreements.
The resolution invited the Commission to make better use of the pre-legislative phase (in particular of the valuable input collected on the basis
of Green and White Papers) and to routinely inform the European Parliament of preparatory work carried out by its services. Parliament, for its
part, ought: to develop its autonomous structure for assessing the impact of any substantial changes to the original proposal submitted by the
Commission; ii) strengthen its autonomous assessment of the impact on fundamental rights of legislative proposals.
Parliament requested that, at the next revision of the Treaties, Parliaments right of legislative initiative be fully recognised by making it
mandatory for the Commission to follow up all requests submitted by Parliament under Article 225 TFEU by presenting a legislative proposal
within an appropriate time limit.
While understanding that delegated acts can be a flexible and effective tool; Members stressed the importance of the choice between
delegated acts and implementing acts from the point of view of the respect of the Treaty requirements while safeguarding the rule-making
prerogatives of Parliament. They requested that the Commission and the Council agree with Parliament on the application of criteria so that
implementing acts are not used as a substitute for delegated acts. They urged the Commission to involve Parliament in the preparatory phase
of the delegated acts.
International relations: Members recalled that the Lisbon Treaty increased the role and powers of the European Parliament in the field of
international agreements which now increasingly fall within the scope of the ordinary legislative procedure.
Parliament emphasised the need:

·

to ensure that Parliament is informed in advance by the Commission of its intention to launch an international negotiation, that it has
a genuine opportunity to express an informed opinion on the negotiating mandates, and that its opinion is taken into account;

·

to consider the participation of Members as observers in the negotiation of international agreements;

·

that Parliament be immediately, fully and accurately informed at all stages of the procedures for concluding international agreements,
including agreements concluded in the area of CFSP, and be given access to the Unions negotiation texts.

The resolution called for the adoption of a Quadripartite Memorandum of Understanding between the European Parliament, the Council, the
Commission and the EEAS on the coherent and effective provision of information in the area of external relations.
Constitutional dynamic: Members consider that one of the major challenges to the Lisbon Treatys constitutional framework is the risk of
intergovernmentalism jeopardising the community method, thus weakening the role of Parliament and the Commission to the benefit of the
institutions representing the Member States governments.
The resolution drew attention to the need to involve at an earlier stage not only Parliament but also the Council in the preparation of the
Commissions annual work programme, and stressed the importance of ensuring there is realistic and reliable programming that can be
effectively implemented and provide the basis for interinstitutional planning.
Finally, Parliament pointed out that a proper legislative and institutional system should be established in order to protect the values of the
Union such as those listed in Article 2 TEU.

