Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2945(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2013 progress report on Turkey

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Turkey

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE OOMEN-RUIJTEN Ria

02/10/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D OBIOLS Raimon
ALDE LAMBSDORFF
Alexander Graf
Verts/ALE FLAUTRE Hélène
ECR VAN ORDEN Geoffrey
GUE/NGL HADJIGEORGIOU
Takis
EFD SALAVRAKOS Nikolaos

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

FÜLE Štefan

Key events
17/12/2013

Debate in Council

11/03/2014

Debate in Parliament

12/03/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

12/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/03/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

T7-0235/2014

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2945(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/7/14495

Summary

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE526.229

13/01/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE526.339

13/01/2014

EP

Motion for a resolution

B7-0241/2014

11/03/2014

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0235/2014

12/03/2014

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)457

11/08/2014

Summary

2013/2945(RSP) - 12/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 475 votes to 153 with 43 abstentions, a resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the
2013 progress report on Turkey.
Credible commitment and strong democratic foundations: while Parliament welcomed the 2013 progress report on Turkey and shared the
Commissions conclusion that Turkey is a strategic partner for the EU, it stressed the importance and urgent need for further reforms with a
view to ensuring greater accountability and transparency in the Turkish administration and the promotion of dialogue across the political
spectrum and in society more broadly, in particular through the proper involvement, and a process of empowerment, of civil society. Members
emphasised the principles of democracy and the importance of an impartial and independent judiciary.
Fulfilling the Copenhagen criteria: Parliament expressed deep concern at the recent developments in Turkey with regard to allegations of
high-level corruption. It reminded the Government of Turkey of the commitment made to eradicate corruption, in particular by implementing the
majority of the recommendations issued in the 2005 evaluation reports by the Council of Europe Group of States against Corruption (GRECO).
Members pointed to the crucial role of a system of checks and balances for any modern democratic state and to the fundamental role that the
Turkish Grand National Assembly must play at the centre of Turkeys political system in providing a framework for dialogue and
consensus-building across the political spectrum. They emphasised the crucial role of civil society organisations and the need for adequate
communication with the public on the reform process.
Members also stressed:
the urgent need for further progress in implementing the 2010 constitutional amendments, in particular the adoption of laws on
protection of personal data and military justice;
the need to revise the rules governing the election, composition and functioning of the High Council of Judges and Prosecutors to be
fully in line with European standards;
the urgent need for comprehensive anti-discrimination legislation and the establishment of an anti-discrimination and equality board,
protecting all citizens, including LGBTI people;
establishment of an independent supervisory body for police offences following event in Gezi parc (excessive police violence towards
protesters);
further measures improving press freedom and internet freedom;
reform of anti-terror legislation;
accession to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC).
Parliament also reaffirmed the importance of opening Chapters 23 (judiciary and fundamental rights) and 24 (justice and home affairs) early in
the negotiation process. Delivering to Turkey the official benchmarks for the opening of these Chapters would provide a clear roadmap for, and
give a boost to, the reform process.
Parliament also called for further measures regarding violence against women.
With regard to the Kurdish issue, it welcomed the fact that education in Kurdish was now allowed in private schools, but expressed concern at
the large number of cases launched against writers and journalists writing on the Kurdish issue and at the arrest of several Kurdish politicians,
mayors and members of municipal councils, trade unionists, lawyers, protesters and human rights defenders in connection with the KCK trial.
It welcomed the expected speedy implementation of the statement of intent by the Turkish Government regarding the reopening of the
Greek-minority school on the island of Gökçeada (Imbros).
Building good neighbourly relations: Parliament noted the continuing efforts by Turkey and Greece to improve their bilateral relations, including
through bilateral meetings, but urged the Turkish Government to end the repeated violations of Greek airspace and territorial waters, as well
as Turkish military aircraft flights over Greek islands. It also called on the Turkish Government to sign and ratify the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), which was part of the acquis communautaire, and recalled the full legitimacy of the Republic of Cyprus
exclusive economic zone.
Parliament reiterated its strong support for the reunification of Cyprus, on the basis of a fair and viable settlement for both communities. It
welcomed Turkeys decision to grant the Committee on Missing Persons access to a fenced military area in the northern part of Cyprus and
encouraged Turkey to allow the committee to access relevant archives and military zones for exhumation.
Members urged Turkey and Armenia to proceed to a normalisation of their relations.
Advancing EU-Turkey cooperation: Parliament deplored Turkeys refusal to fulfil its obligation of full, non-discriminatory implementation of the
Additional Protocol to the EC-Turkey Association Agreement towards all Member States. It recalled that this refusal continued to have a
profound effect on the negotiation process.
It believed that, in view of Turkeys strategic role as an energy hub and source of plentiful renewable energy resources, consideration should
be given to close cooperation between the EU and Turkey on energy and particularly on green energy issues. It asked the Commission to

prioritise financing in favour of renewable energy projects, the energy grid and interconnectivity in Turkey.
Lastly, Parliament welcomed Turkeys commitment to the provision of humanitarian assistance to almost one million Syrian refugees. It asked
Turkey to closely monitor its borders to prevent the entry of fighters and arms to the benefit of groups credibly found to be implicated in
systematic human rights violations or not committed to the democratic transition of Syria. It asked the Commission, the Member States and the
international community to cooperate closely with Turkey on providing assistance to the refugee population.

