Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2186(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU Citizenship Report 2013. EU citizens: your rights, your future

Subject
1 European citizenship
1.20 Citizen's rights

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
PETI

Rapporteur

Petitions

Appointed

EFD SALAVRAKOS Nikolaos 22/10/2013
Shadow rapporteur
PPE BECKER Heinz K.
S&D BOŞTINARU Victor
ALDE WERTHMANN Angelika
Verts/ALE ŽDANOKA Tatjana
GUE/NGL CHOUNTIS
Nikolaos

Committee for opinion
CULT

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

Culture and Education

Appointed

ALDE LØKKEGAARD Morten 26/09/2013

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

REDING Viviane

Key events
12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

06/12/2013

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

11/02/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

14/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

12/03/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

12/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/03/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

A7-0107/2014

Summary

T7-0233/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2186(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

PETI/7/13741

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE522.951

20/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE526.119

19/12/2013

EP

PE521.822

24/01/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0107/2014

14/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0233/2014

12/03/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)457

11/08/2014

Committee opinion

CULT

2013/2186(INI) - 06/12/2013 Resolution/conclusions adopted by Council
The Council adopted the conclusions concerning the 2013 EU Citizenship Report.
The Council noted gaps between the applicable legal rules and the reality confronting citizens in their daily lives, particularly in cross-border
situations. Moreover, taking account of the fact that the year 2013 is the European Year of Citizens and that the European elections will be
held in 2014, the Council highlighted the importance of raising awareness about their electoral rights in these elections and about the
relevance of their participation as voters and as candidates.
Whilst welcoming the EU Citizenship Report 2013, the Council noted with particular interest the proposed measures aiming at:
(1) Removing obstacles for workers, students and trainees in the EU: the Council stressed the need to tackle unemployment and the social
consequences of the crisis. It endorsed a comprehensive approach to combat youth unemployment.
More specifically, the Council:
stated that it will carefully examine the Commission's forthcoming proposal on a revision of the social security coordination regulation
which has the objective of encouraging and facilitating intra-EU mobility;
shall support the ongoing development by the Commission of the Electronic Exchange of Social Security Information System (EESSI);
recalled the establishment of the Alliance for Apprenticeships as well as the invitation to the Commission to finalise the quality
framework for traineeships, and to propose the new EURES regulation;
welcomed measures to improve the coordination of labour mobility in the EU, and to facilitate the exchange of information on job
opportunities in the EU, including where applicable on traineeships and apprenticeships. The Council also awaits the Commission's
proposal to set quality standards for traineeships.
(2) Removing administrative hurdles: in this area, the Council:
welcomed the idea of providing local administrations with tools to fully comprehend and facilitate the free movement rights of EU
citizens;
welcomed the Commission's intention to study measures to remove obstacles in relation to identity and residence documents issued
by Member States and strengthen their security;
insisted on the need to ensure that valid identity cards issued by the Member States to their nationals are recognised throughout the
EU;
reaffirmed the importance of clarity and certainty with a view to identifying and eliminating double taxation.
(3) Eliminating barriers to shopping in the EU: the Council welcomed the adoption of the Directive on alternative dispute resolution for
consumer disputes, the Regulation on online dispute resolution for consumer disputes and the Directive on consumer rights to solve problems
faced by consumers when shopping online. It is looking forward to considering the revision of the European Small Claims Procedure.
The Council also highlighted the need to strengthen administrative cooperation measures among market surveillance authorities in order to
limit the procedural obstacles remaining in the internal market.
(4) Strengthening procedural rights: the conclusions emphasised the following issues:
the importance of the presumption of innocence and of the right to legal aid in criminal proceedings, the importance of ensuring these
procedural rights to all individuals residing in the EU, regardless of their citizenship status;
the continuation of the Stockholm Programme and the roadmap aimed at strengthening procedural rights of individuals, when they are
suspected or accused in criminal proceedings, taking into account the specific situation of children and other vulnerable groups.
(5) Strengthening and developing the European public space: underlining the importance of the right to participate in the democratic life of the
Union as foreseen in Treaties, the Council:

strongly emphasised the need to raise EU citizens' awareness about their electoral rights under EU law, the impact of EU policies on
their daily lives, the role of the European Parliament and hence the importance of their participation in the European elections;
underlined the importance of safeguarding the right to political participation of the most vulnerable groups , including people with
disabilities;
recalled the importance of better informing voters about the issues at stake in next year's European Parliament elections , to
encourage a Europe-wide debate and to bring the EU closer to Union citizens;
invited the Commission to explore ways within its competences to maintain and further promote the voting rights of EU citizens;
Lastly, the Council called on the Member States to contribute to this joint endeavour and take forward the process of raising awareness of and
implementing the rights that come with EU citizenship.

2013/2186(INI) - 14/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Petitions adopted the own-initiative report by Nikolaos SALAVRAKOS (EFD, EL) on the EU Citizenship Report 2013. EU
citizens: your rights, your future in response to the Commission communication on the same subject.
Firstly, the report recalled that the Lisbon Treaty enhanced the concept of EU citizenship and its derived rights. Given that public confidence in
the European Union has fallen and European citizens are living through a difficult period caused by a severe economic and social crisis,
Members considered that the 2014 European elections represent an opportunity to strengthen public trust in the political system and
strengthen the voice and the role of citizens.
Awareness-raising and education: Members welcomed the Commissions EU Citizenship Report 2013 announcing twelve new actions in six
areas aimed at strengthening EU citizens rights. A large majority of the 25 measures announced in the Commissions EU Citizenship Report
2010 have in the meantime been completed by the Commission and other EU institutions. National, regional and local authorities are urged to
promote a better understanding of EU citizenship and to explain its practical benefits for individuals. Member States are also urged to step up
their efforts to spread knowledge of the SOLVIT network to citizens and companies.
Member States are encouraged to give more space to political education on EU affairs in their school curricula, to adapt teachers training
accordingly and, in this respect, to provide the necessary know-how and resources. According to Members, education is essential as a means
of enabling individuals to participate fully in democratic, social and cultural life and therefore considers that substantial cuts should not be
made in the funds allocated to education.
The importance of the organised civil society is stressed in strengthening an active European citizenship. Members reiterated their call for the
establishment of the European Association Statute, as this may facilitate the construction of projects between citizens of different EU Member
States within a transnational organisation and highlighted the need to create a structured framework for European civil dialogue which would
give practical substance to participatory citizenship.
Proper implementation: the report stressed the vital role played by the Member States in correctly implementing European legislation.
However, it stated that progress still remains to be made in this area. A practical toolkit on EU citizens rights tailored to local and regional
authorities would further improve correct implementation. The report expected that the new petitions web portal, which will be available at the
beginning of 2014, will turn the petitioning process into an appealing, transparent and user-friendly instrument, also for people with disabilities.
The Commission is called upon to:
regularly monitor the way in which the administrative formalities related to entry and residence of EU citizens and their relatives are
processed in the Member States;
play an active role in ensuring that procedures implemented by Member States fully comply with the values and human rights
recognised in the EU Treaties;
closely monitor the situation and take appropriate measures to remove potential obstacles, such as excessive bureaucracy, imposed
at the national level in the way of this fundamental freedom.
Member States that disenfranchise their own nationals who choose to live in another Member State for an extended period of time are urged to
put an end to this practice and revise their legislation accordingly to provide full citizenship rights during the whole process. They should also
take all steps to effectively help and assist citizens who wish to vote or stand as candidates in states other than their own. The need for EU
citizens to exercise their right to vote in the national elections of their country of origin from the Member State in which they reside is
highlighted.
European political parties and their national affiliates are called upon to organise transparent electoral campaigns ahead of the 2014 European
elections and to effectively tackle the problems of falling voter participation rates and the widening gap between citizens and the EU
institutions. Members considered the nomination of Europe-wide candidates for the post of Commission President by European political parties
as an important step towards building a genuine European public space. They also stressed the importance of informing citizens that they are
entitled to vote in municipal and European elections if they live outside their home country.
The EU institutions, bodies, offices and agencies are called upon to further improve transparency and make access to documents easy and
user-friendly, as this enables citizens to participate more closely in the decision-making process.
The report welcomed the recent adoption of the two main EU programmes to fund activities in the field of EU citizenship from 2014 to 2020:
the Rights and Citizenship and the Europe for Citizens programmes but considered it highly regrettable that the financial envelope for the latter
especially, which supports projects on active European citizenship, has been drastically cut by Member States governments as compared to
the 2007-2013 period.
Lastly, Member States are called upon to:
better inform EU citizens as to their rights and duties and to facilitate entitlement to these rights being respected equally both in their
country of origin and in any other Member State;
put in place coordination and cooperation measures in order to efficiently tackle the issues of double car registration taxes, tax
discrimination and double taxation in a cross-border context and to take better account of the realities of cross-border worker mobility;

set up as quickly as possible in each Member State a one-stop-shop to coordinate projects with a cross-border impact, for instance
those with a social impact such as emergency services, with particular reference to projects that have an environmental impact, such
as wind farms, where on occasion no consultation is held with residents on both sides of the border and no impact study is conducted.

2013/2186(INI) - 12/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 562 votes to 95, with 11 abstentions, a resolution on the EU Citizenship Report 2013. EU citizens: your
rights, your future in response to the Commission communication on the same subject.
Firstly, the resolution recalled that the Lisbon Treaty enhanced the concept of EU citizenship and its derived rights. Given that public
confidence in the European Union has fallen and European citizens are living through a difficult period caused by a severe economic and
social crisis, Parliament considered that the 2014 European elections represent an opportunity to strengthen public trust in the political system
and strengthen the voice and the role of citizens.
Awareness-raising and education: Parliament welcomed the Commissions EU Citizenship Report 2013 announcing twelve new actions in six
areas aimed at strengthening EU citizens rights. A large majority of the 25 measures announced in the Commissions EU Citizenship Report
2010 have in the meantime been completed by the Commission and other EU institutions. National, regional and local authorities are urged to
promote a better understanding of EU citizenship and to explain its practical benefits for individuals. Member States are also urged to step up
their efforts to spread knowledge of the SOLVIT network to citizens and companies.
Member States are encouraged to give more space to political education on EU affairs in their school curricula, to adapt teachers training
accordingly and, in this respect, to provide the necessary know-how and resources. According to Members, education is essential as a means
of enabling individuals to participate fully in democratic, social and cultural life and therefore they considered that substantial cuts should not
be made in the funds allocated to education.
The importance of the organised civil society is stressed in strengthening an active European citizenship. Parliament reiterated its call for the
establishment of the European Association Statute, as this may facilitate the construction of projects between citizens of different EU Member
States within a transnational organisation and highlighted the need to create a structured framework for European civil dialogue which would
give practical substance to participatory citizenship.
Proper implementation: the resolution stressed the vital role played by the Member States in correctly implementing European legislation.
However, it stated that progress still remains to be made in this area. A practical toolkit on EU citizens rights tailored to local and regional
authorities would further improve correct implementation. The resolution expected that the new petitions web portal, which will be available at
the beginning of 2014, will turn the petitioning process into an appealing, transparent and user-friendly instrument, also for people with
disabilities.
The Commission is called upon to:
regularly monitor the way in which the administrative formalities related to entry and residence of EU citizens and their relatives are
processed in the Member States;
play an active role in ensuring that procedures implemented by Member States fully comply with the values and human rights
recognised in the EU Treaties;
closely monitor the situation and take appropriate measures to remove potential obstacles, such as excessive bureaucracy, imposed
at the national level in the way of this fundamental freedom.
Parliament also called on all those Member States which do not as yet have a national ombudsman, at present Italy and Germany, to meet the
expectations of all EU citizens by appointing one.
European elections: Member States that disenfranchise their own nationals who choose to live in another Member State for an extended
period of time are urged to put an end to this practice and revise their legislation accordingly to provide full citizenship rights during the whole
process. They should also take all steps to effectively help and assist citizens who wish to vote or stand as candidates in states other than
their own. The need for EU citizens to exercise their right to vote in the national elections of their country of origin from the Member State in
which they reside is highlighted.
European political parties and their national affiliates are called upon to organise transparent electoral campaigns ahead of the 2014 European
elections and to effectively tackle the problems of falling voter participation rates and the widening gap between citizens and the EU
institutions. Parliament considered the nomination of Europe-wide candidates for the post of Commission President by European political
parties as an important step towards building a genuine European public space. It also stressed the importance of informing citizens that they
are entitled to vote in municipal and European elections if they live outside their home country.
The EU institutions, bodies, offices and agencies are called upon to further improve transparency and make access to documents easy and
user-friendly, as this enables citizens to participate more closely in the decision-making process.
The resolution welcomed the recent adoption of the two main EU programmes to fund activities in the field of EU citizenship from 2014 to
2020: the Rights and Citizenship and the Europe for Citizens programmes but considered it highly regrettable that the financial envelope for
the latter especially, which supports projects on active European citizenship, has been drastically cut by Member States governments as
compared to the 2007-2013 period.
Lastly, Member States are called upon to:
better inform EU citizens as to their rights and duties and to facilitate entitlement to these rights being respected equally both in their
country of origin and in any other Member State;
put in place coordination and cooperation measures in order to efficiently tackle the issues of double car registration taxes, tax
discrimination and double taxation in a cross-border context and to take better account of the realities of cross-border worker mobility;
set up as quickly as possible in each Member State a one-stop-shop to coordinate projects with a cross-border impact, for instance
those with a social impact such as emergency services, with particular reference to projects that have an environmental impact, such
as wind farms, where on occasion no consultation is held with residents on both sides of the border and no impact study is conducted.

Lastly, Parliament called on the Commission to conduct a thorough assessment of the benefits and challenges of the European Year of
Citizens 2013 (EYC). It regretted that, due to underfunding and lack of political ambition, the EYC had a poor media profile and failed to
generate a broad, publicly visible debate on European citizenship.

