Procedure file
Basic information
2013/0151A(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments
Decision

Procedure completed

EU/Ukraine Association Agreement
See also 2013/0151B(NLE)
See also 2016/0308(COD)
Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.40.15 European neighbourhood policy
Geographical area
Ukraine

Key players
Committee responsible

European Parliament

AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
02/09/2014

SARYUSZ-WOLSKI
Jacek
Former committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Committee for opinion
INTA

International Trade

ECR LEGUTKO Ryszard
Antoni

30/05/2013

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Former committee for opinion
INTA

International Trade

PPE ZALEWSKI Paweł

18/06/2013

Council of the European Union

Key events
15/05/2013

Initial legislative proposal published

24/06/2013

Debate in Council

17/03/2014

Debate in Council

20/06/2014

Legislative proposal published

17/07/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

08/09/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

09/09/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

16/09/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

16/09/2014

Debate in Parliament

16/09/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

COM(2013)0290

Summary

13613/2013

Summary

A8-0002/2014

Summary

T8-0014/2014

Summary

11/07/2017

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

12/07/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0151A(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legislative instrument

Decision
See also 2013/0151B(NLE)
See also 2016/0308(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 217; Treaty on the Functioning of
the EU TFEU 218-p6a; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU
218-p8-a2; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 218-p7

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/00165

Documentation gateway
Initial legislative proposal

COM(2013)0290

15/05/2013

EC

Summary

Document attached to the procedure

SEC(2013)0294

15/05/2013

EC

Legislative proposal

13613/2013

20/06/2014

CSL

Committee draft report

PE537.336

03/09/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE537.384

08/09/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0002/2014

09/09/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0014/2014

16/09/2014

EP

Summary

Summary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Decision 2017/1247
OJ L 181 12.07.2017, p. 0001 Summary

2013/0151A(NLE) - 15/05/2013 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude an Association Agreement between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine, of the
other part.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: relations between the EU and Ukraine are currently based on the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement which entered into
force in 1998. At the 13th EU-Ukraine Summit in Paris in 2008, the leaders of the EU and Ukraine agreed that the Partnership and

Co-operation Agreement should be succeeded by an Association Agreement.
The EU-Ukraine Association Agreement is the first of a new generation of Association Agreements with Eastern Partnership countries.
Negotiations of this comprehensive and ambitious Agreement between the EU and Ukraine were launched in March 2007.
The Association Agreement aims to accelerate the deepening of political and economic relations between Ukraine and the EU, as well as
Ukraine's gradual access to parts of the EU Internal Market including by setting up a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA). It is
a concrete way to exploit the dynamics in EU-Ukraine relations, focusing on support to core reforms, on economic recovery and growth,
governance and sector co-operation.
The Agreement also constitutes a reform agenda for Ukraine, based on a comprehensive programme of approximation of Ukraine's legislation
to EU norms, around which all partners of Ukraine can align themselves and focus their assistance. EU assistance to Ukraine is linked with the
reform agenda as it emerges from the Agreement. The Comprehensive Institutional Building Programme is particularly important in this regard.
On 30 March 2012, the chief negotiators of the European Union and Ukraine initialled the text of the Association Agreement. The trade
negotiators from both sides initialled the DCFTA part of the Agreement on 19 July 2012.
Measures are provided as regards the provisional application of the Agreement in view of keeping mutual economic interests and shared
values in equilibrium, and the common will of the EU and Ukraine to start implementing and enforcing various parts of the Agreement in order
to advance an early reform impact on sector specific issues before the conclusion of the Agreement.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: no impact assessment was undertaken.
LEGAL BASIS: Article(s) 217, in conjunction with Article 218(6)(a) and the second subparagraph of Article 218(8) thereof, as well as Article
218(7) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
CONTENT: with this draft Decision, the Commission proposes to conclude, on behalf of the European Union, an Agreement between the
Union and its Member States of the one part and Ukraine of the other part, together with the Annexes and Protocols attached thereto.
Objectives: this Agreement constitutes a new stage in the development of EU-Ukraine contractual relations, aiming at political association and
economic integration and leaving open the way for further progressive developments.
The overall aims of the association focus on:
promoting a gradual rapprochement between the parties on the basis of common values,
providing enhanced political dialogue,
promoting, preserving and strengthening peace and stability in both the regional and international dimensions,
establishing conditions for enhanced economic and trade relations leading towards Ukraine's gradual access to parts of the EU
Internal Market;
enhancing Justice, Freedom and Security (JFS) cooperation with the aim of reinforcing the rule of law and respect for human rights
and fundamental freedoms,
establishing conditions for increasingly close co-operation in other areas of mutual interest.
General Principles: these include a specific set of "essential elements", the violation of which by one of the Parties could give rise to specific
measures under the Agreement, including the suspension of rights and obligations.
These elements are respect for:
democratic principles,
human rights and fundamental freedoms as defined in relevant international instruments,
respect for the rule of law,
promotion of respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity, inviolability and independence,
countering the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, related materials and means of delivery.
Other General Principles of the Agreement relate to the principles of a free market economy, good governance, the fight against corruption,
the fight against trans-national organised crime and terrorism, the promotion of sustainable development and effective multilateralism.
Political dialogue: the Agreement sets out the aims of an enhanced and strengthened political dialogue promoting gradual convergence on
foreign and security matters with the aim of Ukraine's ever deeper involvement in the European security area. It establishes a number of fora
for the conduct of political dialogue, and provides for dialogue and co-operation on domestic reform based on the common principles set out
by the Parties. There are also provisions for intensified dialogue on foreign and security policy, including CSDP, for the promotion of peace
and international justice by ratifying and implementing the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, and for joint efforts on regional
stability, conflict prevention, crisis management, military/technological co-operation, anti-terrorism, antiproliferation and disarmament and arms
control.
Free-trade: closer economic integration through the DCFTA will be a powerful stimulant to the country's economic growth. Approximation of
Ukraine to EU legislation, norms and standards, will be the method. As a core element of the Association Agreement, the DCFTA will create
business opportunities in both the EU and Ukraine and will promote real economic modernisation and integration with the EU. Higher
standards of products, better services to citizens, and above all Ukraine's readiness to compete effectively in international markets should be
the result of this process.
Justice/Foreign affairs: in the field of Justice Freedom and Security, the Agreement pays particular attention to the rule of law and to the
reinforcement of judicial institutions and practices.
It sets out the framework for co-operation on:
migration,
asylum and border management,
personal data protection,
money laundering and terrorism financing,
anti-drugs policy.

This Title contains provisions on movement of persons, including on readmission, on visa facilitation and on the gradual steps towards a
visa-free regime in due course (provided that relevant conditions for well-managed and secure mobility are in place).
Treatment and mobility of workers are also covered, as is a commitment to further development of judicial co-operation in civil and criminal
matters - making full use of relevant international and bilateral instruments.
Sector cooperation: the Association Agreement foresees a wide range of sector cooperation, focusing on support to core reforms, economic
recovery and growth, governance and sector co-operation in more than 30 areas, such as:
energy,
transport,
environment protection,
industrial and small and medium enterprise cooperation,
social development and protection,
equal rights,
consumer protection,
education,
training and youth,
cultural cooperation.
In all of these areas, enhanced co-operation starts from the basis of current frameworks, both bilateral and multilateral, with the aim of more
systematic dialogue and exchange of information and good practice. Key to the sectoral co-operation chapters is a comprehensive menu of
regulatory approximation set out in annexes to the Agreement. Specific schedules for transposition and implementation by Ukraine of selected
parts of the EU acquis will provide a focus for ongoing co-operation, and will form the core of Ukraine's domestic reform and modernization
agenda.
Institutional framework: the Agreement includes an updated institutional framework encompassing co-operation and dialogue fora from the
Summit level down the level of technical subcommittees. Specific decision-making roles are foreseen for an Association Council, and by
delegation for an Association Committee, which may also meet in a specific configuration to address trade issues.
Forafor civil society, notably the representative organisations for social partners, trade-unions and employers, and parliamentary co-operation
are also foreseen. It also includes provisions on monitoring, fulfilment of obligations and dispute settlement (including separate provisions for
trade-related issues).
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the proposal has no implication for the Union budget.

2013/0151A(NLE) - 20/06/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude, on behalf of the European Union, the Association Agreement between the European Union and EURATOM and their
Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine, of the other part, with the exception of the provisions relating to the treatment of third-country
nationals legally employed as workers in the territory of the other part.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: on 22 January 2007, the Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations with Ukraine for the conclusion of a new
agreement between the European Union and Ukraine to replace the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (please refer to the summary of
the initial legislative proposal of 15/05/2013 under the procedure file 2013/0151B(NLE)).
These negotiations were successfully finalised and the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy
Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine, of the other part was initialled in 2012.
The Agreement was signed at Brussels on 21 March 2014, subject to its conclusion at a later date, except for certain provisions as regards
legal migrants.
It should now be approved on behalf of the Union.
CONTENT: under this proposed Decision, the Council is called upon to approve, on behalf of the Union, the abovementioned Association
Agreement between the European Union and Ukraine.
Provisions on legal migrants: this Decision concerns all provisions of the Agreement except for the provisions of Article 17 thereof, which
contains specific obligations relating to the treatment of third-country nationals legally employed as workers in the territory of the other Party,
and which provisions fall within the scope of Title V of Part Three of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU). The aim and
content of those provisions is distinct from and independent of the aim and content of the other provisions of the Agreement to establish an
association between the Parties. A separate decision relating to Article 17 of the Agreement will be adopted in parallel with this Decision.
Provisions on trade: pursuant to Article 218(7) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, it is appropriate for the Council to
authorise the Commission to approve modifications to the Agreement to be adopted by the Association Committee in its Trade configuration
on Geographical Indications.
N.B. : the future Agreement should not be construed as conferring rights or imposing obligations which can be directly invoked before Union or
Member State courts or tribunals.

2013/0151A(NLE) - 09/09/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading

The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the report by Jacek SARYUSZ-WOLSKI (EPP, PL) on the draft Council decision on the conclusion,
on behalf of the European Union, of the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community
and their Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine, of the other part, with the exception of the provisions relating to the treatment of
third-country nationals legally employed as workers in the territory of the other party.
Members recommended that the European Parliament should give its consent to the conclusion of the Agreement.

2013/0151A(NLE) - 16/09/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 535 votes to 127, with 35 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy
Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine, of the other part, with the exception of the provisions relating to the
treatment of third-country nationals legally employed as workers in the territory of the other party.
Parliament gave its consent to the conclusion of the Agreement.

2013/0151A(NLE) - 11/07/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to approve, on behalf of the European Union, the Association Agreement between the European Union and EURATOM and their
Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine, of the other part, with the exception of the provisions relating to the treatment of third-country
nationals legally employed as workers in the territory of the other part.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2017/1247 on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Association
Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine,
of the other part, with the exception of the provisions relating to the treatment of third-country nationals legally employed as workers in the
territory of the other party.
BACKGROUND: on 22 January 2007, the Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations with Ukraine for the conclusion of a new
agreement between the European Union and Ukraine to replace the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
Following these negotiations, the Association Agreement was initialled in 2012. It was signed at Brussels on 21 March 2014 and at Brussels
on 27 June 2014, subject to its conclusion at a later date.
The Agreement must now be approved.
CONTENT: the Council decided to approve, on behalf of the Union, the Association Agreement between the EU and the European Atomic
Energy Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Ukraine, of the other part, together with the Annexes and Protocols thereto,
with the exception of Article 17 which contains specific obligations concerning the treatment of third-country nationals legally employed in the
territory of the other Party.
A separate decision on Article 17 of the Agreement was adopted in parallel with the Decision.
This Decision also lays down the procedures for the protection of geographical indications protected under the Agreement.
The aims of this Association Agreement are:
to promote gradual rapprochement between the Parties based on common values and close and privileged links, and increasing
Ukraine's association with EU policies and participation in programmes and agencies;
to provide an appropriate framework for enhanced political dialogue in all areas of mutual interest;
to promote, preserve and strengthen peace and stability in the regional and international dimensions;
to establish conditions for enhanced economic and trade relations leading towards Ukraine's gradual integration in the EU Internal
Market, including by setting up a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area and to support Ukrainian efforts to complete the
transition into a functioning market economy by means of, inter alia, the progressive approximation of its legislation to that of the
Union;
to enhance cooperation in the field of Justice, Freedom and Security with the aim of reinforcing the rule of law and respect for human
rights and fundamental freedoms.
The following are essential elements of the Agreement:
respect for democratic principles, human rights and fundamental freedoms and respect for the rule of law as a basis for the domestic
and external policies of the parties;
encouraging respect for the principles of sovereignty and territorial integrity, inviolability of borders and independence, and countering
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
At institutional level, the political and policy dialogue at the highest level between the parties shall take place in the context of summit meetings
held, in principle, once a year. At ministerial level, regular political and policy dialogue shall take place within the Association Council
established by the Agreement and in regular meetings of the representatives of the parties by mutual agreement.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 11.7.2017.

