Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Directive

2013/0221(COD)

Procedure completed

Making available on the market of pressure equipment. Recast
Repealing Directive 97/23/EC 1993/0462(COD)
Subject
2.10.03 Standardisation, EC/EU standards and trade mark, certification,
compliance
3.40.08 Mechanical engineering, machine-tool industry

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE ROITHOVÁ Zuzana

09/07/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D WESTPHAL Kerstin
ALDE MANDERS Toine
ECR FOX Ashley
EFD SALVINI Matteo
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI

Legal Affairs

EFD SPERONI Francesco
Enrico

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Appointed

02/12/2013

Commissioner

Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs TAJANI Antonio

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
28/06/2013

Legislative proposal published

04/07/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

17/12/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

07/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

15/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

15/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

13/05/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

15/05/2014

Final act signed

COM(2013)0471

Summary

A7-0008/2014

Summary

T7-0390/2014

Summary

15/05/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

27/06/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0221(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Recast

Legislative instrument

Directive
Repealing Directive 97/23/EC 1993/0462(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

IMCO/7/13231

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0471

28/06/2013

EC

PE519.690

11/10/2013

EP

Economic and Social Committee: opinion, report

CES5475/2013

16/10/2013

ESC

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0008/2014

07/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T7-0390/2014

15/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Committee draft report

Summary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Directive 2014/68
OJ L 189 27.06.2014, p. 0164 Summary
Corrigendum to final act 32014L0068R(04)
OJ L 157 23.06.2015, p. 0112 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2013/0221(COD) - 28/06/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to recast Directive 97/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the approximation of the laws of the Member
States concerning pressure equipment.
PROPOSED ACT: Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an

equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: Directive 97/23/EC is an example of that Union harmonisation legislation, ensuring the free movement of pressure
equipment. It sets out essential safety requirements that pressure equipment and assemblies must comply with in order to be made available
on the EU market.
(1) Experience with the enforcement of the legislation has shown that measures taken at national level have led to divergent approaches and
to a different treatment of economic operators inside the EU, which undermines the objective of this directive.
To remedy these horizontal shortcomings in Union harmonisation legislation observed across several industrial sectors, the New Legislative
Framework was adopted in 2008 as part of the goods package. The New Legislative Framework (NLF) consists of two complementary
instruments, Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 on accreditation and market surveillance and Decision No 768/2008/EC establishing a common
framework for the marketing of products (NLF Decision).
In view of ensuring consistency across Union harmonisation legislation for industrial products, it is necessary to align Directive 97/23/EC to the
provisions of the NLF Decision. The Commission has already proposed the alignment of nine other Directives to the NLF Decision within an
NLF implementation package adopted on 21 November 2011.
(2) Directive 97/23/EC provides for a classification of pressure equipment in categories, according to the ascending level of risk due to
pressure. This includes the classification of the fluid contained in the pressure equipment as dangerous or not, according to Council Directive
67/548/EEC on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to the classification, packaging and labelling of
dangerous substances.
On 1 June 2015 Directive, 67/548/EEC is to be repealed and replaced by Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of
the Council on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures, which implements in the Union the Globally Harmonised
System of Classification and Labelling of Chemicals that has been adopted at international level, within the United Nations (UN) structure.
Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 introduces new hazard classes and categories only partially corresponding to those provided for by Directive
67/548/EEC. Directive 97/23/EC should therefore be aligned to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 while maintaining the existing levels of
protection of that Directive.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT:
Alignment to the New Legislative Framework Decision: three options were examined and compared:
Option 1 - no changes to the current situation;
Option 2 - alignment to the NLF Decision by non-legislative measures;
Option 3 - alignment to the NLF Decision by legislative measures. This option consists in integrating the provisions of the NLF
Decision into Directive 97/23/EC. Option 3 was found to be the preferred option.
Alignment to the CLP Regulation: the impact assessment study concluded that the impact of the proposed alignment would be limited and in
particular that the overall economic impact will be low.
Based on the number of substances that would be subject to a different classification and the proportion of manufacturers that would be
affected, the impact assessment study estimates the overall costs of aligning Directive 97/23/EC to the CLP Regulation to be of the order of
EUR 8.5 million per year. The cost is due to the changes in the alignment for the health hazard classes.
However, looking at the current compliance costs, and according to the impact assessment study, the total average cost of the conformity
assessment for the pressure equipment covered by Directive 97/23/EC is estimated at EUR 236.3 million per year. Therefore, the incremental
cost due to the alignment of Directive 97/23/EC to the CLP Regulation is low compared to the total cost for conformity assessment. However,
the implementation of the CLP Regulation in the Union is mandatory and the cost cannot be avoided.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
CONTENT: this proposal intends to align Directive 97/23/EC on pressure equipment to:
the goods package adopted in 2008 and in particular to Decision No 768/2008/EC establishing a common framework for the marketing of
products;
Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on classification, labelling and packaging of substances and
mixtures.
The changes made to the provisions of Directive 97/23/EC concern: the definitions, the obligations of economic operators, the presumption of
conformity provided by harmonised standards, the declaration of conformity, CE marking, conformity assessment bodies, the safeguard clause
procedure, the conformity assessment procedures and the classification of the fluids.
The proposal includes:
measures to address the problem of non-compliance by clarifying the obligations of economic operators and requiring enhanced
traceability requirements;
measures intended to ensure the quality of work done by conformity assessment bodies by reinforcing the notification requirements,
revised notification process, specifying requirements for notifying authorities and more stringent information obligations;
measures intended to ensure greater consistency amongst Directives by aligning commonly used definitions and terminology and
aligning the conformity assessment procedures.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the proposal has no implication for the EU budget.
DELEGATED ACTS: this proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).

2013/0221(COD) - 07/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading

The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted the report by Zuzana ROITHOVÁ (EPP, CZ) on the proposal for a
directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to making available on
the market of pressure equipment (recast).
The committee recommended that Parliaments position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission proposal.
It should be recalled that the commission presented this recast of Directive 97/23/EC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
concerning pressure equipment in June 2013 in the framework of the implementation of the New Legislative Framework (NLF) adopted in
2008 (the Goods Package).
This Directive was separated from the alignment package presented in November 2011 because, unlike the other 9 Directives, this recast also
contained an alignment with another EU legislative act, namely Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 (CLP Regulation) on classification, labelling
and packaging of substances and mixtures.
The committee supported the Commissions general intention of a simple alignment and therefore limited its amendments to the proposal to
changes reflecting the agreement obtained between Council and Parliament on the nine other Directives and which had been omitted in the
proposal.
Scope: the Directive covered pressure equipment which is new to the Union market when it was placed on the market; that is to say it was
either new pressure equipment made by a manufacturer established in the Union or pressure equipment, whether new or second-hand,
imported from a third country.
The Directive should apply to all forms of supply, including distance selling.
Economic operators: the latter should be responsible for the compliance of pressure equipment with the requirements of the Directive, so as to
ensure a high level of protection of public interests, such as the health and safety of persons, and the protection of domestic animals and of
property.
Manufacturers should indicate, on the pressure equipment, their name, registered trade name or registered trademark and the postal address
at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on their packaging or in a document accompanying the equipment. The
address should indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details should be in a language easily
understood by consumers, other users and market surveillance authorities.
Every importer should indicate on the pressure equipment his name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at
which he can be contacted.
Lightening the administrative burden: in order to reduce the administrative burden on economic operators, that single EU declaration of
conformity may be a dossier made up of relevant individual declarations of conformity.
CE mark: Member States shall build upon existing mechanisms to ensure correct application of the regime governing the CE marking and shall
take appropriate action in the event of improper use of that marking.
Reasonable transitional period: Members proposed clarification related to the legal situation for products which had been legally placed on the
market in compliance with the current Directive before the new Directive applied, but which were still in stock. These products might still be
made available on the market after the date of application of the new Directive.

2013/0221(COD) - 15/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 608 votes to 16, against 10 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member States relating to making available on the market of
pressure equipment (recast).
The committee recommended that Parliaments position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission proposal.
It should be recalled that the commission presented this recast of Directive 97/23/EC on the approximation of the laws of the Member States
concerning pressure equipment in June 2013 in the framework of the implementation of the New Legislative Framework (NLF) adopted in
2008 (the Goods Package).
This Directive was separated from the alignment package presented in November 2011 because, unlike the other 9 Directives, this recast also
contained an alignment with another EU legislative act, namely Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 (CLP Regulation) on classification, labelling
and packaging of substances and mixtures.
The committee supported the Commissions general intention of a simple alignment and therefore limited its amendments to the proposal to
changes reflecting the agreement obtained between Council and Parliament on the nine other Directives and which had been omitted in the
proposal.
Scope: the Directive covered pressure equipment which is new to the Union market when it was placed on the market; that is to say it was
either new pressure equipment made by a manufacturer established in the Union or pressure equipment, whether new or second-hand,
imported from a third country.
The Directive should apply to all forms of supply, including distance selling.
Economic operators: the latter should be responsible for the compliance of pressure equipment with the requirements of the Directive, so as to
ensure a high level of protection of public interests, such as the health and safety of persons, and the protection of domestic animals and of
property.
Manufacturers should indicate, on the pressure equipment, their name, registered trade name or registered trademark and the postal address

at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on their packaging or in a document accompanying the equipment. The
address should indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details should be in a language easily
understood by consumers, other users and market surveillance authorities.
Every importer should indicate on the pressure equipment his name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at
which he can be contacted.
Lightening the administrative burden: in order to reduce the administrative burden on economic operators, that single EU declaration of
conformity may be a dossier made up of relevant individual declarations of conformity.
CE marking: this shall be affixed visibly, legibly and indelibly to each item of pressure equipment or its dataplate. Member States shall build
upon existing mechanisms to ensure correct application of the regime governing the CE marking and shall take appropriate action in the event
of improper use of that marking.
Reasonable transitional period: Parliament and the Council clarified the legal situation of products which have been placed legally on the
market in conformity with the Directive in force, i.a. before the new Directive applies, but which are still in stock in the distribution chain.
Market surveillance and control of pressure equipment and assemblies entering the Union market: a procedure for dealing with pressure
equipment or assemblies presenting a risk at national level has been introduced as well as a Union safeguard measure.
In case of formal non-compliance of equipment, Member States shall require the relevant economic operator to put an end to the
non-compliance concerned. Where the non-compliance persists, the Member State concerned shall take all appropriate measures to restrict or
prohibit the equipment or assembly being made available on the market or ensure that it is recalled or withdrawn from the market.
The Commission should adopt immediately applicable implementing acts where, in duly justified cases relating to compliant pressure
equipment or assemblies which present a risk to the health or safety of persons, to domestic animals or to property, imperative grounds of
urgency so require.
In order to take into account emerging very serious safety reasons, the power to adopt acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect
of amendments to classification of pressure equipment or assemblies.
Lastly, when matters relating to this Directive, other than its implementation or infringements, are being examined, i.e. in a Commission expert
group, the European Parliament should in line with existing practice receive full information and documentation and, where appropriate, an
invitation to attend such meetings.

2013/0221(COD) - 15/05/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to recast Directive 97/23/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the approximation of the laws of the Member
States concerning pressure equipment.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Directive 2014/68/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on the harmonisation of the laws of the Member
States relating to the making available on the market of pressure equipment.
CONTENT: Directive 97/23/EC is an example of Union harmonisation legislation, which ensures the free movement of pressure equipment. It
sets out essential safety requirements that pressure equipment and assemblies must comply with in order to be made available on the EU
market.
In order to remedy the shortcomings of the current legislation, this Directive aims to align Directive 97/23/ EC: i) on the new legislative
framework comprising of Council Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 on accreditation and market surveillance and Decision No 768/2008/EC on a
common framework for the marketing of products and ii) to Regulation (EC) No 1272/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on
classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures.
The Directive shall apply to the design, manufacture and conformity assessment of pressure equipment (eg, boilers, pressure cookers, fire
extinguishers, heat exchangers, steam generators, process heating) with a maximum allowable pressure PS greater than 0.5 bar.
This Directive covers pressure equipment and assemblies which are new to the Union market when they are placed on the market; that is to
say they are either new pressure equipment or assemblies made by a manufacturer established in the Union or pressure equipment or
assemblies, whether new or second-hand, imported from a third country.
The changes introduced by this Directive relate to the definitions, obligations of economic operators (including the EU declaration of
conformity), the presumption of conformity, the conformity assessment procedures, Union safeguard procedure, the classification of pressure
equipment, comitology and delegated acts.
Economic operators should be responsible for the compliance of pressure equipment and assemblies with the requirements of this Directive, in
relation to their respective roles in the supply chain, so as to ensure a high level of protection of public interests, such as health and safety of
persons, and the protection of domestic animals and of property, and to guarantee fair competition on the Union market.
Manufacturers should indicate, on the pressure equipment, their name, registered trade name or registered trademark and the postal address
at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on their packaging or in a document accompanying the equipment. The address
should indicate a single point at which the manufacturer can be contacted. The contact details should be in a language easily understood by
consumers, other users and market surveillance authorities. Every importer should indicate on the pressure equipment or assembly his name,
registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address at which he can be contacted.
Non-compliance: Member States shall require the relevant economic operator to put an end to the non-compliance concerned. Where the
non-compliance persists, the Member State concerned shall take all appropriate measures to restrict or prohibit the equipment or assembly
being made available on the market or ensure that it is recalled or withdrawn from the market.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 17.07.2014.
TRANSPOSITION: 28.02.2015 and 18.07.2014 depending on the provisions. The Directive shall apply from 01.06.2015 and from 19.07.2015

depending on the provisions.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in order to take into account emerging serious safety
reasons. The power to adopt delegated acts shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 1 June 2015. The European
Parliament or the Council may raise objections to a delegated act within a period of two months from the date of notification (this may be
extended by two months). If the European Parliament or Council express objections, the delegated act will not enter into force.

2013/0221(COD) - 15/05/2014 Corrigendum to final act
Corrigendum to Directive 2014/68/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on the harmonisation of the laws of the
Member States relating to the making available on the market of pressure equipment ((Official Journal of the European Union L 189 of 27 June
2014)
Article 14(7) (Conformity assessment procedures):
instead of: 7. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article, the competent authorities may, where justified in respect
of which the procedures referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article have not been applied and the use of which is in the interests
of experimentation.
read:7. By way of derogation from paragraphs 1 to 6 of this Article, the competent authorities may, where justified in respect of which
the procedures referred to in paragraphs 1 to 6 of this Article have not been applied and the use of which is in the interests of
experimentation;
Article 48(2) (Transitional provisions):
instead of: 2. Member States shall not impede the making available on the market and/or the putting into service of pressure
equipment or assemblies covered by Directive 97/23/EC which are in conformity with that Directive and which were placed on the
market before 1 June 2015.
read: 2. Member States shall not impede the making available on the market and/or the putting into service of pressure equipment or
assemblies covered by Directive 97/23/EC which are in conformity with that Directive and which were placed on the market before 19
July 2016.

