Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2174(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Insurance of natural and man-made disasters

Subject
2.50.05 Insurance, pension funds
3.70.10 Man-made disasters, industrial pollution and accidents
3.70.11 Natural disasters, Solidarity Fund
3.70.16 Law and environment, liability
4.60.02 Consumer information, advertising, labelling
4.60.06 Consumers' economic and legal interests

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

EFD TERHO Sampo

18/06/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE LANGEN Werner
S&D MIZZI Marlene
ALDE TORVALDS Nils
Verts/ALE BESSET Jean-Paul
ECR FOX Ashley
GUE/NGL CHOUNTIS
Nikolaos
Committee for opinion
ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

Legal Affairs

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
16/04/2013

Non-legislative basic document published

12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

17/12/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

06/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

05/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

05/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

COM(2013)0213

Summary

A7-0005/2014

Summary

T7-0076/2014

Summary

05/02/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2174(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/7/13126

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2013)0213

16/04/2013

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE519.700

25/09/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE522.761

23/10/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0005/2014

06/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0076/2014

05/02/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)414

18/06/2014

2013/2174(INI) - 16/04/2013 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to present a Green Paper on the insurance of natural and man-made disasters.
BACKGROUND: the European Union is vulnerable to nearly all types of natural disasters. Disasters not only cause human losses but also
damages to the value of billions of euros every year, affecting economic stability and growth.
Disasters may have cross-border effects and can potentially threaten entire areas in neighbouring countries. Even where costs of major
disasters are locally concentrated, if costs are inadequately covered by insurance then individual Member States may carry large fiscal
burdens, which could cause internal and external imbalances. This is thus an important issue for citizens, companies and governments across
the Union.
In 2010, the Council adopted a series of conclusions in which it invited the Commission to evaluate and report on the potential for the
European Union to facilitate and support increased coverage of appropriate disaster risk insurance and financial risk transfer markets, as well
as regional insurance pooling, in terms of knowledge transfer, cooperation, or seed financing.
This Green Paper poses a number of questions concerning the adequacy and availability of appropriate disaster insurance and accompanies
the Communication entitled "An EU strategy on adaptation to climate change".
CONTENT: the objective is to raise awareness and to assess whether or not action at EU level could be appropriate or warranted to improve
the market for disaster insurance in the European Union.
More generally, this process will also:
expand the knowledge base,
help to promote insurance as a tool of disaster management and thus contribute to a shift towards a general culture of disaster risk
prevention and mitigation,
bring in further data and information.
Next steps: the Commission invites stakeholders to comment on all the issues set out in this Green Paper.
On the basis of the outcome of this consultation, the Commission will decide on the best course of action to take on the issues outlined in this
Green Paper, including legislative measures, as appropriate.
Stakeholders are invited to send their comments before 30 June 2013.

2013/2174(INI) - 06/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Sampo TERHO (EFD, FI) on the insurance of natural

and man-made disasters in response to the Commission Green Paper on the subject.
Members note that the situation in the EU insurance market is heterogeneous because Member States are exposed to different risks and
natural catastrophes and the predictability of a natural catastrophe depends on different factors (meteorological, hydrological, geophysical,
etc.). They recall that between 1980 and 2011 a small number of big events gave rise to about half of all costs related to weather events.
Accordingly, the report calls for prevention and information measures in order to protecting people and avoid losses caused by unexpected
events.
To prevent environmental risks, it suggests more research in partnership with insurance companies in order to better understand the issues
involved, thus preparing citizens and their communities for risks related to natural catastrophes.
Members also consider that information is crucial for the prevention and mitigation of such disasters, and call for closer cooperation between
Member States and the private sector in this area.
At European level, the committee favoured the sharing of best practice on risk prevention and mitigation amongst Member States and
regionally. It pointed out that the involvement of local authorities in decisions concerning city planning and urban development could improve
natural catastrophe management. It called for Member States and public authorities to take adequate preventive measures in order to mitigate
the consequences of natural disasters and to create and maintain crisis response units.
Insurance market: whilst welcoming the Commissions Green Paper, Members note that natural and man-made disasters need different types
of insurance and are covered by two different insurance markets. Such disasters cannot be treated together even if there are cases of
man-made decisions aggravating exposure to a natural catastrophe risk. Members underline that the EU should not create overlapping and
contradicting liability rules.
Most Member States already have some form of insurance-based system for floods and other natural damage, but the system can be
supplemented with state funds to compensate for those assets that cannot be privately insured. State funds may also compensate for
insurance claims exceeding the maximum amounts or for otherwise exceptionally heavy damage. The report also takes the view that a
Member State may participate in compensation for damage by providing reinsurance. It stated, however, that these systems differ in many
respects, and it is not prudent or necessary to unify them.
Recalling that natural catastrophes affect both private households and business activities, the committee encourages insurance companies to
take risk-based pricing as a central approach to disaster insurance. It invites Member States to propose incentives to encourage citizens to
protect themselves and insure their property against damage, and incentives responding to insurance needs in terms of environmental liability,
e.g. for enterprises in mining or in the gas, chemical or nuclear sectors.
Insurance companies, for their part, are invited to clarify contracts for consumers and to provide information on available options and their
impact on the price of cover, in order to ensure adequate consumer choice. Insurance companies must provide clear and comprehensible
information for clients and prospective clients. Risk-based pricing should be central to the availability of insurance coverage.
Non-mandatory insurance: Members recall that in the end it is the state or the regional authorities that bear much of the indirect or direct cost
burden for damage, be the causes natural or man-made. They suggest that Member States and regional authorities should recognise the
importance of risk prevention and should make it a pillar of investment strategy, since it is more efficient to minimise the consequences of
disasters instead of just providing cover and repairing damage afterwards.
Underlining the risk of moral hazard if citizens assume that their government would be using public resources from the national budget to cover
their losses, Members are critical of actions which may discourage citizens or communities from taking measures to protect themselves.
Citizens should carry their share of responsibility and compensation should not cover all damage.
Members recall that individual responsibility in this sector has to be maintained, and is aware of the efforts made by Member States to
combine the promotion of individual responsibility with intervention by government.
In conclusion, Members consider that there is no market distortion in this field to justify intervention at European level , and do not think that a
one-size-fits-all solution would be feasible for this issue. They recall that tailor-made insurance products depend on many elements, such as
type of risks, their probable quantity and quality, culture of prevention, the state of preparedness and capacity for action and the approach
taken by Member States and regional authorities concerning risk monitoring and preparation. The committee considers that a flexible natural
catastrophe insurance market allows insurance companies to adapt products to different conditions, and believes that a non-mandatory
framework is the best way to develop products that match with natural risks in a given geographical area.

2013/2174(INI) - 05/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on the insurance of natural and man-made disasters in response to the Commission Green
Paper on the subject.
Parliament noted that the situation in the EU insurance market is heterogeneous because Member States are exposed to different risks and
natural catastrophes and the predictability of a natural catastrophe depends on different factors (meteorological, hydrological, geophysical,
etc.). It recalled that between 1980 and 2011, a small number of big events gave rise to about half of all costs related to weather events.
Accordingly, Parliament called for prevention and information measures in order to protect people and avoid losses caused by unexpected
events.
To prevent environmental risks, it suggested more research in partnership with insurance companies in order to better understand the issues
involved, thus preparing citizens and their communities for risks related to natural catastrophes.
Members also considered that information is crucial for the prevention and mitigation of such disasters, and called for closer cooperation
between Member States and the private sector in this area.
At European level, Parliament favoured the sharing of best practice on risk prevention and mitigation amongst Member States and regionally.
It pointed out that the involvement of local authorities in decisions concerning city planning and urban development could improve natural

catastrophe management. It called for Member States and public authorities to take adequate preventive measures in order to mitigate the
consequences of natural disasters and to create and maintain crisis response units.
Insurance market: whilst welcoming the Commissions Green Paper, Parliament noted that natural and man-made disasters need different
types of insurance and are covered by two different insurance markets. Such disasters cannot be treated together even if there are cases of
man-made decisions aggravating exposure to a natural catastrophe risk. It underlined that the EU should not create overlapping and
contradicting liability rules.
Most Member States already have some form of insurance-based system for floods and other natural damage, but the system can be
supplemented with state funds to compensate for those assets that cannot be privately insured. State funds may also compensate for
insurance claims exceeding the maximum amounts or for otherwise exceptionally heavy damage. The resolution also took the view that a
Member State may participate in compensation for damage by providing reinsurance. It stated, however, that these systems differ in many
respects, and it is not prudent or necessary to unify them.
Recalling that natural catastrophes affect both private households and business activities, Parliament encouraged insurance companies to
take risk-based pricing as a central approach to disaster insurance. It invited Member States to propose incentives to encourage citizens to
protect themselves and insure their property against damage, and incentives responding to insurance needs in terms of environmental liability,
e.g. for enterprises in mining or in the gas, chemical or nuclear sectors.
Insurance companies, for their part, are invited to clarify contracts for consumers and to provide information on available options and their
impact on the price of cover, in order to ensure adequate consumer choice. Insurance companies must provide clear and comprehensible
information for clients and prospective clients. Risk-based pricing should be central to the availability of insurance coverage.
Parliament recognised the need for consumers to understand what type of coverage they have and how it would operate when risks
materialise. Consumers should be fully informed of all terms and conditions, including the procedures for withdrawal from a contract and for
making complaints and the deadlines applicable in such procedures, when buying insurance products and before signing a contract. It
believed that the protection of consumers must be a concern of the EU and the Member States.
Non-mandatory insurance: Parliament recalled that in the end it is the state or the regional authorities that bear much of the indirect or direct
cost burden for damage, be the causes natural or man-made. They suggested that Member States and regional authorities should recognise
the importance of risk prevention and should make it a pillar of investment strategy, since it is more efficient to minimise the consequences of
disasters instead of just providing cover and repairing damage afterwards.
Underlining the risk of moral hazard if citizens assume that their government would be using public resources from the national budget to cover
their losses, Members were critical of actions which may discourage citizens or communities from taking measures to protect themselves.
Citizens should carry their share of responsibility and compensation should not cover all damage.
Members recalled that individual responsibility in this sector has to be maintained, and is aware of the efforts made by Member States to
combine the promotion of individual responsibility with intervention by government.
In conclusion, Parliament considered that there is no market distortion in this field to justify intervention at European level , and do not think that
a one-size-fits-all solution would be feasible for this issue. It recalled that tailor-made insurance products depend on many elements, such as
type of risks, their probable quantity and quality, culture of prevention, the state of preparedness and capacity for action and the approach
taken by Member States and regional authorities concerning risk monitoring and preparation. Members considered that a flexible natural
catastrophe insurance market allows insurance companies to adapt products to different conditions, and believed that a non-mandatory
framework is the best way to develop products that match with natural risks in a given geographical area.

