Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2077(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU regulatory fitness and subsidiarity and proportionality - 19th report on
Better lawmaking covering the year 2011

Subject
8.40.10 Interinstitutional relations, democratic deficit, subsidiarity, comitology
8.50.02 Legislative simplification, coordination, codification

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Legal Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

ECR KARIM Sajjad

15/04/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D GERINGER DE
OEDENBERG Lidia Joanna
ALDE TAYLOR Rebecca
Committee for opinion

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

AFCO

Constitutional Affairs

EFD MESSERSCHMIDT
Morten

Commission DG

Commissioner

Secretariat-General

ŠEFČOVIČ Maroš

Appointed

23/04/2013

Key events
10/07/2012

Non-legislative basic document published

10/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

21/01/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

28/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

03/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

04/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

04/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

04/02/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2077(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

COM(2012)0373

Summary

A7-0056/2014

Summary

T7-0061/2014

Summary

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 132-p1

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/7/12547

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2012)0373

10/07/2012

EC

Summary

For information

COM(2012)0746

12/12/2012

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE514.600

21/06/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE516.887

30/08/2013

EP

PE514.776

17/10/2013

EP

PE524.664

02/12/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0056/2014

28/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0061/2014

04/02/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)414

18/06/2014

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

AFCO

2013/2077(INI) - 10/07/2012 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to present the 19th report on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality.
BACKGROUND: this is the nineteenth annual report on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality in EU lawmaking.
As in previous years, it looks at how the principles are implemented by the different EU institutions and bodies, the Commission, the European Parliament,
the Council and the Committee of the Regions and presents in more detail some Commission initiatives and legislative proposals which have raised
subsidiarity issues during 2011. It also examines how the subsidiarity control mechanism, which under Article 12 of the TEU and the Protocol gives
national Parliaments a particular role in scrutiny of the principle of subsidiarity, has developed since the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty.
CONTENT: the majority of Commission proposals were adopted by the colegislators without significant discussions on subsidiarity and
proportionality. In 2011, the thresholds for the so-called "yellow card" and "orange card" were not reached and only a small percentage (about
10%) of national Parliaments' opinions sent to the Commission in the context of the political dialogue were reasoned opinions within the
meaning of the Protocol, i.e. stating a breach of subsidiarity. At the same time, in cases where compliance with the principles of subsidiarity
and proportionality was questioned, the views of the institutions and other players involved sometimes differed widely.
The concepts of subsidiarity and proportionality are fundamental elements in the policy development process of the EU Institutions, and the
Commission's impact assessments remain the main vehicle for addressing subsidiarity and proportionality issues during the pre-legislative
phase, the IA Board playing a key role in this respect. However, institutional practice shows that the way these principles are interpreted and
applied during the legislative phase often depends on the political context, highlighting thus their political dimension.
The way in which most of the national Parliaments implement the Protocol and use the subsidiarity control mechanism has highlighted the primarily political
character of this new tool.
The subsidiarity control mechanism has served to make the process more transparent and has clearly helped to bring EU policies into the public debate
in Member States and thus to raise public awareness on these issues.
How the institutions apply these principles: the report reviews how the institutions apply these two fundamental principles:
1. the Commission: it recalls that a subsidiarity statement is presented for each legislative proposal, as foreseen by Article 5 of the Protocol to the Treaty.
Impact assessments (IAs), which accompany proposals with significant impacts, provide the most detailed analysis of subsidiarity and proportionality. The
quality of this analysis is systematically scrutinised by the IA Board. In 2011, the Board continued to assess EU added value when scrutinising the quality of
IAs. Though the Board's recommendations on subsidiarity and proportionality were down slightly compared to 2010, they still featured in a significant
number of opinions (43 %). The Board frequently asked for stronger justification of the need for action at EU level, in particular the need for more evidence
of problems that require action at EU level and, on some occasions, it concluded that the evidence base to demonstrate the need for and proportionality of an
EU legislative initiative remained weak.
2. the national parliaments: the subsidiarity control mechanism gives national Parliaments the right to express their views on whether draft legislative acts,
which do not fall within the EU's exclusive competences comply with the principle of subsidiarity. Depending on the number of reasoned opinions
concluding that a proposal is in breach of the subsidiarity principle, the so-called yellow card and orange card can be triggered. These entail a review of the
draft legislation and may lead to the relevant legislative proposal being amended or withdrawn. In 2011, the Commission received 64 reasoned opinions
from national Parliaments, an increase of almost 75% in comparison with 2010, the first year of functioning of the subsidiarity control mechanism. These
64 reasoned opinions received in 2011 related to 28 different Commission proposals. Most of the reasoned opinions focused on legislative proposals in the
fields of taxation, agriculture, internal market and justice. The proposals which elicited the highest number of reasoned opinions concerned the Common

Consolidated Corporate Tax Base (nine opinions), the temporary reintroduction of border controls at internal borders in exceptional circumstances
(six), the Common European Sales Law (five) and the Single CMO Regulation (five).
In none of the 2011 cases were the thresholds for triggering the yellow or orange cards met.
In accordance with its political commitment to national Parliaments, the Commission replied or is in the process of preparing a reply to each reasoned
opinion in the context of the political dialogue and put forward into account in the ensuing interinstitutional discussions and negotiations.
3. the European Parliament and the Council: in Council, the Committee of Permanent Representatives (Coreper) ensures that the principles are complied
with. In the European Parliament, the internal Rules of Procedure contain a specific Rule on the "Examination of respect for the principle of subsidiarity
", which states that compliance is verified by the committees in charge of specific legislative dossiers, together with the Committee on Legal Affairs, and that
the committee responsible may not take its final vote before expiry of the eight-week deadline.
It should also be noted that, in 2011, the Commission received a small number of parliamentary questions (32 out of more than 12 000) which concerned
issues in relation to respect for the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality. They mainly covered requests to substantiate the compliance of certain
Commission proposals with these principles, partially echoing concerns raised by other institutions and players.
4. the Committee of the Regions: the Committee of the Regions expresses its views either when it is consulted or in the form of own-initiative opinions.
In accordance with Article 8 of the Protocol, it also has the right to challenge under Article 263 TFEU the validity of legislation as regards compliance with
the principle of subsidiarity, but only if it has been consulted by virtue of an obligation under the TFEU. 2011 saw preparations for the launch of the
REGPEX website, which is designed to help regions with legislative powers play their part in the subsidiarity control mechanism and to provide a source of
information and exchange between regional parliaments and governments as they prepare their subsidiarity analyses. The website was launched in March
2012.
5. the Court of Justice: the Court of Justice of the European Union is, in accordance with Article 263 TFEU, competent to review the legality of legislative
acts as regards compliance with the principle of subsidiarity. The Protocol states that the Committee of the Regions or Member States, themselves or on
behalf of their national Parliaments, can bring a case before the Court.
Lastly, the report cites a number of key cases where subsidiarity and proportionality concerns were raised. These cases are described both
from the point of view of the interinstitutional debates that took place in their regard and the arguments put forward by national parliaments to
counter the proposals in question.

2013/2077(INI) - 12/12/2012 For information
PURPOSE: to present a programme, called REFIT, which aims at more targeted EU regulation.
BACKGROUND: EU legislation is essential to achieve the objectives of the EU Treaty and to set the conditions for smart, sustainable and
inclusive growth, benefitting citizens, businesses and workers. Achieving these goals is a shared responsibility between the Commission, the
other European Institutions and the Member States.
The economic and financial crisis has focused attention on the costs of EU legislation and the challenges of implementing and enforcing the
laws already on the statute books. National administrations, already under strain, find it difficult to keep up with the transposition and
application of EU legislation. Businesses and citizens raise concerns about the complexity and administrative load of laws. The European
Council has therefore called for further efforts to reduce the overall regulatory burden at EU and national level.
The Commission is responding to these concerns. Since outlining new initiatives two years ago, it has consolidated its impact assessment
system. The 25% target set under the Action Programme for Reducing Administrative Burdens has been met and exceeded. Legislation has
been simplified and codified. Significant simplification proposals in several policy areas are being examined by the European Parliament and
Council. Many problems on the correct application of EU legislation are being solved without having to resort to formal infringement
procedures.
It would appear, nevertheless, necessary to further enhance the initiatives already taken.
CONTENT: the Commission will continue its activities in this field and is determined to meet policy goals at minimum cost, achieving the
benefits that only EU legislation can bring and eliminating all unnecessary regulatory burden. It intends therefore to propose a programme
designed to set in place fitter regulation.
To this end, it will:
continue to strengthen its regulatory tools and to apply them systematically across its regulatory activities;
also step up its implementation and enforcement in close cooperation with the other European institutions and the Member States;
combine various initiatives now underway into a Regulatory Fitness and Performance Programme (REFIT) aimed at eliminating
unnecessary regulatory costs (i.e. burden) and ensuring that the body of EU legislation remains fit for purpose.
Against quantitative targets: in its Communication, the Commission indicates that it does not believe that setting global targets and/or
quantitative formulae for managing the stock of legislation will produce the desired results . This requires a more tailored approach with an
assessment of actual benefits and costs - identifying whether they are directly related to EU legislation or to the implementation choices made
by the Member States. Such an approach would make it possible to more accurately target cost reduction and regulatory improvements and
would be better suited to the specificities of EU policy making.
Main objective of a Regulatory Fitness and Performance Programme, REFIT: to move towards its goal, the Commission will launch a
Regulatory Fitness and Performance Programme (REFIT) building on its experience in evaluating and reducing administrative burden. REFIT
will identify burdens, inconsistencies, gaps and ineffective measures. Attention will be paid to possible regulatory burden related to how EU
legislation is implemented at the national and sub-national level.
Through REFIT, the Commission will:
1. identify, assess, adopt, and monitor implementation of, initiatives which will result in significant regulatory cost reduction or
simplification;
2.

2. propose a common framework for conducting assessments, on the one hand, to show how they fit into the overall objective of
ensuring smart regulation and eliminating burdens, to involve all relevant levels of government and, on the other, to facilitate wide
stakeholder participation;
3. conduct a mapping exercise to identify the regulatory areas and pieces of legislation with the greatest potential for simplifying rules
and reducing regulatory cost for businesses and citizens without compromising public policy objectives. Normally, the mapping will
point to areas where further evaluation, including of costs and benefits, is needed. These evaluations will also assess whether
quantitative targets for burden reduction should be examined in the concerned field and in relation to EU and Member States
responsibilities respectively. Where the mapping provides sufficient evidence that more immediate action is needed, an impact
assessment process for the proposals will be launched. Stakeholders will be informed throughout the process;
4. implement REFIT in a transparent manner: once the mapping and appropriate evaluation work has been conducted, REFIT
evaluations will be publicly flagged in strengthened multiannual evaluation plans starting from 2014. A tracking system ( scoreboard)
will be set up to assess the progress of proposals through the EU institutions and at the implementation stage;
5. REFIT will include a follow-on to the Administrative Burden Reduction Programme (ABR) - ABR Plus. The 2007 Programme aimed to
reduce burdens on business stemming from EU legislation by 25% by 2012. It covered around 80% of the main sources of
administrative burden. The Commission has gone beyond the target by presenting proposals to cut the administrative burden by over
30 %, while measures equalling 25% have been adopted by the co-legislators. Benefits will not materialize until the ABR is
successfully implemented. ABR Plus will therefore focus on follow-up in the Member States. Member States will be asked to report by
31 December 2013 on how they implemented ABR measures. Special measures will be set in place to evaluate the reduction in
administrative burden for SMEs.
The Commissions communication presents the methodology, the tools and the partners that it envisages being involved in implementing the
REFIT programme. This would include, among other things:
the continuation of the impact assessment programme;
further evaluation of implementation measures in force;
the continuation of the systematic consultation of stakeholders;
the involvement of all the European and Member States institutions.

2013/2077(INI) - 28/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Sajjad Karim (ECR, UK) on EU Regulatory Fitness and Subsidiarity and
Proportionality - 19th report on Better Lawmaking covering the year 2011.
General comments: Members considered that the Interinstitutional Agreement on Better Lawmaking of 2003 had become ill-suited to the
current legislative environment created by the Treaty of Lisbon, and called for the Agreement to be re-negotiated, to take account of the new
framework, consolidate current best practices, and bring the agreement up to date in line with the better lawmaking agenda. Any new
agreement should be adopted on the basis of Article 295 TFEU and should be of a binding nature.
In addition, the Committee stressed the following:
·

the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality were not adequately addressed by the Commission in its impact assessments, as
has been pointed out by the Impact Assessment Board and by national parliaments;

·

the Commission and Council need to engage with Parliament in negotiations on the criteria for the appropriate application of Article
290 and 291 TFEU, and this can be achieved in the framework of the revision of the Interinstitutional Agreement on Better
Lawmaking,

·

the Commission should step up its review of the application of the principle of proportionality, especially with regard to the use of
Articles 290 and 291 TFEU on delegated and implementing acts;

·

close attention should be paid to the early warning system.

Subsidiarity mechanism for national parliaments: Members welcomed the closer participation of national parliaments in the framework of the
European legislative process.
Initiatives to improve the evaluation of European issues by national parliaments were suggested in the report.
Better lawmaking: Members urged the Commission to come forward with further concrete proposals to reduce the overall EU regulatory
burden without undermining health and safety at work.
Members further suggest that the Commission should:
·

explore the option of introducing a white paper stage in the legislative process to afford stakeholders the ability to comment on draft
proposals and accompanying provisional impact assessments;

·

put forward proposals implementing regulatory offsetting, which would require equivalent cost offsets to be identified in advance of
new legislation that would introduce the imposition of costs, and present an assessment of its impact before the end of the current
parliamentary term in 2014.

Lastly, it insisted that the Commission give serious consideration to the European added value assessments accompanying legislative
own-initiative reports, setting out in detail the reasons why it did not accept or consider relevant any of the arguments put forward by
Parliament.

2013/2077(INI) - 04/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The Parliament adopted a resolution on EU Regulatory Fitness and Subsidiarity and Proportionality - 19th report on Better Lawmaking

covering the year 2011.
General comments: Parliament stressed that legislation proposed and adopted at the European level should be simple, effective and efficient,
should provide a clear added value, and should be easy to understand and accessible in all the official languages of the Member States, as
well as delivering full benefits at minimum cost. It emphasised the fact that the European institutions are responsible for ensuring that
legislation is clear and easily understood and does not place any unnecessary administrative burdens on citizens or enterprises.
Believing that better lawmaking should be pursued in a spirit of multilevel governance, i.e. through coordinated action by the EU, national
institutions and local and regional authorities, Parliament considered that the Interinstitutional Agreement on Better Lawmaking of 2003 had
become ill-suited to the current legislative environment created by the Treaty of Lisbon, and called for the Agreement to be re-negotiated on
the basis of Article 295 TFEU and should be of a binding nature.
In addition, Parliament stressed the following:
the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality were not adequately addressed by the Commission in its impact assessments, as has
been pointed out by the Impact Assessment Board and by national parliaments;
the Commission and Council need to engage with Parliament in negotiations on the criteria for the appropriate application of Article
290 and 291 TFEU, and this can be achieved in the framework of the revision of the Interinstitutional Agreement on Better Lawmaking,
the Commission should step up its review of the application of the principle of proportionality, especially with regard to the use of
Articles 290 and 291 TFEU on delegated and implementing acts;
close attention should be paid to the early warning system.
Subsidiarity mechanism for national parliaments: Members welcomed the closer participation of national parliaments in the framework of the
European legislative process. They recommended that the national parliaments be afforded substantial assistance to enable them to carry out
their scrutiny tasks.
On Subsidiarity mechanism, Parliament stressed that in 2011 the Commission received 64 reasoned opinions within the meaning of Protocol
No 2 on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality, which represents a considerable increase in comparison to 2010. It
notes, however, that these 64 reasoned opinions represented barely 10 % of the total of 622 opinions forwarded to the Commission by
national parliaments in 2011 within the terms of the political dialogue in question.
It also drew attention to the fact that no Commission proposal received a sufficient number of reasoned opinions to trigger the yellow or orange
card procedures under the Protocol. It noted, however, that on 22 May 2012 a yellow card procedure was for the first time triggered by a
Commission proposal (proposal for a Council regulation on the exercise of the right to take collective action within the context of the freedom
of establishment and the freedom to provide services, i.e. the proposal for the Monti II Regulation). It stressed that the Commission withdrew
the proposal, not because it considered the principle of subsidiarity to have been infringed upon, but because it realised that the proposal was
unlikely to gain enough political support in Parliament and the Council to ensure its adoption
Globally, Parliament took the view that the mechanism for verification of the subsidiarity principle must be designed and put to use as a major
instrument for collaboration between European and national institutions and emphasised dialogue among the different institutional levels of the
multi-level European system.
Better lawmaking: Parliament urged the Commission to come forward with further concrete proposals to reduce the overall EU regulatory
burden without undermining health and safety at work.
Members further suggested that the Commission should:
explore the option of introducing a white paper stage in the legislative process to afford stakeholders the ability to comment on draft
proposals and accompanying provisional impact assessments;
put forward proposals implementing regulatory offsetting, which would require equivalent cost offsets to be identified in advance of
new legislation that would introduce the imposition of costs, and present an assessment of its impact before the end of the current
parliamentary term in 2014.
Impact assessments and European added value: Members proposed that Parliaments own impact assessments should include a territorial
dimension when appropriate.
Lastly, Parliament insisted that the Commission give serious consideration to the European added value assessments accompanying
legislative own-initiative reports, setting out in detail the reasons why it did not accept or consider relevant any of the arguments put forward by
Parliament.

