Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2043(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Integrated parcel delivery market for the growth of e-commerce in the EU

Subject
2.10 Free movement of goods
2.40 Free movement of services, freedom to provide
3.20.01 Air transport and air freight
3.20.05 Road transport: passengers and freight
3.20.07 Combined transport, multimodal transport
3.20.08 Urban transport
3.30.05 Electronic and mobile communications, personal communications
3.30.09 Postal services, parcel delivery services
3.30.25 International information networks and society, internet
3.45.02 Small and medium-sized enterprises (SME), craft industries
3.45.05 Business policy, electronic commerce, after-sales service,
commercial distribution
4.60.06 Consumers' economic and legal interests
4.60.08 Safety of products and services, product liability
5.05 Economic growth

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE ARIAS ECHEVERRÍA
Pablo

18/12/2012

Shadow rapporteur
S&D SEHNALOVÁ Olga
ALDE CREUTZMANN Jürgen
Verts/ALE RÜHLE Heide
ECR BIELAN Adam
GUE/NGL
TRIANTAPHYLLIDES Kyriacos
EFD SALVINI Matteo
Committee for opinion

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

S&D STEINRUCK Jutta

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

PPE DANTIN Michel

CULT

Culture and Education

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI

Legal Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital

BARNIER Michel

Appointed

13/03/2013

21/01/2013

Markets Union

Key events
29/11/2012

Non-legislative basic document published

14/03/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

17/12/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

14/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

03/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

04/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

04/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

04/02/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

COM(2012)0698

Summary

A7-0024/2014

Summary

T7-0067/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2043(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

IMCO/7/12134

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2012)0698

29/11/2012

EC

Committee draft report

PE516.736

26/07/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE519.457

14/10/2013

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

TRAN

PE514.642

06/11/2013

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE514.874

26/11/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0024/2014

14/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0067/2014

04/02/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)414

18/06/2014

2013/2043(INI) - 29/11/2012 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to launch a consultation on the integrated parcel delivery market for the growth of e-commerce in the EU (Commission Green
Paper).
BACKGROUND: according to estimations, the EU parcel market was estimated to be worth 42.4 billion in 2008.

Over the last 5 years, and due to the growth of e-commerce, the business to consumer segment of the parcel and packet markets has grown
rapidly. Estimates of today's volumes indicate that this segment now represents between 20 % and 40% of total volumes in more mature
e-commerce markets such as the United Kingdom. In the EU-27, only 9% of EU consumers and 18% of EU retailers use cross-border
e-commerce. Cross-border delivery is considered to be an obstacle by 57% of retailers10, while 46.7% of consumers declare they worry about
the delivery in cross-border transactions.
The Commission's Communication on ecommerce and online services identifies the delivery of goods purchased online as one of the top five
priorities to boost e-commerce by 2015 and its importance has been reiterated by the Council of the European Union and the European
Parliament in its resolution of 21 September 2010. Delivery is indeed critical as it has a substantial impact on facilitating e-commerce trade and
is a key element for building trust between sellers and buyers.
A more appropriate design of the delivery chain for e-commerce in the EU would also have positive implications for a number of policy areas
such as cohesion, employment, innovation, environment, competitiveness of European industry to promote investment in a European delivery
network which faces intense competition in the international environment.
CONTENT: this Green Paper examines how the e-commerce and delivery markets in Europe are evolving, explores what is required for the
creation of a Single Market for delivery, analyses the key challenges for the different actors, and highlights the opportunities for improving the
delivery process to the benefits of citizens and businesses, in particular SMEs.
Based on an analysis of the existing regulatory and institutional framework, three main issues are considered instrumental in creating an
integrated EU parcel delivery market :
(1) Convenience: greater convenience and transparency for consumers. In this context, the Green Paper focuses on the following points:
greater consideration from the consumers point of view through the provisions of information: (i) on delivery options and modalities; (ii)
on the quality/performance of delivery (e.g. performance indicators on the speed of delivery, the geographic coverage of the delivery
operator, delays, damaged or lost items; (iii) trust labels (e.g. a certificate given by an industry association that the delivery process of
an operator can be trusted);
better service and more safeguards: the Green Paper examines the need for a new universal service obligation to address the
ubiquity, affordability and quality of parcel delivery services as well as ways to reply to concerns and consumer complaints as regards
deliveries.
(2) Controlling costs: consumers and e-retailers consider generally current price levels to be too high. By contrast, operators argue that they
already work with low margins and that sustainable prices are necessary to ensure their long-term economic viability. There is a need to
identify solutions to limit the impact on delivery prices of crossing border and to close the existing gap between the domestic and the
cross-border price, where it is not objectively justified.
Consumers often perceive the choice of delivery solutions to be very limited due to the lack of transparency of the market, and the actual state
or perceived state of competition on the market. Specific ex ante regulatory solutions could be envisaged to the benefit of consumers by
making delivery markets competitive on a sustainable basis.
(3) Improving interoperability along the delivery chain: more transparency and better partnerships are required in order to address the need of
eretailers, to better understand what constitutes best logistic and delivery practices and to effectively communicate the delivery options that are
available to consumers. Successful partnership within and between these two sectors will be decisive for the future of ecommerce.
The Commission services have already launched a number of demonstration actions aiming to improve the competitiveness of the transport
and logistics sector in Europe, through the smart use of information technologies and connect, in particular smaller enterprises to digital
transport and logistics value chains.
All interested parties are invited to submit their views in response to the consultation at the latest by 15 February 2013. As a follow up to this
Green Paper and on the basis of the responses received, the Commission will identify, in spring 2013, the set of actions to be taken to
complete the single market for parcels.

2013/2043(INI) - 14/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted the own-initiative report by Pablo ARIAS ECHEVERRÍA (EPP, ES)
on an integrated parcel delivery market for the growth of e-commerce in the EU.
The report noted that e-commerce is a channel with enormous potential to combat the economic and financial crisis, strengthen the single
market, and create economic growth and employment across the European Union. The Commissions communication on e-commerce and
online services of January 2012 identified the delivery of goods purchased online as one of the top five priorities for boosting e-commerce by
2015, and its importance has been reiterated by the Council and by Parliament. The EU e-commerce market grew by over 20% in 2012 and
cross-border e-commerce in particular is predicted to multiply by a factor of four.
Integrated delivery services in Europe: a pillar for the Digital Single Market: Members recalled that the parcel delivery market is undergoing
radical transformations, with new providers entering the market, investment oriented towards innovation, and new services emerging.
Therefore, efficient and reliable delivery services are a critical pillar of a real and effective digital single market , having a substantial impact in
terms of facilitating e-commerce and building trust between sellers and buyers. Delivery concerns (including product returns) and high delivery
costs are the top two concerns of consumers in relation to online shopping, contributing to low consumer confidence in cross-border
e-commerce.
Members noted cross-border weaknesses in competition between delivery operators in some Member States and deplored the lack of
transparency on the pricing conditions and performance of the services concerned.
Putting consumer interests at the heart of the delivery process: Members considered more transparency and better and more readily
comparable information on available delivery options, prices and conditions to be paramount for consumers, specifically with respect to the
conditions under which consumer orders are shipped and the procedures to follow in case of damage to or loss of goods or delay in their
delivery or return. They emphasised that it is necessary to promote measures aimed at ensuring consumer choice at the time of purchase.

In addition, the reliability of delivery services is crucial and it is essential to offer efficient systems that guarantee that parcels effectively reach
the requested destination within a reasonable timeframe.
The report pointed out that the high cost of cross-border delivery or delivery to remote areas or the outermost regions is one of the main
reasons for consumer dissatisfaction. More affordable delivery options for consumers and sellers, SMEs included, are imperative to ensure a
genuinely single market. Geographical coverage and accessibility to universal service for delivery of parcels in rural and remote areas should
be improved.
Members stressed the importance of consumers being properly informed on the applicable legislation in this sector. They proposed the
creation of a European network of national problem-solving centres like Solvit would help reassure consumers, as would an alert system like
RAPEX, which could warn consumers of sites found to be using fraudulent practices.
The Commission is called upon to:
adopt EU guidelines on minimum standards for comparison websites, structured around the core principles of transparency,
impartiality, quality, information and user-friendliness;
draw up joint delivery service quality indicators, enabling consumers to compare different offers more accurately.
Creating a level playing field for SMEs: SMEs seeking business opportunities across the EU are confronted with higher costs, greater
complexity and a lack of transparency when it comes to cross-border delivery. Prices for cross-border delivery are three to five times higher
than domestic prices. Effective, simple and affordable delivery systems are a key driver of the sustainability of the business models of SMEs
and their ability to supply products to customers.
Towards innovative and interoperable solutions for a truly European delivery market: the report highlighted the fragmentation of the European
postal sector into national networks with poor interoperability and the lack of integration of road, rail and water transport.
In this regard, it called on the Commission to:
continue to propose measures to encourage industry to improve interoperability and accelerate the roll-out of streamlined parcel
dispatch and collection processes aimed at reducing costs, increasing economies of scale for delivery operators;
explore further the potential of developing European standards to improve integrated tracking systems and to promote the quality,
reliability and sustainability of integrated logistic services applied to electronic commerce;
create platforms for cooperation and information exchange between delivery operators in order to promptly address the existing gaps
in the EU delivery market in terms of innovation, flexibility, stock management, transport, collection and return of parcels, while
respecting EU competition law, and discuss the possibility of infrastructure sharing by express and postal mail services to their mutual
advantage;
work together with business towards the adoption of European standards on addressing and labelling, as well as e-commerce-friendly
letter-box standards;
improve the interoperability of call-centres dedicated to consumer complaints;
explore the possibilities of creating a Pan-European Trustmark for e-Commerce,
Monitoring market development and improving regulatory oversight: the report noted that that any legislative measures should be carefully
assessed in advance in order to avoid impairing the dynamism of the parcel delivery market which should not be hampered by over-regulation.
The Commission is called upon to:
monitor the development of the market carefully, in order to identify any areas of potential market failure where further action may
become necessary in the future;
ensure that the existing regulatory framework is fully transposed, implemented and enforced, with particular attention to the Postal
Services Directive, EU competition law, the Directive on Alternative Dispute Resolution, and the Consumer Rights Directive, in
particular as regards the formal requirements for distance contracts;
submit the promised proposal on the introduction of a uniform VAT declaration as soon as possible;
Lastly, Members stressed that an optional European contract law for contracts between undertakings and consumers would result in
perceptible simplification and encourage more SMEs to send parcels internationally.

2013/2043(INI) - 04/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on an integrated parcel delivery market for the growth of e-commerce in the EU in response to
a European Commission Green Paper on the issue.
Parliament underlined that e-commerce is a channel with enormous potential to combat the economic and financial crisis, strengthen the
single market, and create economic growth and employment across the European Union. The Commissions communication on e-commerce
and online services of January 2012 and its December 2013 communication A roadmap for completing the single market for parcel delivery:
Build trust in delivery services and encourage online sales, identified the delivery of goods purchased online as one of the top five priorities for
boosting e-commerce by 2015, and its importance has been reiterated by the Council and by Parliament. The EU e-commerce market grew by
over 20% in 2012 and cross-border e-commerce in particular is predicted to multiply by a factor of four.
Integrated delivery services in Europe: a pillar for the Digital Single Market: Parliament recalled that the parcel delivery market is undergoing
radical transformations, with new providers entering the market, investment oriented towards innovation, and new services emerging.
Therefore, efficient and reliable delivery services are a critical pillar of a real and effective digital single market, having a substantial impact in
terms of facilitating e-commerce and building trust between sellers and buyers.
Parliament also noted that delivery concerns (including product returns) and high delivery costs are the top two concerns of consumers in
relation to online shopping, contributing to low consumer confidence in cross-border e-commerce. Parliament noted cross-border weaknesses
in competition between delivery operators in some Member States and deplored the lack of transparency on the pricing conditions and
performance of the services concerned.
Putting consumer interests at the heart of the delivery process: Parliament considered more transparency and better and more readily

comparable information on available delivery options, prices and conditions to be paramount for consumers, specifically with respect to the
conditions under which consumer orders are shipped and the procedures to follow in case of damage to or loss of goods or delay in their
delivery or return. It emphasised that it is necessary to promote measures aimed at ensuring consumer choice at the time of purchase. In this
regard, Parliament noted the significant gap between consumer expectations and the availability of convenient, innovative services such as
relay points or parcel kiosks, or terminals, round-the-clock services available at any time, track-and-trace solutions, consumer-friendly delivery
places and times, or easy return policies. It stressed that reliability of delivery services is crucial and that it is essential to offer efficient systems
that guarantee that parcels effectively reach the requested destination within a reasonable timeframe.
The resolution pointed out that the high cost of cross-border delivery or delivery to remote areas or the outermost regions is one of the main
reasons for consumer dissatisfaction. More affordable delivery options for consumers and sellers, SMEs included, are imperative to ensure a
genuinely single market. Geographical coverage and accessibility to universal service for delivery of parcels in rural and remote areas should
be improved.
Parliament also stressed the importance of consumers being properly informed on the applicable legislation in this sector. It proposed the
creation of a European network of national problem-solving centres like Solvit would help reassure consumers, as would an alert system like
RAPEX, which could warn consumers of sites found to be using fraudulent practices.
It called on the Commission to:
adopt EU guidelines on minimum standards for comparison websites, structured around the core principles of transparency,
impartiality, quality, information and user-friendliness;
draw up joint delivery service quality indicators, enabling consumers to compare different offers more accurately;
provide for a stable and coherent social dimension, where delivery services are subject to compliance with labour rights, terms of
employment and remuneration.
Creating a level playing field for SMEs: Parliament emphasised that SMEs seeking business opportunities across the EU are confronted with
higher costs, greater complexity and a lack of transparency when it comes to cross-border delivery. Prices for cross-border delivery are three
to five times higher than domestic prices. Effective, simple and affordable delivery systems are a key driver of the sustainability of the business
models of SMEs and their ability to supply products to customers.
Towards innovative and interoperable solutions for a truly European delivery market: the resolution highlighted the fragmentation of the
European postal sector into national networks with poor interoperability and the lack of integration of road, rail and water transport.
In this regard, it called on the Commission to:
continue to propose measures to encourage industry to improve interoperability and accelerate the roll-out of streamlined parcel
dispatch and collection processes aimed at reducing costs, increasing economies of scale for delivery operators;
explore further the potential of developing European standards to improve integrated tracking systems and to promote the quality,
reliability and sustainability of integrated logistic services applied to electronic commerce;
create platforms for cooperation and information exchange between delivery operators in order to promptly address the existing gaps
in the EU delivery market in terms of innovation, flexibility, stock management, transport, collection and return of parcels, while
respecting EU competition law, and discuss the possibility of infrastructure sharing by express and postal mail services to their mutual
advantage;
work together with business towards the adoption of European standards on addressing and labelling, as well as e-commerce-friendly
letter-box standards;
improve the interoperability of call-centres dedicated to consumer complaints;
explore the possibilities of creating a Pan-European Trustmark for e-Commerce.
Parliament stressed that any new measures taken should be subject to EU data protection legislation.
Monitoring market development and improving regulatory oversight: the resolution noted that that any legislative measures should be carefully
assessed in advance in order to avoid impairing the dynamism of the parcel delivery market which should not be hampered by over-regulation.
It called on the Commission to:
monitor the development of the market carefully, in order to identify any areas of potential market failure where further action may
become necessary in the future;
ensure that the existing regulatory framework is fully transposed, implemented and enforced, with particular attention to the Postal
Services Directive, EU competition law, the Directive on Alternative Dispute Resolution, and the Consumer Rights Directive, in
particular as regards the formal requirements for distance contracts;
submit the promised proposal on the introduction of a uniform VAT declaration as soon as possible.
Lastly, Parliament stressed that an optional European contract law for contracts between undertakings and consumers would result in
perceptible simplification and encourage more SMEs to send parcels internationally. It therefore called on the Member States to pursue the
current negotiations concerning the European Sales Law in a constructive spirit.

