Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2880(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2013 progress report on Serbia

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Serbia, from 06/2006

Key players
Committee responsible

European Parliament

AFET

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

ALDE KACIN Jelko

02/10/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE SCHÖPFLIN György
S&D KOPPA Maria Eleni
ECR TANNOCK Charles
GUE/NGL HADJIGEORGIOU
Takis

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

FÜLE Štefan

Key events
21/10/2013

Debate in Council

16/01/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

16/01/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

16/01/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T7-0039/2014

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2880(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/7/14141

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee
Motion for a resolution

PE522.953

13/11/2013

EP

B7-0006/2014

07/01/2014

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0039/2014

16/01/2014

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)320

26/05/2014

EP

Summary

2013/2880(RSP) - 16/01/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted 528 votes to 43, with 51 abstentions a resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the 2013
progress report on Serbia.
Following the European Council decision of 28 June 2013 to open accession negotiations with Serbia, Parliament looked forward to the formal
beginning of accession talks with Serbia which would take place at the first EU-Serbia intergovernmental conference (IGC) on 21 January
2014. This IGC was a historic step for Serbias European integration process and demonstrated the EUs commitment to the enlargement
process. Members called on the Serbian authorities to intensify EU-related reforms in the country in the follow-up to the conference, and
encouraged Serbia to continue with the systemic and socio-economic reforms that would allow it to implement the obligations of future
membership. They called for strong parliamentary oversight of the accession negotiation process.
Parliament urged the authorities to step up reform efforts in the areas of the judiciary, the fight against corruption, the public sector, civilian
control of defence and security sectors, energy policy with regard, in particular, to energy saving and renewables, media freedom, protection of
all minorities and vulnerable groups, as well as their fundamental rights, structural changes to the economy, social dialogue, improvement of
the business environment and sustainable management of natural resources.
It welcomes the entry into force of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement on 1 September 2013 and pointed out that it represented an
important step for Serbia`s European integration process and provided a general framework for Serbia and the EU to boost cooperation
regarding political criteria and approximation of the acquis. In addition, Members welcomed the adoption of the Strategy and the Action Plan
on the reform of the judiciary 2013-2018 and the National Anti-Corruption Strategy and the Action Plan for 2013-2018, reiterating that a strong
and independent judiciary is key to Serbias capacity to meet EU membership criteria.
Members also welcomed the First Agreement on the Principles of Normalisation reached in the high-level dialogue between the Prime
Ministers of Serbia and Kosovo on 19 April 2013, which opened the way for further steps in the European integration process of Serbia and
Kosovo. They encouraged the authorities to continue implementing all agreements reached so far in good faith and in a timely manner.
Parliament also welcomed the first-ever country-wide local elections in Kosovo on 3 November 2013 and in particular the visible voter turnout
in Serbian-dominated municipalities to the south of the Ibar river as well as the overall orderly conduct of the local elections in Kosovo, as
assessed in the preliminary statement of the EU-EOM as a crucial step towards the formation of the Community of Serbian Municipalities.
However, it strongly condemned the violence and persistent intimidation which occurred in the north Mitrovica and Zve?an municipalities and
urged the Serbian authorities to do their utmost to facilitate efforts to bring the perpetrators of violence to justice. Members welcomed the
stance taken by Serbian political leaders who had actively encouraged ethnic Serbians in Kosovo to participate in the elections, but noted at
the same time that Belgrade should not stifle political pluralism in the Serbian community in Kosovo by campaigning on behalf of any particular
party or electoral list. Parliament also asked the Serbian authorities in Belgrade, Mitrovica and south of the Ibar river to do more to increase
community interaction between Kosovo Serbs and Albanians. It appreciated the constructive approach of the Serbian Government to relations
with neighbouring countries, since enabled substantial progress to be made in achieving both regional cooperation and closer relations with
the EU.
Parliament went on to call on Serbia to intensify efforts to resolve all outstanding issues with Croatia, in particular the issues of missing
persons, border demarcation and the processing of war crimes, which would enable the removal of obstacles in the way of the lifting of mutual
suits on genocide before the International Court of Justice.
Authorities are urged again to continue with their efforts to remove heritage of communist secret services which would contribute to
democratisation of Serbia.
Parliament noted that corruption and organised crime were widespread in the region and represented an obstacle to Serbias democratic,
social and economic development. A regional strategy and enhanced cooperation between all the countries in the region were essential to
tackle these issues more effectively.
Parliament strongly reiterated its concerns about the decision of the Constitutional Court to repeal the guaranteed 22 competences of the
Autonomous Province of Vojvodina, leaving a worrying number of unresolved issues which need to be addressed.
It welcomed the adoption of the Anti-Discrimination Strategy and called for the proper implementation of Serbias Roma strategy and better
protection of womens rights and gender equality policies. Members strongly condemned the authorities decision to ban the planned
September 2013 Belgrade Pride Parade as in the previous two years, and called for political support to be given to human rights for LGBTI
persons at the highest political level.
Lastly, it reaffirmed its staunch support for visa liberalisation for the Western Balkan countries but at the same time was very concerned about
the rising numbers of false asylum seekers and called on Member States to designate Serbia as a country of safe origin.

