Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Decision

2013/0243(COD)

Procedure completed

Second European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership
Programme (EDCTP2): participation of the Union
See also 2011/0401(COD)
Subject
3.50.01.05 Research specific areas
4.20.02.06 Clinical practice and experiments
6.30.02 Financial and technical cooperation and assistance

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

Rapporteur

Appointed

ECR FORD Vicky

14/10/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE CARVALHO Maria Da
Graça
S&D RIERA MADURELL
Teresa
ALDE HALL Fiona
Verts/ALE RIVASI Michèle
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed
11/11/2013

DEVE

Development

PPE PONGA Maurice

BUDG

Budgets

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Research and Innovation

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
GEOGHEGAN-QUINN Máire

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
10/07/2013

Legislative proposal published

10/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

26/09/2013

Debate in Council

23/01/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

29/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

15/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

COM(2013)0498

Summary

A7-0064/2014

Summary

15/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0366/2014

06/05/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

15/05/2014

Final act signed

15/05/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

07/06/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0243(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Decision
See also 2011/0401(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 185; Treaty on the Functioning of
the EU TFEU 188-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ITRE/7/13414

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0498

10/07/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0253

10/07/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0254

10/07/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE522.973

12/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE522.974

05/12/2013

EP

PE521.824

18/12/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0064/2014

29/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0366/2014

15/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Committee opinion

DEVE

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Decision 2014/556

Summary

OJ L 169 07.06.2014, p. 0038 Summary

2013/0243(COD) - 10/07/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to enable the participation of the Union in a second European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership Programme
jointly undertaken by several Member States.
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership (EDCTP) was established in 2003 in response to the
global health crisis caused by the three main poverty-related diseases - HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis - and to the EUs commitment to
achieving the United Nations Millennium Development Goals by 2015. The first EDCTP programme (EDCTP-I 2003-2012) is now beyond its
active funding period.
EDCTP-I had major achievements and has so far developed eight improved medical treatments, in particular for new-borns, children or
pregnant/lactating women suffering from HIV/AIDS or malaria. It has resulted in the launch of the first four African Regional Networks of
Excellence promoting South-South cooperation on clinical research and more than 400 African researchers have been trained. It has also
contributed to establishing the Pan-African Clinical Trials Registry and the African Vaccine Regulators Forum.
Despite the results and impact of EDCTP so far, the health and socio-economic burden of poverty-related diseases persists and hinders the
sustainable development of developing countries, in particular in sub-Saharan Africa . More than one billion people, including 400 million
children, are suffering from one or more poverty-related diseases, including neglected infectious diseases such as sleeping sickness and worm
infections. HIV/AIDS alone kills an estimated 2 million people, while malaria and tuberculosis together kill an estimated 2.2 million people
annually.
Following the recommendations from the independent interim evaluation of EDCTP-I, the Belgian EU Council Presidency proposed, in
November 2010, the launch of a second EDCTP joint programme (EDCTP-2) with at least ten years duration (2014-2024). On 15 June 2010,
the European Parliament adopted a resolution on progress towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals (MDG) in which it asks the
Commission, the Member States and developing countries to address MDG 5 (on improving maternal health), MDG 4 (on child mortality) and
MDG 6 (on HIV/AIDS, malaria and tuberculosis) in a coherent and holistic way.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the external interim evaluations of the EDCTP-I and the impact assessment of the future EDCTP-2 programme call
for the programme to be continued but with the next programme lasting 10 years and covering a scope that extends to other poverty-related
diseases (beyond HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria) and to all phases of clinical development. The geographical focus should continue to be
on sub-Saharan Africa.
LEGAL BASIS: Articles 185 and Article 188(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: the proposal for a decision concerns the participation of the Union in a second European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials
Partnership Programme (EDCTP-2) jointly undertaken by Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Ireland, Greece, Spain, France, Italy, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, Sweden and the United Kingdom, as well as Switzerland and Norway.
EDCTP2 shall contribute to the reduction of the social and economic burden of poverty-related diseases in developing countries, in particular
in sub-Saharan Africa, by accelerating the clinical development of effective, safe and affordable medical interventions for poverty-related
diseases, in partnership with sub-Saharan Africa.
EDCTP-2 seeks to achieve the following specific objectives:
an increased number of new or improved medical interventions for HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other poverty-related
diseases, and by the end of the programme to have delivered (i) at least one new medical intervention; (ii) to have issued at least 30
guidelines for improved or extended use of existing medical interventions; and (iii) to have progressed the clinical development of at
least 20 candidate medical interventions;
strengthened cooperation with sub-Saharan African countries, in particular on building their capacity for conducting clinical trials;
better coordination, alignment and integration of relevant national programmes to increase the cost-effectiveness of European public
investments;
extended international cooperation with other public and private funders;
an increased impact due to effective cooperation with relevant European Union initiatives, including its development assistance.
EDCTP-2 has been conceived to complement the actions implemented under the European Development Funds and the Development
Cooperation Instruments, and to respond to the Unions commitment to the 2012 Rio+20 conference conclusions on developing and achieving
internationally agreed Sustainable Development Goals.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the Union contribution shall be up to EUR 683 million at current prices including EFTA contribution. The
envelope is in current prices. The Union contribution shall be made from the Health, demographic change and wellbeing challenge, DG
Research & Innovation envelope, as part of the implementation of Horizon 2020 The Framework Programme for Research and Innovation.
The maximum amount of Union contribution for administrative costs is up to EUR 41 million.

2013/0243(COD) - 29/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted the report by Vicky FORD (ECR, UK) on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the participation of the Union in a second European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials
Partnership Programme (EDCTP2) jointly undertaken by several Member States.

The parliamentary committee recommended that the position adopted by the European Parliament at first reading under the ordinary
legislative procedure should amend the Commissions proposal as follows:
Union's financial contribution: this shall be EUR 648.85 million (as opposed to EUR 683 million in the Commission proposal) matching the
contributions of the participating states. This contribution shall be paid from the appropriations in the general budget of the Union allocated to
the relevant parts of the Specific Programme implementing Horizon 2020 Framework Programmeand, in particular, from the appropriations
under the specific objective Health, demographic change and wellbeing.
Scope: Members suggested changing and extending the current scope of EDCTP1:
further strengthening the capabilities in developing countries for sound conduct and management of clinical trials, in particular, the role
and development of ethical review committees and the corresponding regulatory environment, the coordination, collaboration and,
where appropriate;
extending public-private partnerships (P2Ps) such as the Product Development Partnerships (PDPs), civil society, non-governmental
organisations and foundations;
making the rules of governance more clear and transparent.
Activities of the programme EDCTP2: the activities may include activities undertaken by public or private not-for-profit research organisations
included in the national programme activities of participating states.
These activities must also contribute to:
supporting clinical trial research and related activities on poverty-related diseases, in particular, HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis and
other poverty related and neglected diseases, devoting special attention to neglected diseases that are already affecting Sub-Saharan
Africa and Europe;
launching joint actions with industry and product development partnerships, aiming at reinforcing national health systems and
facilitating transfers of results to the population concerned;
assuring awareness, endorsement and acknowledgment of the EDCTP2 Programme and its activities through advocacy and
communication, not only at European Union level and in developing countries, but also at global level.
Conditions applicable to the Unions financial contribution: Members stressed the need to ensure that there be a strong coherence between the
activities of the P2Ps and the research priorities defined in the Horizon 2020 Framework Programme, such as open access, equality between
men and women and non-discrimination.
Rules for the participation and dissemination of results: an amendment sought to clearly establish that the Rules of Procedure apply and that
projects are integrated and selected via competitive calls.
Members requested that all calls and opportunities to participate be widely advertised, including on the Commission's Horizon 2020 website
which shall include a chapter dedicated to EDCTP2.
Audits: without prejudice to the independence or the role of the Court of Auditors of the European Union, the Commission may, in duly
reasoned cases and in consultation with the participating states, decide to carry out ex post audits of indirect activities itself.
Evaluation: the Commission shall organise an independent interim evaluation of the EDCTP2 Programme by 30 June 2017 and send that
report to the European Parliament and to the Council by 31 December 2017. The result of the independent interim evaluation of EDCTP2 shall
be taken into account in the interim evaluation of Horizon 2020.
In order to respond to unforeseen situations or to new developments and needs the Commission may, following the interim evaluation of
Horizon 2020, review, within the annual budgetary procedure, the budget of EDCTP2.

2013/0243(COD) - 15/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 646 votes to 13, with 12 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the participation of the Union in a second European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials
Partnership Programme (EDCTP2) jointly undertaken by several Member States.
Parliament adopted its position at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary were the result of
a compromise between Parliament and Council. They amend the Commissions proposal as follows:
Union financial contribution: as stated in the Commission proposal, this would be EUR 683 million, to equal the contributions of Participating
States.
It will be paid from the appropriations in the general budget of the Union allocated to the relevant parts of the Specific Programme
implementing Horizon 2020, and in particular from the appropriations under the specific objective "Health, demographic change and wellbeing
".
To take account of the duration of the Horizon 2020 Programme, all calls for proposals should be launched by 31 December 2020.
Scope: in the Communication of 27 February 2013 entitled "A decent life for all: ending poverty and giving the world a sustainable future", the
Commission reaffirmed its commitment to doing its utmost to help achieve the MDG by 2015, and pointed out that EU-funded research under
EDCTP1 had contributed to achieving the MDG.
Parliament and Council agreed to amend and extend the current scope of EDCTP1 by :
·

strengthening the capabilities in developing countries for the sound conduct and management of clinical trials, in particular the role
and development of ethical review committees and the corresponding regulatory environment, the coordination, collaboration and,
where appropriate, improving integration of European national programmes ;

·

extending collaboration with other major public and private partners, including the pharmaceutical industry, and public-private

partnerships such as the Product Development Partnerships ("PDPs"), civil society, non-governmental organisations and
foundations;
·

ensuring clear and transparent rules of governance.

EDCTP2 activities: activities may include activities undertaken by public or private not-for-profit research organisations, and new activities,
including calls for proposals managed by the EDCTP2-IS.
The programme should contribute to the reduction of the social and economic burden of poverty-related diseases in developing countries, and
in particular in sub-Saharan Africa, by accelerating the clinical development of effective, safe, accessible, suitable and affordable medical
interventions for such diseases, (such as drugs, microbicides or vaccines, including their delivery modality, follow up of treatment and
prevention in the affected population as well as medical diagnostics to detect and monitor disease/health evolution.)
The specific objectives will be, inter alia :
·

an increased number of new or improved medical interventions for HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other poverty-related
diseases, including neglected ones, and by the end of the programme to have delivered at least one new medical intervention,
issued approximately 30 guidelines, and have progressed the clinical development of approximately 20 candidate medical
interventions;

·

establish the research priorities in an objective-orientated manner in order to accelerate results and contribute to the control and
eradication of poverty-related diseases, including neglected ones;

·

extend international cooperation with other public and private partners to ensure that the impact of all research is maximised and that
synergies can be taken into consideration and achieve leveraging of resources and investments.

In order to reach the specific objectives, operational indicators and objectives would be monitored during the course of the EDCTP2
programme.
Agreements between the Union and the EDCTP2-IS : these must set out provisions for the publication of calls for proposals by EDCTP2, in
particular on the single portal for participants as well as through other Horizon 2020 electronic means of dissemination managed by the
Commission.
Audits: administrative burdens should be reduced for all parties. Double audits and disproportionate documentation and reporting should be
avoided.
Evaluation: the Commission must carry out, with the assistance of independent experts, an interim evaluation of the EDCTP2 Programme by
30 June 2017 and report to Parliament and Council by 31 December 2017. The results of the independent interim evaluation should be taken
into account in the interim evaluation of Horizon 2020.

2013/0243(COD) - 15/05/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to contribute to the reduction of the social and economic burden of poverty-related diseases in developing countries, and in
particular in sub-Saharan Africa.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision No 556/2014/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on the participation of the Union in a second
European and Developing Countries Clinical Trials Partnership Programme (EDCTP2) jointly undertaken by several Member States
CONTENT: this Decision is part of a package of four legal acts for a new generation of public -private partnerships that will allow large-scale,
long-term innovation projects to be carried out under the umbrella of Horizon 2020, the EU's research and innovation framework programme.
Three other public-public partnerships will be further developed on research programmes jointly undertaken by Member States with the
participation of the Union in the areas of:
·

a second research and development programme aimed at supporting research and development performing small and medium-sized
enterprises (Eurostars-2);

·

a programme on research and development on active and assisted living (AAL programme);

·

a European research and innovation programme on metrology (EMPIR) ;

Objective: the Decision establishes the rules and conditions for Union participation in the second European and Developing Countries Clinical
Trials Partnership Programme (the EDCTP2 Programme), jointly undertaken by Austria, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland,
Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and the United Kingdom.
Any Member State and any other country associated to Horizon 2020 may apply to join the programme, provided it fulfils the conditions
regarding financial contribution.
Programme objectives: EDCTP1 (2003-2012) produced major achievements, and developed eight improved medical treatments, in particular
for newborns, children and pregnant or breastfeeding women suffering from HIV/AIDS or malaria.
In extending the first programme, EDCTP-II will contribute to the reduction of the social and economic burden of poverty-related diseases in
developing countries, and in particular in sub-Saharan Africa, by accelerating the clinical development of effective, safe, accessible, suitable
and affordable medical interventions for poverty-related diseases in partnership with sub-Saharan countries.
The specific objectives are, inter alia:
·

an increased number of new or improved medical interventions for HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria and other poverty-related
diseases, including neglected ones, and by the end of the programme to have delivered at least one new medical intervention; to
have issued approximately 30 guidelines and approximately 20 candidate medical interventions;

·

strengthened cooperation with sub-Saharan African countries, in particular on building their capacity for conducting clinical trials in

compliance with fundamental ethical principles and relevant national, Union and international legislation;
·

better coordination, alignment and, where appropriate, integration of relevant national programmes to increase the cost-effectiveness
of European public investments;

·

extended international cooperation with other public and private partners to ensure that the impact of all research is maximised and
that synergies can be taken into consideration and achieve leveraging of resources and investments.

Union financial contribution: the Unions financial contribution, including EFTA appropriations, to the EDCTP2 Programme shall be up to
EUR 683 000 000 to equal the contributions of Participating States.
This contribution shall be paid from the appropriations allocated to the relevant parts of the Specific Programme implementing Horizon 2020,
and in particular from the appropriations under the specific objective Health, demographic change and wellbeing.
Implementation: the Participating States have agreed on the implementation structure for EDCTP2 Programme and have set up the
EDCTP2-Implementation Structure (EDCTP2-IS). The EDCTP2-IS should be the recipient of the Unions financial contribution and should
ensure the efficient implementation of the EDCTP2 Programme.
Calls for proposals should be launched at the latest by 31 December 2020. In duly justified cases they may be launched by 31 December
2021. Calls for proposals should also be published on the single portal for participants as well as through other Horizon 2020 electronic means
of dissemination managed by the Commission.
In order to protect the Unions financial interests, the Commission should have the right to reduce, suspend or terminate the Unions financial
contribution if the programme is implemented inadequately.
Evaluation: by 30 June 2017, the Commission shall carry out an interim evaluation of EDCTP-II with the help of independent experts. It shall
send that report to the European Parliament and to the Council by 31 December 2017. The result of the interim evaluation of the programme
shall be taken into account in the interim evaluation of Horizon 2020.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 27.06.2014.

