Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2075(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU competition policy. Annual report

Subject
2.60 Competition

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed

ALDE TREMOSA I BALCELLS 14/01/2013
Ramon
Shadow rapporteur
PPE SCHWAB Andreas
S&D SÁNCHEZ PRESEDO
Antolín
Verts/ALE EICKHOUT Bas
ECR EPPINK Derk Jan
GUE/NGL KLUTE Jürgen

Committee for opinion
EMPL

European Commission

Employment and Social Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

S&D CASTEX Françoise

17/04/2013

Commission DG

Commissioner

Competition

ALMUNIA Joaquín

Key events
10/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

17/10/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

29/10/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

10/12/2013

Debate in Parliament

11/12/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

11/12/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/12/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0357/2013

Summary

T7-0576/2013

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2075(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 132-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/7/12416

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE514.676

21/06/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE519.467

13/09/2013

EP

PE513.392

26/09/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0357/2013

29/10/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0576/2013

11/12/2013

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)260

06/05/2014

Committee opinion

EMPL

2013/2075(INI) - 29/10/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Ramon TREMOSA i BALCELLS (ALDE, ES) on the
Annual Report on EU Competition Policy.
Legitimacy and effectiveness of EU competition policy: Members stated that they should have legislative codecision powers in the
establishment of the competition policy framework. They regret the fact that Articles 103 and 109 of the TFEU provide only for consultation of
Parliament. They considered that this democratic deficit cannot be tolerated. It stressed the importance of treating Parliament and Council
equally as regards access to meetings and the provision of information for the preparation of legislation or soft law in the field of competition
policy, as provided for in the Framework Agreement.
On State aid:
- State aid to banks: the report acknowledged the important role played by State aid control since the beginning of the crisis as a restructuring
and resolution mechanism for distressed banks. The Commission should regularly provide detailed country- and organisation-specific statistics
on the State aid granted to the financial sector since the onset of the crisis.
- SMEs: the report called on the Commission to prioritise measures which recalibrate financial regulation in order to promote growth and ease
the funding crisis which SMEs are going through. Members deplored that SMEs undergoing adjustment programmes in the Member States
have difficulties in accessing credit from banks and are obliged to pay higher interest rates solely on account of their location in the eurozone,
creating distortions in the single market.
- Credit ratings: the Commission is asked to come forward with a proposal for the creation of a public rating agency which would be the only
agency allowed to assess sovereign debt inside European Union.
- State aid modernisation: Members considered that not only financial institutions but also industrial companies can become too big to fail. The
Commission is called upon to examine at what point companies become too big to fail and to consider which measures can be taken at
national or EU level to prevent companies becoming dependent on future government bailouts.
On transport, Members stated that the Commission should further strengthen the links between competition policy and transport policy in order
to improve the competitiveness of the European transport sector.
- Rail: the Commission is urged to:
complete the implementation of the Single European Railway Area, ensure full transparency in the flows of money between
infrastructure managers and railway undertakings, and verify that each Member State has a strong and independent national
regulator;
study the possibility of adopting a legislative proposal for a European regulatory body that would cooperate with existing national
regulators and act where they do not exist or, where appropriate, when they are inactive;
verify whether market barriers put in place by operators or technical aspects that differ from one Member State to another can be
considered infringements of competition rules.
- Aviation: the Commission is urged to:
revise the EU aviation and airport state aid guidelines by the end of 2013;
provide a justified overview to ascertain which air carriers behave in an anti-competitive manner;
investigate whether certain practices regarding the designation of specific hub airports are objectively justified and do not prejudice
competition against European consumers interests.
- Automotive sector: the report urged the Commission to:
ensure a fair balance of bargaining power between manufacturers and distributors;
insist on the need to develop principles of good conduct between manufacturers and dealers with regard to vertical agreements in the

motor vehicle sector.
As regards the energy sector, the report noted that a single market for energy will not only result in lower prices for consumers but also
increase the competitiveness of EU undertakings. It welcomed the implementation of the Commissions anti-monopoly measures in the energy
sector. The Commission is urged to pursue the full implementation of the internal energy market package, given that an open and competitive
single market in the energy sector has not yet been fully achieved.
The Commission should also be encouraged to develop a single European energy market by 2014. It should also ensure that energy
regulations and directives are transposed and applied correctly in all Member States. The Commission should be particularly vigilant when
prices reach above the EU-average. Members urged the Commission to closely monitor the level of competition since the three largest players
still represent about 75 % (electricity) and above 60 % (gas) of the market despite the gradual opening of the markets in the mid-1990s.
The report also emphasised the role of smart grids in allowing two-way communication between electricity producers and customers, and
pointed out that smart grids can allow consumers to observe and adapt their electricity use.
As regards payment services, Members highlighted that the European market for electronic payments is still fragmented and that competition
issues remain to be solved. They noted that this is harmful to competition in the single market, and affects SMEs in particular.
For telecommunications, Members urged the Commission to redouble its efforts in the telecommunications markets to help end their
fragmentation and prevent abuses of dominant positions by operators with power in those markets. They called on it to ensure that the
services provided by operators, and in particular internet access, are transparent, comparable and free of any contractual obstacles to
competition.
On new technologies and innovation, the report stressed the overriding importance of essential patents for innovation in the ICT sector and, in
this respect, called on the Commission to act swiftly to ensure that their holders grant fair, accessible and non-discriminatory licences to other
operators to enable continued technical progress and the development of new products to the benefit of consumers.
Members take the view that ensuring a level playing field for companies in the internal market also depends on combating social dumping,
which should be regarded as an anticompetitive practice. There is also need for structural reforms to include an overhaul of the taxation
system in order to combat fraud, tax evasion and tax havens.

2013/2075(INI) - 11/12/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 604 votes to 48 with 41 abstentions a resolution on the Annual Report on EU Competition Policy.
Members welcomed the 2012 report but regretted the fact that the Commission paid relatively little attention to unfair practices due to the
concentration of companies in the Single Market. They agreed with the Commission, that the crisis should not be used as a pretext for relaxing
the enforcement of competition rules. They took the view, however, that competition policy should be adjusted so as to better respond to the
challenges posed by globalisation, to include flexibility clauses.
Parliament noted that prices of products still vary from one Member State to another, e.g. as regards medicines, due to different agreements
between Member States and the pharmaceutical industry. It called on the Commission to look into this problem and to come up with proposals
to create a more transparent internal market.
Legitimacy and effectiveness of EU competition policy: Members stated that they should have legislative codecision powers in the
establishment of the competition policy framework. Regretting the fact that Articles 103 and 109 of the TFEU provide only for consultation of
Parliament, they suggested correcting this democratic deficit through interinstitutional arrangements in the field of competition policy in the next
Treaty change.
It stressed the importance of treating Parliament and Council equally as regards access to meetings and the provision of information for the
preparation of legislation or soft law in the field of competition policy, as provided for in the Framework Agreement.
Parliament called on the Commission to ensure that its fining and enforcement policy restores a balanced market and incentivises companies
to identify infringements internally and implement restorative action voluntarily.
State aid and effects on the real economy:
State aid to banks: Parliament acknowledged the important role played by State aid control since the beginning of the crisis as a restructuring
and resolution mechanism for distressed banks. The Commission should regularly provide detailed country- and organisation-specific statistics
on the State aid granted to the financial sector since the onset of the crisis.
SMEs: Parliament called on the Commission to prioritise measures which recalibrate financial regulation in order to promote growth and ease
the funding crisis which SMEs are going through. Members deplored that SMEs undergoing adjustment programmes in the Member States
have difficulties in accessing credit from banks and are obliged to pay higher interest rates solely on account of their location in the eurozone,
creating distortions in the single market.
State aid modernisation: Parliament called on the Commission to examine at what point companies become too big to fail and to consider
which measures can be taken at national or EU level to prevent companies becoming dependent on future government bailouts. It shared the
view that State aid procedures needed to be accelerated to allow more concentration on complicated cases with serious effects for competition
on the internal market.
Transport sector: Members stated that the Commission should further strengthen the links between competition policy and transport policy in
order to improve the competitiveness of the European transport sector. They called for open and fair competition in all transport modes, and
for public transport networks with the aim of improving services for customers.
Rail: Parliament urged the Commission to:
·

complete the implementation of the Single European Railway Area, and verify that each Member State has a strong and
independent national regulator;

·

study the possibility of adopting a legislative proposal for a European regulatory body that would cooperate with existing national
regulators and act where they do not exist or, where appropriate, when they are inactive;

·

verify whether market barriers put in place by operators or technical aspects that differ from one Member State to another can be
considered infringements of competition rules.

Aviation: the Commission is urged to:
revise the EU aviation and airport state aid guidelines by the end of 2013;
provide a justified overview to ascertain which air carriers behave in an anti-competitive manner;
investigate whether certain practices regarding the designation of specific hub airports based on the terms of the over 1000 bilateral
air services agreements signed by Member States with non-EU countries distort competition.
Automotive sector: Members urged the Commission to:
·

ensure a fair balance of bargaining power between manufacturers and distributors;

·

insist on the need to develop principles of good conduct between manufacturers and dealers with regard to vertical agreements in
the motor vehicle sector.

Energy sector: Parliament noted that a single market for energy will not only result in lower prices for consumers but also increase the
competitiveness of EU undertakings. It welcomed the implementation of the Commissions anti-monopoly measures in the energy sector. The
Commission is urged to pursue the full implementation of the internal energy market package , given that an open and competitive single
market in the energy sector has not yet been fully achieved.
The Commission should also be encouraged to develop a single European energy market by 2014. It should be particularly vigilant when
prices reach above the EU-average. Members urged the Commission to closely monitor the level of competition since the three largest players
still represent about 75 % (electricity) and above 60 % (gas) of the market despite the gradual opening of the markets in the mid-1990s.
The resolution also emphasised the role of smart grids, which can allow consumers to observe and adapt their electricity use.
Payment services: Members highlighted that the European market for electronic payments is still fragmented and that competition issues
remain to be solved. They note that late transposition of the Payments Directive ((2011/7/EU) was harmful to competition in the single market,
and affects SMEs in particular.
Telecommunications: Parliament urged the Commission to redouble its efforts in the telecommunications markets to help end their
fragmentation and prevent abuses of dominant positions by operators with power in those markets. It called on it to ensure that the services
provided by operators, and in particular internet access, are transparent, comparable and free of any contractual obstacles to competition.
New technologies and innovation: the resolution stressed the overriding importance of essential patents for innovation in the ICT sector and, in
this respect, called on the Commission to act swiftly to ensure that their holders grant fair, accessible and non-discriminatory licences to other
operators to enable continued technical progress and the development of new products to the benefit of consumers.
Members welcomed the progress made in the Commissions investigation of Googles anticompetitive practices. They urged the Commission to
act decisively on all concerns that have been identified, given Googles dominance, with a market share of over 90 % in most Member States.
Members took the view that ensuring a level playing field for companies in the internal market also depends on combating social dumping,
which should be regarded as an anticompetitive practice. There is also need for structural reforms to include an overhaul of the taxation
system in order to combat fraud, tax evasion and tax havens.

