Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2149(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Assessing and setting priorities for EU relations with the eastern partnership
countries

Subject
6.40.15 European neighbourhood policy
Geographical area
Azerbaijan
Ukraine
Moldova
Armenia
Belarus
Georgia

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

ECR KOWAL Paweł Robert

16/01/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE KOVATCHEV Andrey
S&D FLECKENSTEIN Knut
ALDE VAJGL Ivo
Verts/ALE SCHULZ Werner
GUE/NGL SCHOLZ Helmut
Committee for opinion
INTA

Rapporteur for opinion

International Trade

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Key events
12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

18/11/2013

Debate in Council

03/03/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

05/03/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

10/03/2014

Debate in Parliament

12/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/03/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2149(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A7-0157/2014

Summary

T7-0229/2014

Summary

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/7/13300

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE524.575

06/12/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE526.268

09/01/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE529.713

12/02/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0157/2014

05/03/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0229/2014

12/03/2014

EP

Summary

2013/2149(INI) - 05/03/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Pawe? Robert KOWAL (ECR, PL) on assessing and setting priorities for
EU relations with the Eastern Partnership countries.
Members recalled that the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), in particular the Eastern Partnership (EaP), is based on a community of
values and on a shared commitment to international law and fundamental values and aims extend, share and promote the values and the
principles upon which the EU is founded.
Successive EU enlargements have brought Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine and Belarus closer to the EU and that these
countries have deeply rooted European aspirations but are still undergoing difficult transformation processes towards a democratic system,
following decades of existence within the USSR.
Against this background, Members recalled the purpose of the EaP, which is the strengthening of the political, economic and cultural European
integration of the Eastern Partners. They expressed concern at the fact that the EaP as a whole has recently been seriously challenged by
third parties. They stressed that a European perspective, including the right to apply for membership under Article 49 of the Treaty on
European Union, could constitute a driving force for reforms in these countries and further strengthen their commitment to shared values and
principles such as democracy.
To give a new impetus to the Eastern Partnership, Members urged the EU to focus particularly on investing in immediate progress for citizens,
and in this context to establish visa-free regimes, to support youth and future leaders, and to devote greater attention to the empowerment of
civil society.
Vilnius Summit: Members believed that the outcome of the Vilnius Summit (November 2013) highlighted the need to enhance the strategic
character of the Eastern Partnership. They recommended, therefore, making flexible use of the tools at the EU's disposal, such as
macroeconomic assistance, easing of trade regimes, projects to enhance energy security and economic modernisation, and swift
implementation of visa liberalisation, in line with European values and interests. They called on the Commission to produce a green paper on
the post-Vilnius future of the Eastern Partnership.
Members welcomed, as a positive conclusion of the Vilnius summit, the initialling of the Association Agreements including a DCFTA with the
Republic of Moldova and Georgia. They regretted, however, that the outcome of the Vilnius summit did not match all expectations, and urged
that association agreements be swiftly signed and fully, rapidly and efficiently implemented, where applicable, with the partner countries.
Promoting exchanges, including with young people: Members noted in this connection that visa liberalisation is only one of a number of
processes aimed at bringing the societies closer together, and that more efforts are required in this area, particularly with regard to advancing
cooperation in the fields of education, science, culture and sport. In parallel, it highlighted the importance of investing in projects for youth and
future leaders, by making full use of the scholarship opportunities under the 'Erasmus +' programme to foster student and teacher exchanges
between EaP countries and the EU Member States. They invited the EU to increase its presence in the partner countries using more
interactive audiovisual means and social media in the respective local languages in order to reach all of society.
Energy issues: Members emphasised that the EU and the Eastern European partners face common political challenges with regard to
ensuring a reliable and safe energy supply. They underlined the importance of focusing more on the consolidation, improvement and efficiency
of the energy sector, as one of the main conditions for modernisation of the economy, strengthening energy security and competitiveness as
well as developing energy strategies in line with European Energy Community obligations and EU targets. Members called for the continuation
of gas and electricity market reforms and an adequate share of energy from renewable resources. They recognised that Eastern Partnership
countries' energy dependence on third countries and inadequate diversification of supply complicate the dynamics of European integration,
and called on the Commission and the Member States to fast-track projects that will help mitigate the situation. They also called on the
Commission and Council to make solidarity a fundamental principle of the Energy Community that is expected to be fully respected by all the
players active in the EU market.
Principle of differentiation: Members called for a more tailored approach to individual partner countries, also by better taking into account their

specific geopolitical vulnerabilities, implementing the principles of differentiation and more for more but with overall coordination. They are
convinced that the depth and scope of relations with each partner country should reflect its own European ambition, commitment to shared
values, and progress in aligning with EU legislation, assessed on the basis of clear benchmarks and on its own merits. They stated that the
Eastern Partnership architecture must be forward-looking and flexible - institutionally and conceptually in order to provide long-term incentives
for all partners, including the most advanced ones and thus further intensify relations with the EU. They further believed that the EaP should
not only focus on normative objectives but also reach the citizens through bottom-up approaches aimed at anchoring the benefits of
prospective association to public opinion.
Enlightening citizens about the EaP: Members are concerned about the lack of shared understanding of the essence of cooperation between
the EU and the EaP countries. They noted with concern that the EU is frequently seen as a donor and partner countries as beneficiaries, while
all should perform a double role. They warned that this kind of public perception might create unrealistic expectations among the societies of
the Eastern Partners. They regretted that the Member States often have divergent views and do not take a common position in relations with,
and developments in, EaP countries and called for a comprehensive review of the ENP, especially as regards the Eastern Neighbours, in the
light of recent events and also in terms of concrete and tangible measures, especially concerning EaP citizens.
Sectoral issues: other sectoral issues were highlighted such as:
easing trade barriers;
introducing individual targeted measures, travel bans and asset and property freezes directed at officials, legislators and their
business sponsors responsible for human rights violations,
sharing experiences of democratic reforms, drawing on the rich experience that European countries have in the process of
establishing and protecting democratic regimes based on respect for fundamental values and the rule of law;
strengthening measures aiming to protect human rights defenders;
frozen conflicts hamper the full development of the EaP and exacerbate hate, animosity and tensions among the peoples of several
EaP countries;
enhancing the participation and the role of civil society;
raising awareness of the complexity of the economic problems, promoting good governance in the financial sector and cooperation
with international financial institutions, adopting a sectoral approach, and encouraging legislation conducive to the development of the
SME sector;
strengthen the business dimension of the Eastern Partnership;
promoting joint activities with other strategic partners and cooperation in international and European organisations;
the need to promote social and cultural ties and cooperation in the field of research and innovation.
Pressure from Russia: Members deplored the continuous pressure exerted on the EaP countries, through economic, political and military tools,
by Russia, which perceives the strengthening of relations between the EU and the EaP countries as actions against its own interests. They
highlighted the need to address this in talks with Russia, as well as the need for a serious discussion among EU Member States on new ways
of constructively engaging Russia in initiatives that reflect common interests in the context of a secure, stable and prosperous European
neighbourhood, thus overcoming obsolete and dangerous thinking in terms of spheres of influence. The report called on the EU to take
concrete measures, including economic assistance, easing of trade regimes, projects to enhance energy security and economic
modernisation, in order to support the EaP countries in their European aspirations, and to adopt a
common strategy vis-à-vis Russia.
Lastly, Members stressed that while the EaP is being widely criticised, the success of the initiative is dependent on the engagement and
political will of both the EU and its Eastern neighbours. It noted, further, that it is essential that any criticism of the EaP should be constructive
in character and should be targeted on improving it rather than discrediting it.

2013/2149(INI) - 12/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 592 votes to 64, with 24 abstentions, a resolution on assessing and setting priorities for EU relations
with the Eastern Partnership countries.
Parliament recalled that the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), in particular the Eastern Partnership (EaP), is based on a community of
values and on a shared commitment to international law and fundamental values and aims extend, share and promote the values and the
principles upon which the EU is founded.
Successive EU enlargements have brought Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova, Ukraine and Belarus closer to the EU and that these
countries have deeply rooted European aspirations but are still undergoing difficult transformation processes towards a democratic system,
following decades of existence within the USSR.
Against this background, Parliament recalled the purpose of the EaP, which is the strengthening of the political, economic and cultural
European integration of the Eastern Partners. It expressed concern at the fact that the EaP as a whole has recently been seriously challenged
by third parties. It stressed that a European perspective, including the right to apply for membership under Article 49 of the Treaty on European
Union, could constitute a driving force for reforms in these countries and further strengthen their commitment to shared values and principles
such as democracy.
To give a new impetus to the Eastern Partnership, the resolution urged the EU to focus particularly on investing in immediate progress for
citizens, and in this context to establish visa-free regimes, to support youth and future leaders, and to devote greater attention to the
empowerment of civil society.
Vilnius Summit: Parliament believed that the outcome of the Vilnius Summit (November 2013) highlighted the need to enhance the strategic
character of the Eastern Partnership. It recommended, therefore, making flexible use of the tools at the EU's disposal, such as macroeconomic
assistance, easing of trade regimes, projects to enhance energy security and economic modernisation, and swift implementation of visa
liberalisation, in line with European values and interests. It called on the Commission to produce a green paper on the post-Vilnius future of the
Eastern Partnership.
Parliament also welcomed, as a positive conclusion of the Vilnius summit, the initialling of the Association Agreements including a DCFTA with

the Republic of Moldova and Georgia. However, it regretted that the outcome of the Vilnius summit did not match all expectations, and urged
that association agreements be swiftly signed and fully, rapidly and efficiently implemented, where applicable, with the partner countries.
Promoting exchanges, including with young people: Parliament recalled in this connection that visa liberalisation is only one of a number of
processes aimed at bringing the societies closer together, and that more efforts are required in this area, particularly with regard to advancing
cooperation in the fields of education, science, culture and sport. In parallel, it highlighted the importance of investing in projects for youth and
future leaders, by making full use of the scholarship opportunities under the 'Erasmus +' programme to foster student and teacher exchanges
between EaP countries and the EU Member States. Members invited the EU to increase its presence in the partner countries using more
interactive audiovisual means and social media in the respective local languages in order to reach all of society.
Energy issues: Parliament emphasised that the EU and the Eastern European partners face common political challenges with regard to
ensuring a reliable and safe energy supply. It underlined the importance of focusing more on the consolidation, improvement and efficiency of
the energy sector, as one of the main conditions for modernisation of the economy, strengthening energy security and competitiveness as well
as developing energy strategies in line with European Energy Community obligations and EU targets.
In an amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament recalled that the Energy Community Treaty lays the basis for establishing a fully integrated
regional energy market favouring growth, investment and a stable regulatory framework. It considered further progress in the integration of the
gas and electricity networks, including reverse-flows, in the region to be essential to achieving the goals of the Energy Community. It also
underlined the importance of focusing more on the consolidation, improvement and efficiency of the energy sector, as one of the main
conditions for modernisation of the economy, strengthening energy security and competitiveness as well as developing energy strategies in
line with European Energy Community obligations and EU targets. It called for the continuation of gas and electricity market reforms and an
adequate share of energy from renewable resources, in line with EU policies and standards.
Plenary recognised that Eastern Partnership countries' energy dependence on third countries and inadequate diversification of supply
complicate the dynamics of European integration and recalled that projects such as South Stream increase the EU's dependency on Russian
gas. Parliament called on the Commission and the Member States to fast-track projects that will help mitigate the situation.
Principle of differentiation: Parliament called for a more tailored approach to individual partner countries, also by better taking into account their
specific geopolitical vulnerabilities, implementing the principles of differentiation and more for more but with overall coordination. It is convinced
that the depth and scope of relations with each partner country should reflect its own European ambition, commitment to shared values, and
progress in aligning with EU legislation, assessed on the basis of clear benchmarks and on its own merits. It stated that the Eastern
Partnership architecture must be forward-looking and flexible - institutionally and conceptually in order to provide long-term incentives for all
partners, including the most advanced ones and thus further intensify relations with the EU. It further believed that the EaP should not only
focus on normative objectives but also reach the citizens through bottom-up approaches aimed at anchoring the benefits of prospective
association to public opinion.
Enhancing multilateralism: Parliament recognised the importance of inclusiveness in ensuring that the Partnership advances with the
participation of all six partners. It highlighted therefore, the need to further enhance the multilateral dimension, and encourages the holding of
regular meetings at ministerial level across the policy spectrum. It stressed, in this regard, as in the case of Ukraine, the importance of the
Council taking immediate action, including increased diplomatic pressure and the introduction of individual targeted measures, travel bans and
asset and property freezes directed at officials, legislators and their business sponsors responsible for human rights violations, and of stepping
up efforts to stop money laundering and tax evasion by companies and businesspeople of the country concerned in European banks.
Parliament recommended the further strengthening of the multilateral track of the Eastern Partnership in order to foster a climate of
cooperation, friendship and good neighbourly relations that will support the objectives of political association and particularly economic
integration and the encouragement of multilateral initiatives for cooperation and joint projects, as well as making further progress on
cross-border and regional cooperation, especially in areas such as transport, people-to-people contacts, the environment, border security, and
energy security. It stated that cooperation should nevertheless continue, where possible, on a bilateral basis between the EU, on the one side,
and the partner countries, on the other.
Enlightening citizens about the EaP: Parliament is concerned about the lack of shared understanding of the essence of cooperation between
the EU and the EaP countries. It noted with concern that the EU is frequently seen as a donor and partner countries as beneficiaries, while all
should perform a double role. It warned that this kind of public perception might create unrealistic expectations among the societies of the
Eastern Partners. It also regretted that the Member States often have divergent views and do not take a common position in relations with, and
developments in, EaP countries and called for a comprehensive review of the ENP, especially as regards the Eastern Neighbours, in the light
of recent events and also in terms of concrete and tangible measures, especially concerning EaP citizens.
Sectoral issues: other sectoral issues were highlighted such as:
easing trade barriers;
sharing experiences of democratic reforms, drawing on the rich experience that European countries have in the process of
establishing and protecting democratic regimes based on respect for fundamental values and the rule of law;
strengthening measures aiming to protect hum rights defenders;
frozen conflicts hamper the full development of the EaP and exacerbate hate, animosity and tensions among the peoples of several
EaP countries;
enhancing the participation and the role of civil society;
raising awareness of the complexity of the economic problems, promoting good governance in the financial sector and cooperation
with international financial institutions, adopting a sectoral approach, and encouraging legislation conducive to the development of the
SME sector;
strengthen the business dimension of the Eastern Partnership;
promoting joint activities with other strategic partners and cooperation in international and European organisations;
the need to promote social and cultural ties and cooperation in the field of research and innovation.
Pressure from Russia: Parliament stated that the countries concerned are still exposed to strong pressure and blackmail by third parties in
their sovereign decisions. It recalled that the EaP countries must be free and sovereign so as to fully exercise their right to determine their
future without being subjected to undue external pressure, threats or intimidation. For the Parliament, every country has the sovereign right to
join any international organisation or alliance and to define its own future without any external influence.
The resolution deplored the continuous pressure exerted on the EaP countries, through economic, political and military tools, by Russia, which

perceives the strengthening of relations between the EU and the EaP countries as actions against its own interests. It highlighted the need to
address this in talks with Russia, as well as the need for a serious discussion among EU Member States on new ways of constructively
engaging Russia in initiatives that reflect common interests in the context of a secure, stable and prosperous European neighbourhood, thus
overcoming obsolete and dangerous thinking in terms of spheres of influence. Parliament called on the EU to take concrete measures,
including economic assistance, easing of trade regimes, projects to enhance energy security and economic modernisation, in order to support
the EaP countries in their European aspirations, and to adopt a common strategy vis-à-vis Russia.
Criticisms of the EaP: Parliament stressed that, while the EaP is being widely criticised, the success of the initiative is dependent on the
engagement and political will of both the EU and its Eastern neighbours. Furthermore, it noted that it is essential that any criticism of the EaP
should be constructive in character and should be targeted on improving it rather than discrediting it.
In a recital, Parliament stressed the need for a real political will which has proven an insufficient driver of change and reforms. Recent
developments in the EaP countries, as well as the outcome of the Vilnius Summit, highlighted the need to strengthen the strategic character of
the Eastern Partnership and to make increased efforts to promote and increase awareness of the mutual benefits of the Association
Agreements.

