Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2106(IMM)

IMM - Members' immunity

Procedure completed

Request for the waiver of parliamentary immunity of Alexander Alvaro

Subject
8.40.01.03 Members' immunity

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed

Verts/ALE LICHTENBERGER 15/04/2013
Eva

Key events
29/05/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

03/06/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

11/06/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

11/06/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/06/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0188/2013

Summary

T7-0238/2013

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2106(IMM)

Procedure type

IMM - Members' immunity

Procedure subtype

Waiver of immunity

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 006

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/7/12836

Documentation gateway
Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0188/2013

03/06/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0238/2013

11/06/2013

EP

Summary

2013/2106(IMM) - 03/06/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs unanimously adopted the report by Eva LICHTENBERGER (Greens/EFA, AT) in which it recommends that
the European Parliament should waive the immunity of Alexander ALVARO (ADLE, DE).
The Cologne Public Prosecutors office in Germany intends to initiate investigation proceedings against Alexander ALVARO as it considers that
there are sufficient factual indications to suggest that Mr ALVARO is liable to prosecution for involuntary manslaughter under Section 222 of

the German Criminal Code and for causing bodily harm by negligence under Section 229 of the German Criminal Code. This follows a road
traffic accident which resulted in the death of one person and serious injuries sustained by three further people, including Mr ALVARO himself.
The Cologne public prosecutor has requested the waiver of Mr ALVAROs immunity in order to conduct investigations related specifically to Mr
ALVAROs involvement in the accident, in particular as regards the question whether it could have been avoided by Mr Alvaro. The public
prosecutor explains that investigations in this respect have not yet been conducted in view of Mr ALVAROs immunity and cannot be conducted
in the context of investigations against the other participants in the accident.
The committee considers that the alleged activities on the grounds of which the Cologne Chief Public Prosecutor intends to carry out an
investigation against Alexander ALVARO are manifestly not opinions expressed or votes cast by the Member in the performance of his duties
within the meaning of Article 8 of the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities. Article 9 of the Protocol is therefore the relevant provision for
assessing the request for waiver of Mr Alvaros immunity.
In the present case, the Committee has found no evidence of fumus persecutionis, i.e. a sufficiently serious and precise suspicion that the
case has been brought with the intention of causing political damage to the Member. The proceedings clearly have not been brought with the
sole aim of damaging the Members reputation. To what extent the handling of the case in detail by the German authorities might be subject to
criticism has no bearing on the question as to whether or not the Members immunity should be waived.
On the basis of the above considerations, after considering the reasons for and against waiving the Members immunity, the committee
recommended that the European Parliament should waive the parliamentary immunity of Alexander ALVARO.

2013/2106(IMM) - 11/06/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament decided to waive the immunity of Alexander ALVARO (ALDE, DE).
To recall, the Cologne Public Prosecutors office in Germany intends to initiate investigation proceedings against Alexander ALVARO as it
considers that there are sufficient factual indications to suggest that Mr ALVARO is liable to prosecution for involuntary manslaughter under
Section 222 of the German Criminal Code and for causing bodily harm by negligence under Section 229 of the German Criminal Code. This
follows a road traffic accident which resulted in the death of one person and serious injuries sustained by three further people, including Mr
ALVARO himself.
The Cologne public prosecutor has requested the waiver of Mr ALVAROs immunity in order to conduct investigations related specifically to Mr
ALVAROs involvement in the accident, in particular as regards the question whether it could have been avoided by Mr Alvaro. The public
prosecutor explains that investigations in this respect have not yet been conducted in view of Mr ALVAROs immunity and cannot be conducted
in the context of investigations against the other participants in the accident.
Parliament has found no evidence of fumus persecutionis, i.e. a sufficiently serious and precise suspicion that the case has been brought with
the intention of causing political damage to the Member. The proceedings clearly have not been brought with the sole aim of damaging the
Members reputation. To what extent the handling of the case in detail by the German authorities might be subject to criticism has no bearing
on the question as to whether or not the Members immunity should be waived.
Consequently, the European Parliament decided to waive the parliamentary immunity of Alexander ALVARO.

