Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2606(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on a cybersecurity strategy of the European Union: an open, safe
and secure cyberspace

Subject
3.30.07 Cybersecurity, cyberspace policy

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE SCHWAB Andreas

20/03/2013

ECR HARBOUR Malcolm

20/03/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D GARCÉS RAMÓN
Vicente Miguel
ALDE MANDERS Toine
Verts/ALE ENGSTRÖM
Christian
EFD SALVINI Matteo

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Communications Networks, Content and Technology KROES Neelie

Key events
25/06/2013

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

09/07/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

10/09/2013

Debate in Parliament

12/09/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

12/09/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/09/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T7-0376/2013

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2606(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

IMCO/7/12435

Summary

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE513.182

06/06/2013

EP

Motion for a resolution

B7-0386/2013

06/09/2013

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0376/2013

12/09/2013

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2013)816

19/12/2013

Summary

2013/2606(RSP) - 25/06/2013 Resolution/conclusions adopted by Council
On 7 February 2013, the Commission and the High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy issued a
Joint Communication to the European Parliament and the Council on the Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Safe and
Secure Cyberspace".
On this basis, the Council adopted a series of conclusions as follows:
Comprehensive approach: the Council regarded it essential and urgent to develop further and implement a comprehensive approach for EU
cyberspace policy that:
protects and promotes enjoyment of human rights and is grounded in the EUs fundamental values of democracy, human rights and
the rule of law,
advances European prosperity and the social and economic benefits of cyberspace including the Internet,
promotes effective and improved cyber security across the EU and beyond,
advances the efforts to bridge the global digital divide and promotes international cooperation in cybersecurity,
reflects the roles and rights of individual citizens, the private sector, and civil society in cyber issues.
In this context, the Council invited the Member States, the Commission and the High Representative to work together, respecting each others
areas of competence and the principle of subsidiarity, in response to the strategic objectives:
(1) Values: the Council invited Member States to take all reasonable steps to ensure that all EU citizens are able to access and enjoy the
benefits of the Internet.
(2) Prosperity: legislation in support of cybersecurity should foster innovation and growth according to the Council. The digital economy is a
major driver of growth, innovation and employment, and cybersecurity is key to protecting the digital economy. The Council also stated the
importance at national level of CIIP (Critical Information Infrastructure Protection).
(3) Cyber resilience: Member States are invited to take steps to ensure they reach an efficient national level of cybersecurity, by developing
and implementing the proper policies, organisational and operational capacities in order to protect information systems in cyberspace, in
particular those considered to be critical. The Council called for a series of measures such as: (i) support awareness-raising on the nature of
the threats and the fundamentals of good digital practices, at all levels; (ii) support the owners and providers of ICT systems in protecting their
own systems; (iii) foster pan-European cybersecurity cooperation, in particular by enhancing pan-European cybersecurity exercises; (iv)
strengthen and expand cooperation between Member States and EU users, building on existing structures; (v) take into account cybersecurity
issues in light of ongoing work on the solidarity clause.
(4) Cybercrime: the Council invited the Commission to support Member States, at their request, to identify gaps and strengthen their capability
to investigate and combat cybercrime. It suggested the use of the future Internal Security Fund (ISF), within its budget limit, to support relevant
authorities fighting cybercrime as well as the use of the Instrument for Stability (IfS) to develop the fight against cybercrime as well as
cybercriminal organisations. It also suggested continuing to facilitate cross-community cooperation, in particular by supporting Europol.
Other proposals have been made as regards the fight against cybercrime through the cooperation with third countries and the Common
Security and Defence Policy.
At the same time, the Council called upon the Commission and High Representative to produce a progress report on the cybersecurity
Strategy to be presented at the High Level Conference to be held in February 2014. It also proposed to hold regular meetings of the
competent Council preparatory bodies, (in particular the FoP on Cyber Issues) to assist in setting EU cyber priorities and strategic objectives
as part of a comprehensive policy framework.
Lastly, the Council invited the Commission to present the financing of the Strategy, taking into account the upcoming negotiations with the
European Parliament.

2013/2606(RSP) - 12/09/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 585 votes to 45 with 8 abstentions a resolution tabled by the Committee on the Internal Market and
Consumer Protection and the Committee on Foreign Affairs on a Cybersecurity Strategy of the European Union: An Open, Safe and Secure
Cyberspace, in response to the Joint Communication of 7 February 2013 by the Commission and the HR/VP on the subject.
It notes the growing cyber-challenges, in the form of increasingly sophisticated threats and attacks, as well as the need to ensure that
cyberspace remains open to free expression and to online services. Members stress the need for a strategic communication policy on EU
cyber-security, cyber-crisis situations, strategy reviews, public-private collaboration and alerts, and recommendations to the public.

Parliament reiterates its call on the Member States to adopt national cyber-security strategies that: (i) cover technical, coordination, human
resources and financial allocation aspects, (ii) include distinct rules on the benefits for and responsibilities of the private sector, in order to
guarantee their participation; (iii) provide for comprehensive risk management procedures as well as safeguard the regulatory environment. At
the same time it stresses that Member States should aim never to endanger citizens' rights and freedoms when developing responses to cyber
threats and attacks.
The resolution also emphasises the need for training programmes aimed at promoting awareness, among European citizens, in particular with
regard to personal security, as a part of a digital literacy curriculum from an early age.
Cyber-resilience: Parliament insists on the development of cyber-resilience for critical infrastructures, and recalls that the forthcoming
arrangements for the implementation of the Solidarity Clause (Article 222 TFEU) should take into consideration the risk of cyber-attack against
a Member State. The Commission and the HR are asked to take this risk into account in their joint integrated threat and risk assessment
reports to be issued as from 2015. Parliament welcomes the Commission's notion to create a risk-management culture with regard to
cyber-security, and urges Member States and Union institutions rapidly to include cyber-crisis management in their crisis management plans
and risk analyses. Private sector actors must also be encouraged to include cyber-crisis management in their management plans and risk
analyses, and to train their staff in cyber-security.
Members stress the need to establish a network of well functioning Computer Emergency and Response Teams (CERTs) operational on a
24/7 basis. They also support ENISA in exercising its duties with regard to network and information security, in particular by providing
guidance and by advising Member States.
Industrial and technological resources: Parliament calls on Union institutions and Member States to take the necessary measures to establish
a single market for cyber-security in which users and suppliers are able to make best use of the innovations, synergies and combined
expertise on offer, and which enables the entry of SMEs. Member States are asked to consider making joint investments in the European
cyber-security industry, much in the same way as has been done in other industries, such as the aviation sector.
Cybercrime: recalling that cybercrime costs the global economy almost EUR 295 billion each year, Parliament takes the view that, given the
borderless nature of cybercrime, joint efforts made, and expertise offered, at Union level, above the level of the individual Member States, are
particularly important, and that Eurojust, Europol's EC3, CERTs, and universities and research centres must therefore be provided with
adequate resources and capabilities to function properly as hubs for expertise, cooperation and information-sharing. Furthermore, citizens
should be able easily to access information on cyber-threats and how to fight them.
Lastly, all Member States should ratify the Council of Europe's Budapest Convention on Cybercrime.
Cyber-defence: the resolution calls on Member States to intensify their cooperation with the European Defence Agency (EDA) with a view to
developing proposals and initiatives for cyber-defence capabilities. It also calls on the VP/HR to include cyber-crisis management in crisis
management planning, and stresses the need for the Member States, in cooperation with the EDA, to develop plans to protect CSDP missions
and operations against cyber-attacks.
International policy: since international cooperation and dialogue play an essential role in creating trust and transparency, Parliament wants
the Commission and EEAS to set up a cyber-diplomacy team, whose responsibilities would include the promotion of dialogue with like-minded
countries and organisations. It calls on the VP/HR to mainstream the cyber-security dimension into the EU's external actions, especially in
relation to third countries. In this connection, the EU-US Working Group on Cybersecurity and Cybercrime should serve as an instrument for
the EU and the US to exchange best practices on cyber-security policies.
Implementation: Members ask the Commission to draw up a clear roadmap determining the timelines for the objectives to be delivered at
Union level under the cyber-security strategy and invite Member States to agree on a similar delivery plan for national activities under this
strategy.

