Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Decision

2013/0416(COD)

Procedure completed

Macro-financial assistance to Tunisia
See also 2016/0039(COD)
Subject
6.20.07 Macro-financial assistance to third countries
Geographical area
Tunisia

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
INTA

International Trade

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D MOREIRA Vital

17/12/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE BERRA Nora
ALDE DE SARNEZ Marielle
Verts/ALE KELLER Ska
ECR ZAHRADIL Jan
GUE/NGL MURPHY Paul
Committee for opinion
AFET

BUDG

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Budgets

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Economic and Financial Affairs

Appointed

Commissioner
REHN Olli

Key events
05/12/2013

Legislative proposal published

13/01/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

13/02/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

14/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

16/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

16/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

06/05/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

15/05/2014

Final act signed

COM(2013)0860

Summary

A7-0110/2014

Summary

T7-0439/2014

Summary

15/05/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

21/05/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0416(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Decision
See also 2016/0039(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 212

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

INTA/7/14777

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0860

05/12/2013

EC

Summary

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0498

05/12/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE526.226

13/01/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE527.982

27/01/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0110/2014

14/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T7-0439/2014

16/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Additional information
European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Decision 2014/534
OJ L 151 21.05.2014, p. 0009 Summary

2013/0416(COD) - 05/12/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to provide macro-financial assistance to the Republic of Tunisia for an amount of EUR 250 million.
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the Tunisian economy has been negatively affected by the domestic unrest that followed the 2011 revolution, regional
instability (notably the war in Libya). In particular, the fiscal and balance of payments situation has deteriorated quite markedly, generating
important financing needs.
At the same time, following the ousting of President Ben Ali on 14 January 2011, the country is taking significant steps towards the
establishment of democratic mechanisms. However, the political transition has not been without difficulties and episodes of instability.

Against this background, the Tunisian authorities reached in mid-April 2013 an agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) staff on
a 24-month Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) in the amount of USD 1.75 billion (400% of quota), which was approved by the IMF Board in June.
The aim of the SBA is to support the governments economic reform programme, reduce economic vulnerabilities and foster sustainable and
inclusive growth.
In this context, the Tunisian government requested Macro-Financial Assistance (MFA) from the EU in the amount of EUR 500 million on 28
August 2013, with a portion in the form of a grant. The European Commission submits to the European Parliament and the Council a proposal
to grant a MFA to the Republic of Tunisia amounting to a maximum of EUR 250 million. The assistance would take the form of medium-term
loans, with no grant component being envisaged given that Tunisia does not meet the eligibility criteria for the use of grants in MFA operations.
CONTENT: the proposal seeks to make available to Tunisia MFA for a total maximum amount of EUR 250 million in order to:
contribute to cover Tunisia's residual external financing needs in 2014-15;
support the fiscal consolidation effort and external stabilisation in the context of the IMF programme;
facilitate and encourage efforts of the authorities of Tunisia to implement measures identified under the EU-Tunisia ENP Action Plan,
and;
support structural reform efforts aimed at improving the overall macroeconomic management, strengthening economic governance
and transparency, and improving conditions for sustainable growth.
The full amount of the Union's macro-financial assistance shall be provided to Tunisia in the form of loans. The loans shall have a maximum
maturity of 15 years.
The Commission shall be empowered on behalf of the Union to borrow the necessary funds on the capital markets or from financial institutions
and to on-lend them to Tunisia.
Disbursement of assistance: the assistance is planned to be disbursed in three loan instalments:
- the disbursement of the first instalment (EUR 90 million) is expected to take place in mid-2014;
- the second instalment (EUR 80 million), conditional on a number of policy measures, could be disbursed towards the end of 2014;
- the third and last instalment (EUR 80 million) could be made available, provided the policy measures are met, during the first half of 2015.
Implementing conditions:
respects effective democratic mechanisms: a pre-condition for granting the Union's macro-financial assistance should be that Tunisia
respects effective democratic mechanisms, including a multi-party parliamentary system and the rule of law, and guarantees respect
for human rights. Both fulfilment of the preconditions and the achievement of those objectives should be regularly monitored by the
Commission;
release of the Union's macro-financial assistance: this shall be managed by the Commission in a manner consistent with the
agreements or understandings reached between the IMF and Tunisia;
implementing reforms: the Commission and the Tunisian authorities would agree on specific structural reform measures in a
Memorandum of Understanding. The Commission will target structural reforms aimed at improving the overall macroeconomic
management and the conditions for sustainable growth (e.g. targeting the transparency and efficiency of public finance management;
fiscal reforms; reforms to strengthen the social safety net; labour market reforms; and reforms to improve the regulatory framework for
trade and investment).
The proposed MFA would be made available for two and a half years, starting from the first day after the entry into force of the Memorandum
of Understanding.
Decreased assistance: where the financing needs of Tunisia decrease fundamentally during the period of the disbursement of the Union's
macro-financial assistance compared to the initial projections, the Commission, acting in accordance with the examination procedure, shall
reduce the amount of the assistance or suspend or cancel it.
Where the circumstances permit, and if Tunisia so requests, the Commission may take the steps necessary to ensure that an early repayment
clause is included in the loan terms and conditions and that it is matched by a corresponding clause in the terms and conditions of the
borrowing operations.
Implementing conditions: in order to ensure uniform conditions of implementation and for reasons of efficiency, the Commission should be
empowered to negotiate such conditions with the Tunisian authorities under the supervision of the committee of representatives of the Member
States in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. Under that Regulation, the advisory procedure should, as a general rule, apply in all
cases other than as provided for in that Regulation. Considering the potentially important impact of assistance of more than
EUR 90 million, it is appropriate that the examination procedure be used for operations above that threshold as well as to any reduction,
suspension or cancellation of the assistance.
Reports: by 30 June of each year, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report on the implementation
of this Decision in the preceding year, including an evaluation of that implementation.
Not later than two years after the expiry of the availability period, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council
an ex post evaluation report, assessing the results and efficiency of the completed Union's macro-financial assistance and the extent to which
it has contributed to the aims of the assistance.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the planned assistance would be provided in the form of a loan and should be financed through a borrowing
operation that the Commission will conduct on behalf of the EU. The budgetary costs of the assistance will correspond to the provisioning, at a
rate of 9%, of the amounts disbursed in the guarantee fund for external lending of the EU, from budget line 01 03 06 ("the provisioning of the
Guarantee Fund").
Assuming that the first and second loan disbursements will be made in 2014 for a total amount of EUR 170 million and the third loan
disbursement in 2015 for the amount of EUR 80 million, and according to the rules governing the guarantee fund mechanism, the provisioning
will take place in the 2016-17 budgets.

2013/0416(COD) - 14/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on International Trade adopted the report by Vital MOREIRA (S&D, PT) the proposal for a decision of the European
Parliament and of the Council providing macro-financial assistance to the Republic of Tunisia.
The committee recommended that Parliaments position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission position as follows:
Amount of macro-financial assistance: the amount of macro-financial assistance to be granted to Tunisia has been increased from EUR 250
million to EUR 300 million, with a view to supporting Tunisia's economic stabilisation and reforms.
Individual rights and freedoms: in a recital, it has been stipulated that the Constitution being drawn up by the National Constituent Assembly of
Tunisia includes some advances in the field of individual rights and freedoms and gender equality, which set Tunisia on the path towards
democracy and the rule of law.
It should be noted that the amendments contained in the text reflect the considerations and principles contained in that Joint Declaration;
and/or harmonise the wording of this proposal with the recitals and articles contained in the latest MFA decision (in particular Decision No
778/2013/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 August 2013 providing further macro-financial assistance to Georgia).

2013/0416(COD) - 16/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 488 votes to 51 with 17 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council providing macro-financial assistance to the Republic of Tunisia.
Parliament adopted its position at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary were the result of
a compromise between Parliament and Council. They amend the Commissions proposal as follows:
Amount of macro-financial assistance: the amount of macro-financial assistance to be granted to Tunisia has been increased from EUR 250
million to EUR 300 million, with a view to supporting Tunisia's economic stabilisation and reforms.
Individual rights and freedoms: in a recital, it was stipulated that the Constitution being drawn up by the National Constituent Assembly of
Tunisia included some advances in the field of individual rights and freedoms and gender equality, which set Tunisia on the path towards
democracy and the rule of law.
It should be noted that the amendments contained in the text reflect the considerations and principles contained in that Joint Declaration
and/or harmonise the wording of the proposal with the recitals and articles contained in the latest MFA decision (in particular Decision No
778/2013/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council providing further macro-financial assistance to Georgia).

2013/0416(COD) - 15/05/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to provide macro-financial assistance to the Republic of Tunisia for an amount of EUR 250 million.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Directive No 534/2014/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council providing macro-financial assistance to the
Republic of Tunisia.
CONTENT: the Decision seeks to make macro-financial assistance available to Tunisia of a maximum amount of EUR 300 million, with a view
to:
supporting Tunisia's economic stabilisation and reforms;
covering Tunisia's balance of payments needs as identified in the IMF programme.
The full amount of the Union's macro-financial assistance shall be provided to Tunisia in the form of loans. The loans shall have a maximum
maturity of 15 years.
The Commission shall be empowered on behalf of the Union to borrow the necessary funds on the capital markets or from financial institutions
and to on-lend them to Tunisia.
The Union's macro-financial assistance shall be made available for a period of two and a half years, starting from the first day after the entry
into force of the Memorandum of Understanding referred to in this Decision.
Democratic clause: a pre-condition for granting the Union's macro-financial assistance shall be that Tunisia respects effective democratic
mechanisms, including a multi-party parliamentary system and the rule of law, and guarantees respect for human rights. The Commission shall
monitor the fulfilment of this pre-condition throughout the life-cycle of the Union's macro-financial assistance.
Implementing conditions of the loan: the Commission, in accordance with the examination procedure, shall agree with the Tunisian authorities
on clearly defined economic policy and financial conditions, focusing on structural reforms and sound public finances, to which the Union's
macro-financial assistance is to be subject, to be laid down in a Memorandum of Understanding, which shall include a time-frame for the
fulfilment of those conditions. The economic policy and financial conditions set out in the Memorandum of Understanding shall be consistent
with the agreements or understandings, including the macro-economic adjustment and structural reform programmes implemented by Tunisia,
with the support of the IMF.
The detailed financial terms of the Union's macro-financial assistance shall be laid down in a Loan Agreement to be agreed between the
Commission and the Tunisian authorities. The Commission shall verify at regular intervals that the conditions continue to be met, including
whether the economic policies of Tunisia are in accordance with the objectives of the Union's macro-financial assistance. In so doing, the
Commission shall coordinate closely with the IMF and the World Bank and, where necessary, with the European Parliament and the Council.

Disbursement of assistance: the Union's macro-financial assistance shall be made available by the Commission in three loan instalments. The
size of each instalment shall be laid down in the Memorandum of Understanding.
Where the conditions as regards the release of the instalments are not met, the Commission shall temporarily suspend or cancel the
disbursement of the Union's macro-financial assistance and inform the European Parliament and the Council of the reasons for that
suspension or cancellation.
Decreased assistance: where the financing needs of Tunisia decrease fundamentally during the period of the disbursement of the Union's
macro-financial assistance compared to the initial projections, the Commission, acting in accordance with the examination procedure, shall
reduce the amount of the assistance or suspend or cancel it.
Where the circumstances permit, and if Tunisia so requests, the Commission may take the steps necessary to ensure that an early repayment
clause is included in the loan terms and conditions and that it is matched by a corresponding clause in the terms and conditions of the
borrowing operations.
Implementing conditions: in order to ensure uniform conditions of implementation and for reasons of efficiency, the Commission should be
empowered to negotiate such conditions with the Tunisian authorities under the supervision of the committee of representatives of the Member
States in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011. Under that Regulation, the advisory procedure should, as a general rule, apply in all
cases other than as provided for in that Regulation. Considering the potentially important impact of assistance of more than EUR 90 million, it
is appropriate that the examination procedure be used for operations above that threshold as well as to any reduction, suspension or
cancellation of the assistance.
Implementation and procedural rules:
Implementation and rules of procedure: in accordance with the examination procedure and the joint EP/Council declaration set out in the
Annex to the Decision granting additional macrofinancial assistance to Georgia (used as an overall general framework to grant Union
macrofinancial assistance), the Commission shall agree with the Tunisian authorities on clearly defined economic policy and financial
conditions, focusing on structural reforms and sound public finances, to which the Unions macro-financial assistance is to be subject.
Report: by 30 June of each year, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report on the implementation
of this Decision in the preceding year.
Not later than two years after the expiry of the availability period, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council
an ex post evaluation report, assessing the results and efficiency of the completed Union's macro-financial assistance and the extent to which
it has contributed to the aims of the assistance.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 24.05.2014.

