Procedure file
Basic information
2013/0321(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments
Decision

Procedure completed

EC/Switzerland Agreement: free movement of persons; accession of Croatia
to the EU. Protocol
See also 1999/0103(AVC)
Subject
2.20 Free movement of persons
6.40.01 Relations with EEA/EFTA countries
Geographical area
Switzerland

Key players
Committee responsible

European Parliament

EMPL

Rapporteur

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
03/09/2014

JAZŁOWIECKA Danuta
Shadow rapporteur

BRESSO Mercedes

ŽITŇANSKÁ Jana

HARKIN Marian

KARI Rina Ronja

ŽDANOKA Tatjana

AGEA Laura
Former committee responsible
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Appointed

Former committee for opinion
AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Council of the European Union

Key events
01/10/2013

Initial legislative proposal published

10/02/2014

Legislative proposal published

COM(2013)0673

Summary

14381/2013

Summary

11/04/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

21/06/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

27/06/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

14/09/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

14/09/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

08/11/2016

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

08/11/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

04/02/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0216/2016

Summary

T8-0339/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0321(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legislative instrument

Decision
See also 1999/0103(AVC)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 217; Treaty on the Functioning of
the EU TFEU 218-p6a

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/8/00244

Documentation gateway
Initial legislative proposal

COM(2013)0673

01/10/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

14382/2013

28/01/2014

CSL

Legislative proposal

14381/2013

10/02/2014

CSL

Amendments tabled in committee

PE584.029

31/05/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0216/2016

27/06/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0339/2016

14/09/2016

EP

Summary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Decision 2017/192
OJ L 031 04.02.2017, p. 0001 Summary

Summary

Summary

2013/0321(NLE) - 01/10/2013 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude a Protocol to the Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and
Switzerland, of the other, on the free movement of persons, to take account of the accession of Croatia to the European Union.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and Switzerland, of the other, on
the free movement of persons was signed on 21 June 1999 and entered into force on 1 June 2002.
It has since been extended twice, notably to states in eastern Europe: first of all to the Czech Republic, Estonia, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania,
Hungary, Malta, Poland, Slovenia and Slovakia (entry into force in 2006) and Bulgaria and Romania (entry into force in 2009). It is now
necessary to revise the 2002 Agreement to take account of Croatia?s accession to the EU on 1 July 2013.
On 24 September 2012, the Council authorised the Commission to open negotiations with Switzerland with a view to concluding the relevant
protocol. The negotiations were successfully concluded by the initialling of the Protocol.
It is now necessary to approve the Protocol on behalf of the European Union.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: no impact assessment was undertaken.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 217 in conjunction with Article 218(6)(a) and the second subparagraph of Article 218(8) of the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: with this proposed Decision, the Council is called upon to approve, on behalf of the Union, the Protocol to the Agreement between
the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and Switzerland of the other, on the free movement of persons to take
account of the accession of Croatia to the European Union.
Principles: the Protocol seeks to revise the 2002 Agreement in order to take into account the accession of Croatia as regards the free
movement of persons. It is provided that for a period of 7 years from the entry into force of the Protocol, Switzerland may limit the access of
Croatian citizens into the labour market (quotas, priority to local workers, control of working conditions and wages).
During the last two years of this transition period, the restrictions must be accepted by a mixed Switzerland-EU committee.
Labour market restrictions: Switzerland may maintain quantitative limits in respect of access by workers employed in Switzerland and for
self-employed persons who are nationals of Croatia for the following two categories of residence:
residence for a period of more than four months and less than one year;
residence for a period equal to, or exceeding, one year.
N.B.: the draft Protocol does not provide any restrictions on residence of less than four months.
The quantitative limits are set for each year of the Protocol?s seven year implementation. The quotas for each year are progressive so that
Switzerland may open gradually, year by year, its labour market to Croatian workers.
Regular labour market and controls: further provisions are laid down to enable Switzerland and Croatia to maintain the controls on the priority
of workers integrated into the regular labour market and the wage and working conditions applicable to nationals of the other Contracting Party
concerned. The same controls may be maintained for persons providing services in the following sectors:
horticulture;
construction, including related branches;
security activities;
industrial cleaning.
Review of the Protocol: before the end of the transitional period, the Joint Committee shall review the functioning of the transitional period
applied to nationals of Croatia on the basis of a report from Switzerland. Upon completion of the review, Switzerland shall notify the Joint
Committee whether it will continue applying quantitative limits to workers employed in Switzerland. Switzerland may continue to apply such
measures for five years after the entry into force of the aforementioned Protocol.
Croatia should be entitled to introduce the same quantitative limits for Swiss nationals for the same periods.
Safeguard clause: at the end of the 7-year period of the Protocol, Switzerland shall have the opportunity for a further three years, to unilaterally
activate the safeguard clause against Croatian citizens with a view to limiting the number of residence permits to allow them to work. Specific
provisions are laid down to this effect.
Duration of the transitional period: the total transition period with safeguard clause ? if applicable ? is 10 years from the date of entry into force
of the Protocol.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the proposal has no impact on the EU budget.

2013/0321(NLE) - 10/02/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude a Protocol to the Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and
Switzerland, of the other, on the free movement of persons, regarding the participation of Croatia as a Contracting Party, following its
accession to the European Union.

PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the Protocol to the Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and Switzerland, of
the other, on the free movement of persons to take account of the accession of Croatia to the European Union was signed subject to its
conclusion at a later date.
The Protocol should now be concluded on behalf of the European Union and its Member States.
CONTENT: the draft Decision seeks the approval by the Council, on behalf of the European Union and its Member States, of the Protocol to
the Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and Switzerland, of the other, on the free movement
of persons, regarding Croatia's participation as a Contracting Party following its accession to the European Union.
For details about the content of the Protocol, please refer to the summary of the Commissions initial legislative proposal of 1.10.2013.

2013/0321(NLE) - 27/06/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the report by Danuta JAZ?OWIECKA (EPP, PL) on the draft Council decision on
the conclusion of a Protocol to the Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss
Confederation, of the other, on the free movement of persons, regarding the participation of Croatia as a Contracting Party, following its
accession to the European Union.
The committee recommended the European Parliament to give its consent to the conclusion of the Protocol.
The Protocol provided that for a period of 7 years from the entry into force of the Protocol, Switzerland may limit the access of Croatian citizens
into the labour market (quotas, priority to local workers, control of working conditions and wages).
Further provisions are laid down to enable Switzerland and Croatia to maintain the controls on the priority of workers integrated into the regular
labour market and the wage and working conditions applicable to nationals of the other Contracting Party concerned.
Croatia should be entitled to introduce the same quantitative limits for Swiss nationals for the same periods. An important final safeguard
clause states that at the end of the 7-year period of the Protocol, Switzerland shall have the opportunity for a further three years, to unilaterally
activate the safeguard clause against Croatian citizens with a view to limiting the number of residence permits to allow them to work.
The total transition period with safeguard clause if applicable is thus of 10 years from the date of entry into force of the Protocol.
The committee recalled that Switzerland benefits comparably to the EU Member States from the internal market and its enlargements. It is
beyond doubt that both Croatia and Switzerland will benefit from the signature of the present Protocol, politically, economically and culturally
profiting from a larger internal market where the free movement is a crucial element.
Therefore, the committee supports the Protocol to the agreement and recommends it be given a consent.

2013/0321(NLE) - 14/09/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 602 votes to 63, with 29 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion of a Protocol to the Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss
Confederation, of the other, on the free movement of persons, regarding the participation of Croatia as a Contracting Party, following its
accession to the European Union.
Parliament gave its consent to the conclusion of the Protocol.
The Protocol provided that for a period of 7 years from the entry into force of the Protocol, Switzerland may limit the access of Croatian citizens
into the labour market (quotas, priority to local workers, control of working conditions and wages).
Further provisions are laid down to enable Switzerland and Croatia to maintain the controls on the priority of workers integrated into the regular
labour market and the wage and working conditions applicable to nationals of the other Contracting Party concerned.
Croatia should be entitled to introduce the same quantitative limits for Swiss nationals for the same periods.

2013/0321(NLE) - 08/11/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to conclude a Protocol to the Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and
Switzerland, of the other part, on the free movement of persons, to take account of the accession of Croatia to the European Union.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2017/192 on the conclusion of a Protocol to the Agreement between the European
Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Swiss Confederation, of the other, on the free movement of persons, regarding the
participation of the Republic of Croatia as a Contracting Party, following its accession to the European Union
BACKGROUND: The Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and Switzerland, of the other
part, on the free movement of persons was signed on 21 June 1999 and entered into force on 1 June 2002.
The agreement has been adapted for the first time in order to take account of the participation, as contracting parties, in the Czech Republic,
Estonia, Cyprus, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Malta, Poland, Slovenia and Slovakia, following their accession to the European Union (entry into
force in 2006) and then a second time to take account of the accession of Bulgaria and Romania (entry into force in 2009).

It is now appropriate to adapt the 2002 Agreement to the accession of Croatia to the European Union on 1 July 2013.
CONTENT: With this Decision, the Protocol to the Agreement between the European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and
Switzerland, of the other part, on the free movement of persons, concerning the participation of Croatia, as a contracting party, following its
accession to the European Union, is hereby approved on behalf of the European Union and its Member States.
Objective: The Protocol seeks to adapt the 2002 Agreement in order to take account of the accession of Croatia to the free movement of
persons.
For a period of seven years from the date of entry into force of the Protocol, Switzerland may restrict the access of Croatian citizens to its
labour market (quotas, priority to local workers, control of working conditions and wages).
During the last two years of this transitional period, the continuation of these restrictions will be approved by a Joint Switzerland-EU
Committee.
Restrictions on the labour market: Restrictions on the access of Croatian nationals to the Swiss labour market for employed and self-employed
workers have been provided for in accordance with the quotas set out in the draft protocol.
The Protocol does not provide for any quantitative limitation for stays of under 4 months.
The quantitative limits are set for each year of application of the Protocol over the 7 years of its application. The quotas set for each year are
progressive so that Switzerland can gradually open its labour market to Croatian workers year by year .
Control of access to the regular labour market: there are provisions for authorising the Parties to maintain controls on the integration of
workers into the parties regular labour market and on the working conditions and wages of workers.
Controls could also be applied for service providers operating in the following sectors:
·

horticulture

·

construction,

·

security,

·

industrial cleaning.

Examination of the Protocol: before the end of the period of validity of the Protocol, the Joint Committee provided for in the original agreement
should examine the operation of the Protocol, on the basis of a report prepared by Switzerland. Taking this into account, Switzerland will have
to notify the Joint Committee if it intends to continue to apply quantitative limits to Croatian workers employed in Switzerland for new periods
as detailed in the Protocol.
Croatia may also introduce equivalent quantitative limits for Swiss nationals during the same periods.
Safeguard clause: at the end of the 7-year period of application of the Protocol, Switzerland will have the possibility, for a further 3 years, to
invoke unilaterally a safeguard clause with regard to Croatian citizens with a view to limiting the number of residence permits granted to enable
them to work. Specific conditions are provided for in the Protocol.
Duration of the transitional period: the duration of the transitional regime vis-à-vis Croatia shall cover a period of 10 years in all cases from the
entry into force of the Protocol.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: the Decision enters into force on 8.11.2016.

