Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0181(COD)

Awaiting committee decision

Statistics for the macroeconomic imbalances procedure
See also Regulation (EU) No 1176/2011 2010/0281(COD)
Subject
5.10.01 Convergence of economic policies, public deficit, interest rates
8.60 European statistical legislation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
22/07/2014

LUCKE Bernd
Shadow rapporteur

MALETIĆ Ivana

BAYET Hugues

TREMOSA I
BALCELLS Ramon

VIEGAS Miguel

LAMBERTS Philippe
Former committee responsible
ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Committee for opinion
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

REGI

Regional Development

ECR EPPINK Derk Jan

18/06/2013

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Former committee for opinion
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

S&D BERÈS Pervenche

03/07/2013

REGI

Regional Development

ALDE GODMANIS Ivars

20/06/2013

ALDE MĂNESCU Ramona
Nicole

20/06/2013

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Economic and Financial Affairs

Commissioner
MOSCOVICI Pierre

Key events
07/06/2013

Legislative proposal published

13/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

COM(2013)0342

Summary

24/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

11/03/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

11/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/03/2014

Matter referred back to the committee
responsible

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

25/05/2016

Debate in Council

A7-0143/2014

Summary

T7-0181/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0181(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
See also Regulation (EU) No 1176/2011 2010/0281(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 338-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Awaiting committee decision

Committee dossier

ECON/8/00179

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0342

07/06/2013

EC

Summary

CON/2013/0072
OJ C 014 18.01.2014, p. 0005

10/10/2013

ECB

Summary

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0143/2014

24/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0181/2014

11/03/2014

EP

Summary

European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

2013/0181(COD) - 07/06/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to set in place a common and reliable procedure for the provision of relevant data for the macroeconomic imbalances procedure
(MIP).
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: this initiative fits into the political context of improving of the economic governance of the Union which requires an ability to
detect, prevent and correct macroeconomic imbalances.

For this purpose, Regulation (EU) No 1176/2011 set out detailed rules for the early detection, prevention and correction of macroeconomic
imbalances which emerge or persist in the euro area and the EU (the Macroeconomic Imbalances Procedure or MIP).
The MIP and its scoreboard of indicators require efficient statistical quality monitoring of the indicators and of the underlying statistical
information.
The ECOFIN Councils of 8 November 2011 and 13 November 2012 underlined the importance for the credibility of the MIP of having timely
statistics of the highest quality for inclusion in the scoreboard and invited the Commission (Eurostat) to take all necessary initiatives to assure
a reliable procedure for the compilation of these statistics.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: no impact assessment was undertaken. The successful implementation of this Regulation will mainly require close
cooperation from Member States statistical authorities with a view to improving the quality of the MIP relevant data and the underlying
statistical information. No additional data collection mechanisms are foreseen.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 338(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: the proposed Regulation sets out the rules governing the way the statistical data that are relevant for the macroeconomic
imbalances procedure are provided. These rules relate to the compilation, quality monitoring and release of the indicators in the
macroeconomic imbalances procedure scoreboard.
This Regulation will cover the monitoring of data quality; the compilation and transmission of data and metadata, and the
reporting/communication on the data to the different stakeholders and to the European Parliament and the Council.
The Regulation will introduce new tasks for the Commission (Eurostat) on the following main aspects:
validating the quality of the MIP relevant data in relation to quality criteria that either exist already or will be further specified in certain
areas;
structuring, collecting and analysing Member States compilation sources and methods; and
developing and implementing an improvement action plan.
The work on the MIP relevant data will need to be supported by good website publication and dissemination arrangements, as well as release
actions.
The implementation of the proposed Regulation with a view to providing high quality statistics will require close cooperation with Member
States statistical authorities covering both the scoreboard data and the underlying statistical information.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: additional resources will be necessary in order to assure the high quality requirements for the MIP-relevant data.
This has meant introducing a staff bid for 21 posts (12 posts and 9 external personnel) to cover the tasks required of the Commission
(Eurostat).
The overall impact on the EU budget is estimated at EUR 9.788 million for the period 2013-2016.
Moreover, the Commission will need assistance from Member States experts in the context of the MIP missions covered by this proposal. At
this stage, it is difficult to give a precise estimate of costs, in particular because all possible synergies will be sought with Eurostat missions in
related areas.

2013/0181(COD) - 10/10/2013 European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report
Opinion of the European Central Bank on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the provision and
quality of statistics for the macroeconomic imbalances procedure.
The ECB underlines the importance of ensuring reliable statistical data for the macroeconomic imbalances procedure (MIP) established under
Regulation (EU) No 1176/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the prevention and correction of macro-economic
imbalances.
Within this context, the Commission has started a legislative initiative to assure the statistical quality of the MIP. The initiative aims to secure
that the compilation, monitoring and release of the macro-economic and financial statistics relevant for the elaboration of MIP scoreboard
indicators is conducted in a manner that delivers sound and independent figures.
The proposed regulation provides that the Commission may carry out missions to investigate any problems and propose that the Council
imposes fines on Member States that misrepresent MIP relevant data intentionally or by serious negligence.
European Statistical System (ESS) and European System of Central Banks (ESCB) quality assurance of the statistics underlying the MIP: the
quality assurance of macroeconomic and financial statistics is secured by the ESS and the ESCB as producers of European statistics.
The ECB notes that the quality framework suggested by the proposed regulation targets statistical data for the MIP, while neglecting other
economic and monetary policy purposes. It thereby seems to establish parallel quality assessments instead of integrating the statistical data
for the MIP into the existing quality frameworks.
Consequently, the ECB recommends that rather than introducing a new quality assurance framework by means of the proposed regulation, the
already existing quality assurance arrangements of the ESS and the ESCB should also be applied to statistical data for the MIP.
Enhancing quality assurance of statistics through a closer cooperation of the ESS and ESCB: since the responsibilities for the production of
the macroeconomic and financial statistics underlying the indicators for the MIP are shared between the ESS and the ESCB, close cooperation
between the two systems is necessary to assure their quality.
The ECB points to the work initiated by the Committee on Monetary, Financial and Balance of Payments Statistics (CMFB), with a view to
assessing the quality and comparability of the MIP relevant data under the current statistical legal framework. Once the work of the CMFB has
progressed, practical arrangements for the cooperation between the ESS and the ESCB on quality assurance frameworks for statistical data
for the MIP could be laid down.

2013/0181(COD) - 24/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the report by Derk Jan EPPINK (ECR, BE) on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the provision and quality of statistics for the macroeconomic imbalances procedure (MIP).
The parliamentary committee recommended that the position of the European Parliament adopted at first reading under the ordinary legislative
procedure modify the Commission proposal as follows.
Quality of data: Members underlined that reliable, accurate and useful statistical data are essential for effective surveillance of macroeconomic
imbalances. To guarantee this goal, the independence of Eurostat should be strengthened in line with the European Parliament's proposals for
the revision of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Quality assurance procedures: the procedures put in place in the framework of this Regulation shall build on and take into consideration best
practices in existing quality assurance procedures. They shall not result in the duplication of quality assurance efforts nor parallel data series.
Transmission of data to the Commission: in order to clarify the process for transmission, reporting and communication of the data, Members
suggested including (i) a cut-off date when the Commission (Eurostat) would extract the time series needed for the MIP Scoreboard and (ii) a
publication date for the news release of the MIP Scoreboard indicators.
Dialogue missions to Member States: in order to improve the effectiveness of the proposed procedures, the report suggested: i) to call the
missions dialogue missionsin the Member States; ii) to clarify that the aim of these missions is to investigate in depth the quality of the data; iii)
to ensure the right selection and distribution as well as a rotation of experts in good time, and iv) to provide that the general provision in
relation to the dialogue missions does not apply where the sectoral legislation already foresees these visits.
Provision of data by the Commission: when the Commission (Eurostat) expresses a reservation on the quality of a Member State's MIP
relevant data, the Member State concerned shall be given the opportunity to defend its position.
Sanctions: Members suggested that the Council, acting on the recommendations of the Commission, might decide, via a two-step procedure:
1) to impose an interest-bearing deposit and subsequently, if the Commission assesses that the Member States has not complied with the
corrective actions, as a last resort measure, 2) inflict a fine on a Member State that has acted intentionally to misrepresent the data or in the
case of serious negligence which has impacted on the ability of the Commission to make a true and fair assessment.
The Member State shall report to the Commission within a specified deadline on the corrective actions necessary to address and remedy the
misrepresentation or serious negligence as well as to prevent similar circumstances to arise in future. The report shall be made public.
The interest-bearing deposit shall be effective, dissuasive and proportionate to the nature, seriousness and duration of the misrepresentation
and the amount of the interest bearing shall not exceed 0.05% of the GDP in the preceding year of the Member State concerned.
Role of Parliament: the Commission shall inform the competent Committee of the European Parliament of any investigation or
recommendation made pursuant to this regulation. The competent committee of the European Parliament may offer a Member State which is
the subject of a Commission recommendation an opportunity to participate in an exchange of views.
Report: the Commission (Eurostat) shall report at least annually to the European Parliament and to the Council on the activities carried out by
the Commission (Eurostat) for the purpose of implementing this Regulation in the context of the European Semester.

2013/0181(COD) - 11/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st reading/single
reading
The European Parliament adopted by 614 votes to 56 with 6 abstentions, certain amendments to the proposal for a regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the provision and quality of statistics for the macroeconomic imbalances procedure (MIP).
The matter had been referred back to the competent committee. The vote had been postponed to a later session.
The main amendments adopted in plenary were as follows:
Quality of data: Parliament underlined that reliable, accurate and useful statistical data are essential for effective surveillance of
macroeconomic imbalances. To guarantee this goal, the independence of Eurostat should be strengthened in line with the European
Parliament's proposals for the revision of Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
Quality assurance procedures: the procedures put in place in the framework of this Regulation shall build on and take into consideration best
practices in existing quality assurance procedures. They shall not result in the duplication of quality assurance efforts nor parallel data series.
Transmission of data to the Commission: in order to clarify the process for transmission, reporting and communication of the data, Members
suggested including a cut-off date for the extraction by the Commission (Eurostat) of the MIP relevant data to compute for each Member State
the MIP scoreboard indicators and set up a reference database on MIP relevant data.
The Commission (Eurostat) shall make public the MIP relevant data used for the purposes of the macroeconomic imbalances procedure. It
shall determine the publication date for the news release and communicate it to Member States within ten working days after the cut-off date
Dialogue missions to Member States: in order to improve the effectiveness of the proposed procedures, Parliament wanted: i) to call the
missions dialogue missions» in the Member States; ii) to clarify that the aim of these missions is to investigate in depth the quality of the data;
iii) to ensure the right selection and distribution as well as a rotation of experts in good time, and iv) to provide that the general provision in
relation to the dialogue missions does not apply where the sectoral legislation already foresees these Commission visits to Member States.
Provision of data by the Commission: when the Commission (Eurostat) expresses a reservation on the quality of a Member State's MIP
relevant data, the Member State concerned shall be given the opportunity to defend its position.
Sanctions: Members suggested that the Council, acting on the recommendations of the Commission, might decide, via a two-step procedure:

1) to impose an interest-bearing deposit and subsequently, if the Commission assesses that the Member States has not complied with the
corrective actions, as a last resort measure, 2) inflict a fine on a Member State that has acted intentionally to misrepresent the data or in the
case of serious negligence which has impacted on the ability of the Commission to make a true and fair assessment.
The Member State shall report to the Commission within a specified deadline on the corrective actions necessary to address and remedy the
misrepresentation or serious negligence as well as to prevent similar circumstances to arise in future. The report shall be made public.
The interest-bearing deposit shall be effective, dissuasive and proportionate to the nature, seriousness and duration of the misrepresentation
and the amount of the interest bearing shall not exceed 0.05% of the GDP in the preceding year of the Member State concerned.
Role of Parliament: the Commission shall inform the competent Committee of the European Parliament of any investigation or
recommendation made pursuant to this regulation. The competent committee of the European Parliament may offer a Member State which is
the subject of a Commission recommendation an opportunity to participate in an exchange of views.
Report: the Commission (Eurostat) shall report at least annually to the European Parliament and to the Council on the activities carried out by
the Commission (Eurostat) for the purpose of implementing the Regulation in the context of the European Semester.

