Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0398(COD)

Procedure completed

Agricultural products on the internal market and in third countries:
information provision and promotion measures
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 3/2008 2007/0095(CNS)
Subject
3.10.02 Processed products, agri-foodstuffs
3.10.03 Marketing and trade of agricultural products and livestock
3.10.14 Support for producers and premiums
4.60.02 Consumer information, advertising, labelling
6.20 Common commercial policy in general

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE HERRANZ GARCÍA
Esther

05/11/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D GARCÍA PÉREZ Iratxe
ALDE GOULARD Sylvie
Verts/ALE BOVÉ José
ECR NICHOLSON James
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

CONT

Budgetary Control

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Agriculture and Rural Development

Appointed

Commissioner
CIOLOŞ Dacian

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
21/11/2013

Legislative proposal published

09/12/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

16/12/2013

Debate in Council

17/02/2014

Debate in Council

18/03/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

21/03/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

24/03/2014

Debate in Council

COM(2013)0812

Summary

Summary

A7-0217/2014

Summary

15/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

15/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

13/10/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

22/10/2014

Final act signed

29/10/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

04/11/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T7-0362/2014

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0398(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 3/2008 2007/0095(CNS)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 042-p1; Treaty on the Functioning
of the EU TFEU 043-p2

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AGRI/7/14631

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0812

21/11/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0469

21/11/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0470

21/11/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE524.588

16/01/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE529.733

17/02/2014

EP

A7-0217/2014

21/03/2014

EP

CDR8096/2013

02/04/2014

CofR

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T7-0362/2014

15/04/2014

EP

Economic and Social Committee: opinion, report

CES0010/2014

30/04/2014

ESC

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Committee of the Regions: opinion

Additional information
European Commission

Final act
Regulation 2014/1144

EUR-Lex

Summary

Summary

Summary

OJ L 317 04.11.2014, p. 0056 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

Delegated acts
2015/2668(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2013/0398(COD) - 21/11/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to extend and modernise European information and promotion measures for agricultural products
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: since it accounts for 18 % of world exports and 20 % of world imports, the EU can claim to be the world's number one
importer and exporter of agricultural products, jockeying for position with the United States. Over the years, the European sector has focussed
on quality and added value, offering processed products that are increasingly popular in Europe and worldwide.
Nevertheless, on the internal market only a small minority of European consumers are aware of the efforts undertaken by European farmers to
supply high-quality, healthy and safe products. Only 14 % of Europeans recognise the logos of products that benefit from a protected
designation of origin (PDO) or a protected geographical indication (PGI), these being the main European quality schemes established by the
Union.
European agriculture is faced today with a much more competitive environment, largely resulting from the globalisation of markets. This trend
should continue in the coming years with the prospect of the Doha round and various bilateral and regional agreements currently under
negotiation being concluded. Though often feared, these agreements might also give rise to major opportunities for the sector.
Council Regulation (EC) n° 3/2008 currently sets out the main principles of the information provision and promotion measures on the internal
market and in third countries for agricultural products. Reform of this policy is needed, one which learns from the lessons of the promotional
programmes implemented to date. The objective is to support agriculture, and especially the SMEs and producer organisations that form the
backbone of this sector.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the targeted scenario is the favoured option: this scenario ensures targeting of promotion measures on the internal
and external markets through the development and implementation of a strategy. It also encourages collaboration between operators in the
various Member States (by means of directly managed multi-country programmes). The strategy will also allow the range of products and
themes eligible under the promotion scheme to be widened. Lastly, this scenario involves better use of indications of the origin of products and
brand names (e.g. "banner" brands).
CONTENT: in view of the experience gained and likely trends in the agricultural sector and on markets both inside and outside the Union, the
Commission proposes to repeal Regulation (EC) No 3/2008 replace it with a new regulation.
The proposal aims to enable information provision and promotion measures necessary for the agricultural sector to be able to rise to the many
challenges it faces in a context of growing competition and opening-up of markets to be implemented on the internal market and in third
countries.
The main points of the proposed reform are as follows:
·

measures targeting the internal market, limited to providing information on the specific characteristics of agricultural production
methods in the Union or on themes which are relevant to the Union, such as the European quality systems;

·

measures to enhance the authenticity of Union products so as to improve consumers' awareness as to the qualities of genuine
products as compared to imitations and counterfeit products;

·

opening up the information and promotion scheme to certain food products based on agricultural products;

·

the eligibility of wine for the information provision and promotion measures to be limited solely to wine which is associated with
another agricultural or food product.

·

strict guidelines as regards the possibilities of mentioning the origin of products or brand names as a means of illustrating the main
generic message highlighting the intrinsic characteristics of European agricultural products;

·

specific arrangements to encourage a larger number of information provision and promotion measures for Union agricultural
products in third countries, with the aim of reaching 75 % of estimated expenditure;

·

opening up the scheme to producer organisations;

·

establishment of a work programme which defines the strategic priorities for these measures in terms of populations, products,
themes or markets to be targeted and the nature of the information and promotion messages to be imparted;

·

development of new technical and support services at European level with the aim of helping operators take part in co-financed
programmes, conduct effective campaigns or develop their export activities.

·

better management of programmes submitted by operators in different Member States;

·

a systematic impact assessment in order to confirm that the goals set have indeed been achieved;

·

simplification of administrative procedures: the Commission will be more active in managing multi-country programmes, thereby
making it easier for them to be set up and implemented. The respective roles of Member State and the Commission in terms of
monitoring and control must be clarified in order to avoid duplication and lengthy procedures. It is proposed that selection should
take place solely at Commission level.

BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: compared to the present situation, the proposal gradually but significantly increases the budget allocated to
information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products (from EUR 61.5 million in the 2013 budget to EUR 200 million in
2020). Total expenditure is estimated at EUR 883 million for the period 2014-2020.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2013/0398(COD) - 17/02/2014 Debate in Council
The Council held a policy debate on the proposal for a regulation on information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on
the internal market and in third countries.
Some Member States considered as real added value to maintain information and promotion measures on the internal market; on the contrary,
for some others promotion should focus on foreign countries to avoid a distortion of competition into the EU.
The main issues raised during the debate concerned the following:
the regret that the proposal does not envisage the co-financing of member states pointing out that SMEs and producer organisations
would be affected and would not have the financial capability to engage in such actions;
the need to better involve Member States in the whole process of selecting promotion programmes;
the need to extend the list of products covered by the measures;
the need to closely check use of the budget for information and promotion.

2013/0398(COD) - 21/03/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted the report by Esther HERRANZ GARCÍA (EPP, ES) on the proposal for a
regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the
internal market and in third countries
The committee recommended that Parliaments position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission position as follows:
Objectives: the committee clarified that Information provision and promotion measures provided for by this Regulation should pursue the
following objectives:
·

increasing the market share of Union agricultural and food products, with a specific focus on the markets with the highest growth
potential;

·

providing information to consumers on the high standards that Union products are required to meet, arising from application of the
common agricultural policy (CAP);

·

increasing the competitiveness of Union products and raising their profile both within and outside the Union;

·

restoring normal market conditions in the event of serious disruption to the market, loss of consumer confidence or other specific
problems.

Measures on the internal and third-country markets: while the Commission proposal made a distinction between measures that could be
embarked upon within the internal market and those that could be run in third countries, the report proposed retaining just one classification for
measures that may be financed both within the European Union and outside it.
Information measures should aim to:
·

stress the specific features of agricultural and food production methods in the Union, particularly in terms of food safety, quality,
labelling, traceability, sustainability, social standards, cultural traditions, taste, nutritional and health aspects, animal welfare or
respect for the environment;

·

highlight the intrinsic characteristics of agricultural and food products.

Promotion measures should aim to:
·

increase sales of agricultural and processed food products based on Union agricultural products.

·

protecting the authenticity of protected designation of origin, protected geographical indication and traditional specialities guaranteed.

Eligible products: Members introduced cotton to the list of eligible products. Wine with designation of origin or protected geographical
indication status and wine carrying an indication of the wine grape variety should be eligible for information and promotion measures.
Fishery and aquaculture products may only be the subjects of information and promotion measures in third countries under certain conditions.
With regard to food products based on agricultural products, priority should be given to products for which the Union origin of the raw materials
was demonstrated.
Financial provisions: Members proposed that the Union's financial contribution to simple programmes should be at least 75 % (rather than
50%) of the eligible expenditure. They deleted the provision regarding increasing this to 60% for a simple programme targeting one or more

third countries and for information and promotion measures on fruit and vegetables specifically targeting children in Union educational
establishments.
The percentage contributed by the Union in the event of a serious disruption to the market, loss of consumer confidence or other specific
problems should be at least 85 %.
Technical support services: Members specified that the services developed by the Commission should encourage awareness of different
markets, including the financing of exploratory business meetings, maintaining a dynamic professional network around information and
promotion policy, advising and assisting operators in regard to protecting their products from imitation and counterfeit products in third
countries.
Report: by 31 December 2017, the Commission should an interim report on the application of this Regulation, including the rate of uptake in
different Member States, together with any appropriate proposals. At the European Parliament's request, the Commission shall present the
interim report to the responsible committee.

2013/0398(COD) - 15/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 557 votes to 103 with 12 abstentions a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on information provision and promotion measures for agricultural products on the internal market and
in third countries.
Parliament adopted its position at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary were the result of
a compromise between Parliament and Council. They amend the Commissions proposal as follows:
Objectives: Parliament and Council agreed to clarify that Information provision and promotion measures should enhance the competitiveness
of the agricultural sector. More specifically, the measures should:
·

aim to increase consumers' awareness about the merits of the Union's agricultural products and recognition of EU quality schemes;

·

increasing the competitiveness and consumption of EU agricultural products and certain food products and raise their profile both
within and outside the Union;

·

increasing awareness and recognition of Union quality schemes;

·

increasing the market share of EU agricultural products and certain food products, with a specific focus on those markets in third
countries with the highest growth potential;

·

restoring normal market conditions in the event of a serious market disturbance, loss of consumer confidence or other specific
problems.

Information provision and promotion measures: as Members had proposed, the amended text kept one class of action that might be financed
inside and outside the EU. This should be aimed at:
·

stressing the (i) specific features of agricultural production methods in the Union, particularly in terms of food safety, traceability,
authenticity, labelling, nutritional and health aspects, animal welfare, respect for the environment and sustainability, and (ii) the
characteristics of agricultural and food products, particularly in terms of quality, taste, diversity or traditions;

·

raising awareness about the authenticity of European protected designations of origin, protected geographical indication and
traditional specialities guaranteed.

Those measures should consist notably in public relation work and information campaigns and may also take the form of participation in
events, fairs and exhibitions of national, European and international importance.
Characteristics of the measures: information provision and promotion measures must not be brand-oriented or be origin-oriented.
Nevertheless, in order to improve the quality and effectiveness of demonstrations, tastings and information and promotion material, it should
be possible to mention the product brand and origin, provided that the principle of non-discrimination is respected and the measures are not
aimed at encouraging the consumption of any product on the sole ground of its origin.
Eligible products: as regards wine, only wine with designation of origin or protected geographical indication status and wine carrying an
indication of the wine grape variety should be the subject of the information provision and promotion measures.
The eligibility of fishery and aquaculture products listed in Annex 1 to Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013, for the information provision and
promotion measures provided for under this scheme, should be limited solely to fishery and aquaculture products which are associated with
another agricultural or food product.
Also eligible will be: (i) products covered by Union quality schemes and quality schemes recognised by Member States; (ii) the organic
production method,(iii) the logo for quality agricultural products specific to the outermost regions.
The Commission will adopt delegated acts with the aim of supplementing the list of eligible products in accordance with market perspectives.
Types of actions: measures shall be implemented in the context of information and promotion programmes and Commission initiatives.
Programmes should consist of a coherent set of operations and shall be implemented over a period of at least one year but not more than
three years.
In order to increase the number of measures proposed and improve their quality, the co-legislators widened the range of beneficiaries to
include producer organisations, groups and bodies of the agrifood sector whose objective and activity is to provide information on and promote
agricultural products.
Commission work programme: the annual work programme adopted by the Commission must set out the operational objectives. The work
programme should provide, among others, for specific arrangements in order to react in the event of a serious market disturbance or loss of
consumer confidence.

Financial provisions: the Union's financial contribution to simple programmes should be 70 % of the eligible expenditure on the internal
market and 80% in third countries.
The percentage contributed by the Union in the event of a serious disruption to the market, loss of consumer confidence or other specific
problems should be 85 %.
Technical support services: as proposed by Members, the services developed by the Commission should encourage awareness of different
markets, including the financing of exploratory business meetings, maintaining a dynamic professional network around information and
promotion policy, and advice to the sector with regard to the threat of imitation and counterfeit products in third countries.
Report: by 31 December 2018, the Commission shall submit an interim report on the application of the Regulation, including the rate of uptake
in different Member States, together with any appropriate proposals.

2013/0398(COD) - 22/10/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to adopt measures promoting agricultural products in the internal market and third countries.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) n° 1144/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council on information provision and promotion
measures concerning agricultural products implemented in the internal market and in third countries and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No
3/2008.
CONTENT: the Regulation revises the system established under Regulation (EC) 3/2008 in order to make it more efficient and coherent. It
lays down the conditions under which information provision and promotion measures concerning agricultural products and certain food
products based on agricultural products implemented in the internal market or in third countries, may be fully or partially financed from the
Union budget.
Objectives of information provision and promotion measures: this involves:
increase awareness of the merits of Union agricultural products and of the high standards applicable to the production methods in the
Union;
increase the competitiveness and consumption of Union agricultural products and certain food products and to raise their profile both
inside and outside the Union;
increase the awareness and recognition of Union quality schemes;
increase the market share of Union agricultural products and certain food products, specifically focusing on those markets in third
countries that have the highest growth potential;
restore normal market conditions in the event of serious market disturbance, loss of consumer confidence or other specific problems.
Measures should aim to :
highlight the specific features of agricultural production methods in the Union, particularly in terms of food safety, traceability,
authenticity, labelling, nutritional and health aspects, animal welfare, respect for the environment and sustainability, and the
characteristics of agricultural and food products, particularly in terms of their quality, taste, diversity or traditions;
raise awareness of the authenticity of European protected designations of origin, protected geographical indication and traditional
specialities guaranteed.
Those measures will in particular consist of public relation work and information campaigns and may also take the form of participation in
events, fairs and exhibitions of national, European and international importance.
Programmes will consist of a coherent set of operations and shall be implemented over a period of at least one but not more than three years.
Mention of origin: the Regulation states that information provision and promotion measures shall not be brand-oriented or
origin-oriented. Nevertheless, it shall be possible for the origin of products to be visible on information and promotional material, subject to the
certain rules to be expanded on in implementing acts on the internal market.
Eligible products and schemes: measures may cover:
the products listed in Annex I to the TFEU, excluding tobacco;
the products listed in Annex I to this Regulation;
spirit drinks with a protected geographical indication and beer under certain conditions;
the fishery and aquaculture products listed in Annex I to Regulation (EU) No 1379/2013 if other products are also covered.
Proposing organisations: until now, programmes were proposed by trade or inter-trade organisations, but the new Regulation expands the
scope of beneficiaries to producer organisations or associations of producer organisations, groups and agri-food sector bodies.
The Commission will evaluate and select proposals for simple programmes received in response to the call for proposals and it must provide
Member States with information on all the programmes proposed or selected.
Technical support services: with regard to measures on the initiative of the Commission, the latter must develop technical support services, in
particular with a view to:
encouraging awareness of different markets, including by means of exploratory business meetings;
maintaining a dynamic professional network around information and promotion policy, including providing advice to the sector with
regard to the threat of imitation and counterfeit products in third countries.
Financing: the Unions financial contribution to simple programmes in the internal market shall be 70 % of the eligible expenditure and 80 % in
third countries. These percentages shall be increased to 85 % in the event of serious market disturbance, loss of consumer confidence.
Report: by 31 December 2018, the Commission shall submit an interim report on the application of the Regulation including the rate of uptake
in different Member States, together with any appropriate proposals.

ENTRY INTO FORCE: 24.11.2014. The Regulation is applicable from 1.12.2015.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission may adopt delegated acts in order to supplement or amend certain non-essential elements of the
Regulation. The power to adopt such acts is conferred on the Commission for a period of five years (renewable) from 24 November 2014. The
European Parliament or the Council may raise objections to a delegated act within two months of the date of notification (which may be
extended by two months). If Parliament or Council raise objections, the delegated act will not come into force.

