Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2105(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Implementation of the common security and defence policy

Subject
6.10.02 Common security and defence policy (CSDP); WEU, NATO

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D KOPPA Maria Eleni

19/03/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE DANJEAN Arnaud
ALDE
NEYTS-UYTTEBROECK
Annemie
Verts/ALE CRONBERG Tarja
ECR VAN ORDEN Geoffrey
GUE/NGL LÖSING Sabine

Key events
28/05/2013

Debate in Council

13/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

24/10/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

31/10/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

20/11/2013

Debate in Parliament

21/11/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

21/11/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

21/11/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0360/2013

Summary

T7-0513/2013

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2105(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 132-p1; Treaty on
European Union TEU 036

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/7/12812

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE516.824

28/08/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE519.684

26/09/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0360/2013

31/10/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0513/2013

21/11/2013

EP

Summary

2013/2105(INI) - 31/10/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Maria Eleni KOPPA (S&D, EL) on the implementation of the Common
Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), based on the Annual Report from the Council to the European Parliament on the Common Foreign and
Security Policy.
Members welcomed the prospect of a summit on security and defence at the December 2013 European Council and believed that the time
had come for Member States to show the political will needed for making the EU a relevant global actor and security provider
with real strategic autonomy. A change of mindset on the part of Member States was required in order to anchor a European approach to a
committed and effective security and defence policy. The committee also welcomed the report by the HR/VP of 15 October 2013 but deplored
the fact that it did not propose more in the way of measures aimed specifically at remedying the shortcomings of the CSDP. It looked forward
to substantive decisions being taken at the December Summit and put forward its own recommendations, the main points are as follows:
Unleashing the potential of the treaties: noting that the Lisbon Treaty introduced several new instruments in the area of the CSDP which have
not yet been put into practice, Members stressed the possibility of entrusting CSDP instruments and military planning and conduct capabilities
to a group of Member States, and of establishing a start-up fund for preparatory activities for missions which are not charged to the Union
budget.
First cluster: increase the effectiveness, visibility and impact of the CSDP: the report stated that although elements of the 2003 European
Security Strategy remain valid, the EU needed to complement this strategy by redefining its strategic interests, with a greater emphasis on the
protection of its citizens, the defence of critical infrastructures and its neighbourhood. Members noted with concern that the number and
timeliness of CSDP missions and operations, and the development of civilian and especially military means and capabilities for the CSDP, fall
short of what is required, given the EU's increasingly unstable neighbourhood. They deplored, in particular, the limited overall scope of the
CSDP missions related to the crises in Libya and Mali and regretted the lack of flexibility within the Unions decision-making procedures which
accounted for delayed effective responses in crisis scenarios.
·

White Paper: the European Council was asked to launch a debate on the appropriate strategic framework for the Union, and to
mandate the VP/HR to come forward with proposals in this respect before the end of 2014. The review of the EU strategic framework
should form the basis for a White Paper on EU security and defence policy and the European Council could set the necessary
process in motion.

·

National strategies: EU Member States were asked to give serious consideration to the European dimension in their national security
strategies, White Papers and decision-making in the field of defence. Member called on the VP/HR to develop a common template
for the shaping of concurrent national reviews.

·

Permanent headquarters: the report highlighted the fact that successful military operations required a clear command and control
function, and reiterated the call for the establishment of a permanent military operational headquarters, noting with regret the lack of
progress on this issue and the strong resistance by some Member States. Furthermore, Members stressed that these headquarters
should include cells for intelligence gathering and for early warning/situational awareness.

·

Battlegroups: noting the fact that EU battlegroups had never been deployed, Members confirmed that the existing financial system of
costs lie where they fall constituted a serious problem for the CSDP, leading to delays or complete blockages in decision-making.
They recommended that Member States agree on an EU financing mechanism based on burden-sharing for the use of battlegroups
under the EU flag, in order to give them a realistic future.

·

NATO: the report called for stronger cooperation between the EU and NATO structures through a complementary approach and
closer coordination in order to help avoid duplication between the two partners and to effectively tackle the new threats.

Second cluster: enhance the development of defence capabilities: Members stressed that further cuts in national defence budgets would make
it impossible to maintain critical military capabilities and will result in the irreversible loss of know-how and technologies, but considered that
the problem is less of a budgetary nature than of a political one . They stressed the opportunity for Member States to enjoy the full benefits of
working closer together to generate military efficiency and to optimise scarce resources by creating synergies and by a coordinated reduction
of unnecessary duplication, redundant and obsolete capabilities.
Members wanted the European Defence Agency (EDA) to be given a stronger role in coordinating capabilities, with a view to ending
duplication and the existence of parallel programmes in the Member States.
Third cluster: strengthen Europes defence industry: Members reiterated the need for a strong and less fragmented European defence industry
that was capable of enhancing the EUs strategic autonomy, and called on the European Council to mandate the EDA to prepare a roadmap
for the development of defence industrial standards, and on Member States to streamline European certification procedures with the mutual
recognition of certificates.
Lastly, the committee expressed high hopes that this European Council would not be an isolated event, but rather would be the starting point
of a continuous process that revisited security and defence matters at European Council level on a regular basis. It favoured the establishment
of a roadmap with specific benchmarks and timelines, and a reporting mechanism. It also advocated the creation of a Council of Defence
Ministers in the medium term.

A minority opinion objected to the report on the grounds that it wanted to transform the EU into a global military actor, and called for radical
disarmament on all levels.

2013/2105(INI) - 21/11/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 421 votes to 104, with 80 abstentions, a resolution on the implementation of the Common Security and
Defence Policy (CSDP), based on the Annual Report from the Council to the European Parliament on the Common Foreign and Security
Policy.
Parliament welcomed the prospect of a summit on security and defence at the December 2013 European Council and believed that the time
had come for Member States to show the political will needed for making the EU a relevant global actor and security provider
with real strategic autonomy. A change of mindset on the part of Member States was required in order to anchor a European approach to a
committed and effective security and defence policy. Parliament also welcomed the report by the HR/VP of 15 October 2013 but deplored the
fact that it did not propose more in the way of measures aimed specifically at remedying the shortcomings of the CSDP.
It looked forward to substantive decisions being taken at the December Summit and put forward its own recommendations, the main points are
as follows:
- Unleashing the potential of the treaties: noting that the Lisbon Treaty introduced several new instruments in the area of the CSDP which have
not yet been put into practice, Parliament stressed the possibility of entrusting CSDP instruments and military planning and conduct
capabilities to a group of Member States. A start-up fund was called for by the Members for preparatory activities for missions which are not
charged to the Union budget.
- First cluster: increase the effectiveness, visibility and impact of the CSDP: Parliament stated that although elements of the 2003 European
Security Strategy remain valid, the EU needed to complement this strategy by redefining its strategic interests, with a greater emphasis on the
protection of its citizens, the defence of critical infrastructures and its neighbourhood. It noted with concern that the number and timeliness of
CSDP missions and operations, and the development of civilian and especially military means and capabilities for the CSDP, fall short of what
is required, given the EU's increasingly unstable neighbourhood. It deplored, in particular, the limited overall scope of the CSDP missions
related to the crises in Libya and Mali and regretted the lack of flexibility within the Unions decision-making procedures which accounted for
delayed effective responses in crisis scenarios.
White Paper: Parliament asked the European Council to launch a debate on the appropriate strategic framework for the Union, and to
mandate the VP/HR to come forward with proposals in this respect before the end of 2014. The review of the EU strategic framework
should form the basis for a White Paper on EU security and defence policy and the European Council could set the necessary process
in motion.
National strategies: EU Member States were asked to give serious consideration to the European dimension in their national security
strategies, White Papers and decision-making in the field of defence. Member called on the VP/HR to develop a common template for
the shaping of concurrent national reviews.
Permanent headquarters: Parliament highlighted the fact that successful military operations required a clear command and control
function, and reiterated the call for the establishment of a permanent military operational headquarters, noting with regret the lack of
progress on this issue and the strong resistance by some Member States. Furthermore, it stressed that these headquarters should
include cells for intelligence gathering and for early warning/situational awareness.
Battlegroups: noting the fact that EU battlegroups had never yet been deployed, Parliament underlined the fact that EU battlegroups
should be deployable for all types of crises, including climate-driven humanitarian crisis. It is convinced that the EU should dispose of
high-readiness standing battle forces, with land, air, naval, cyber and special forces components and a high level of ambition .
Parliament confirmed that the existing financial system of costs lie where they fall constitutes a serious problem for the CSDP, leading
to delays or complete blockages in decision-making, notably on the quick deployment of battlegroups. It recommended that Member
States agree on an EU financing mechanism based on burden-sharing for the use of battlegroups under the EU flag, in order to give
them a realistic future. It also called for the EEAS to be given control over the financial instruments linked to the crisis management
measures that it plans and carries out.
NATO: Parliament called for stronger cooperation between the EU and NATO structures through a complementary approach and
closer coordination in order to help avoid duplication between the two partners and to effectively tackle the new threats.
- Second cluster: enhance the development of defence capabilities: Parliament stressed that further cuts in national defence budgets would
make it impossible to maintain critical military capabilities and will result in the irreversible loss of know-how and technologies, but considered
that the problem is less of a budgetary nature than of a political one . It stressed the opportunity for Member States to enjoy the full benefits of
working closer together to generate military efficiency and to optimise scarce resources by creating synergies and by a coordinated reduction
of unnecessary duplication, redundant and obsolete capabilities.
Members wanted the European Defence Agency (EDA) to be given a stronger role in coordinating capabilities, with a view to ending
duplication and the existence of parallel programmes in the Member States.
Parliament expects the upcoming Defence Summit in December to consider launching development work on a Military Headline Goal 2025,
possibly complemented by an Industrial Headline Goal.
- Third cluster: strengthen Europes defence industry: Parliament reiterated the need for a strong and less fragmented European defence
industry that was capable of enhancing the EUs strategic autonomy, and called on the European Council to mandate the EDA to prepare a
roadmap for the development of defence industrial standards, and on Member States to streamline European certification procedures with the
mutual recognition of certificates.
Lastly, Parliament expressed high hopes that this European Council would not be an isolated event, but rather would be the starting point of a
continuous process that revisited security and defence matters at European Council level on a regular basis. It favoured the establishment of a
roadmap with specific benchmarks and timelines, and a reporting mechanism. It also advocated the creation of a Council of Defence Ministers
in the medium term.

