Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Decision

2013/0064(COD)

Procedure completed

Framework for space surveillance and tracking (SST) support
See also 2011/0368(COD)
See also 2011/0392(COD)
See also 2011/0402(CNS)
Amended by 2016/0282A(COD)
Subject
3.40.05 Aeronautical industry, aerospace industry
3.50.01.05 Research specific areas
3.50.20 Scientific and technological cooperation and agreements

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

Rapporteur

Appointed

Verts/ALE ANDERSDOTTER 18/04/2013
Amelia
Shadow rapporteur
PPE MAZEJ KUKOVIČ Zofija
S&D PRODI Vittorio
ALDE JOHANSSON Kent
ECR KARIM Sajjad
GUE/NGL FLASAROVÁ Věra

Committee for opinion
AFET
BUDG

ENVI

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

Foreign Affairs

PPE GAHLER Michael

21/03/2013

Budgets

PPE CARVALHO Maria Da
Graça

10/06/2013

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Commissioner

Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs TAJANI Antonio

Key events
28/02/2013

Legislative proposal published

14/03/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

30/05/2013

Debate in Council

16/12/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

COM(2013)0107

Summary

16/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

02/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

02/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/04/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

16/04/2014

Final act signed

16/04/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

27/05/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

A7-0030/2014

Summary

T7-0270/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0064(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Decision
See also 2011/0368(COD)
See also 2011/0392(COD)
See also 2011/0402(CNS)
Amended by 2016/0282A(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 189

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ITRE/7/12177

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0107

28/02/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0054

28/02/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0055

28/02/2013

EC

CES3545/2013

10/07/2013

ESC

PE521.718

23/10/2013

EP

PE519.703

15/11/2013

EP

PE523.078

19/11/2013

EP

PE519.586

03/12/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0030/2014

16/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0270/2014

02/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Economic and Social Committee: opinion,
report
Committee draft report
Committee opinion

BUDG

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

AFET

Summary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Decision 2014/541
OJ L 158 27.05.2014, p. 0227 Summary

2013/0064(COD) - 28/02/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish a space surveillance and tracking support programme for the period 2014 to 2020.
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: space-based applications and derived services as well as space research have become critical for the implementation of EU
policies, such as environment, climate change, maritime policies, development, agriculture, security related policies.
In Europe there are today limited capacities to monitor and survey satellites and space debris as well as re-entry of space objects into the
Earth's atmosphere. Furthermore, there are no proper services to issue collision warnings for satellite operators.
A space surveillance and tracking ('SST') support programme should therefore be established with the aim to support the setting up and
operation of services consisting of monitoring and surveying space objects with a view to preventing damage to spacecraft resulting from
collisions.
In its Communication entitled "Towards a space strategy for the European Union that benefits its citizens", the Commission underlined that the
shared competence in the field of space conferred upon the Union by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) goes hand
in hand with a reinforced partnership with the Member States. The need for EU action in the domain has been supported by Member States in
several Council Resolutions and Conclusions. In its resolution on a space strategy for the European Union adopted on 19 January 2012, the
European Parliament shares this point of view.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the proposal follows an extensive consultation with stakeholders and the public. It is accompanied by an impact
assessment.
During the consultation, Member States asked the EU to define the governance and data policy for a European SST service, to play an active
role in the setting up of the service, and to make best use of existing sensors and expertise. The consultation also showed that the public
opinion is aware of and supports the need to protect space infrastructure.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 189(2) of the TFEU.
CONTENT: the current proposal for a Decision concerns the establishment of a European service which will seek to prevent collisions
between spacecraft or between spacecraft and debris and monitor uncontrolled re-entry of complete spacecraft or parts thereof. In technical
terms this service is referred to as a European SST service.
The proposal defines the objectives of the proposed action, namely, the provision of Space Surveillance and Tracking services, the scope of
the services to be provided, the governance aspects, as well as the budgetary resources. The proposed Decision allows for the definition of a
partnership, whereby Member States will contribute with their existing and future assets to the SST capability at European level and the Union
will provide a legal framework and a financial contribution to the implementation of the actions defined. The legal framework defines the
governance scheme and the data policy.
Lastly, the proposed European SST services accommodate an essential objective of the space industrial policy of the EU (indentified in the
Commission's Communication on Elements for an EU Space Industrial Policy to be released in 2013), namely to achieve European
technological non-dependence in critical domains, and to maintain independent access to space.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the SST programme remains within the overall EU budget envelope proposed by the Commission for the next
Multiannual Financial Framework.
No funding requests beyond the MFF proposal are made.
The indicative Union overall contribution to the implementation of the support programme is EUR 70 million over the period from 2014-2020 at
current prices. However, this overall contribution depends on the outcome of the ongoing co-decision process on the MFF.

2013/0064(COD) - 16/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted the report by Amelia ANDERSDOTTER (Greens/EFA, SE) on the proposal for a
decision of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a space surveillance and tracking support programme (SST).
The committee recommended that the position of the European Parliament adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure

should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Overall objectives: Members specified that the SST support programme should contribute to ensuring the long-term availability of European
and national space infrastructure facilities and services essential for the safety and security of the economies, societies and citizens in Europe,
by equipping the European Union with an autonomous space surveillance and tracking system.
Specific objectives: the programme should contribute to the following specific objectives:
·

assessing and reducing the risks to in-orbit operations of European spacecraft in terms of collisions, enabling spacecraft operators to
more efficiently plan and carry out mitigation measures;

·

reducing the risks relating to the launch of European spacecraft;

·

surveying uncontrolled re-entries of spacecraft or space debris into the Earth's atmosphere and providing more accurate and efficient
early warnings with the aim of reducing the potential risks to the safety of Union citizens and mitigating potential damage to critical
terrestrial infrastructure.

Main actions: the report proposed to define the establishment of the networking of sensors, of the processing of data and of the SST services
as main actions rather than objectives, from which specific actions will be developed by the Commission in its multiannual work programme.
SST services: these must include a freely available and re-usable public information service on orbital elements of space objects orbiting the
Earth.
Commissions role: this should: (i) be responsible for the SST support programme, manage the funds allocated, while providing transparency
and clarity regarding the different sources of funding; (ii) define the governance and the data policy for the European SST service; (iii) ensure,
in addition, the necessary dialogue and coordination bringing together relevant actors such as European Defence Agency (EDA) and
European Space Agency (ESA) in view of ensuring coherence between military and civilian space programmes.
Use and exchange of SST data and information: Members stressed that efficient operations should be ensured and the use of the
generated SST information should be maximised while preventing the unauthorised disclosure of SST data and information.
SST data and information generated in the framework of the SST support programme should be made available, including to third countries,
on a need-to-know basis, in accordance with the instructions and security rules of the originator of the SST information and of the owner of the
space object concerned.
Financing: the amount of Union funding allocated to the SST support programme for the period 2014-2020 will be EUR 70 million. Up to EUR
26.5 million may also come from the Copernicus programme.
Planning: in order to ensure proper planning of the programme, the Commission should have the power to adopt delegated acts in respect of
the adoption of a multiannual work programme.
Report: at the beginning of each year, the Commission should send a report to the European Parliament and to the Council. The report should
include information on the participation to the SST support programme and the actions supported by the programme.

2013/0064(COD) - 02/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 602 votes to 17, with 10 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council establishing a space surveillance and tracking support programme (SST).
Parliament adopted its position at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary are the result
of an agreement negotiated between the European Parliament and the Council. They amend the proposal as follows:
Overall objective: Parliament and the Council agreed that the SST support programme should have as its general aim to contribute to ensuring
the long-term availability of European and national space infrastructure facilities and services essential for the safety and security of the
economies, societies and citizens in Europe.
The specific objectives are as follows:
assessing and reducing the risks to in-orbit operations of European spacecraft in terms of collisions, enabling spacecraft operators to
more efficiently plan and carry out mitigation measures;
reducing the risks relating to the launch of European spacecraft;
surveying uncontrolled re-entries of spacecraft or space debris into the Earth's atmosphere and providing more accurate and efficient
early warnings with the aim of reducing the potential risks to the safety of Union citizens and mitigating potential damage to critical
terrestrial infrastructure;
seeking to prevent the proliferation of space debris.
Main actions: the SST support programme shall support the following actions which seek to establish an SST capacity at European level and
with the appropriate level of European autonomy:
the establishment and operation of a sensor function consisting of a network of Member State ground-based and/ or space-based
sensors, including national sensors developed through ESA, to survey and track space objects and to produce a database thereof ;
the establishment and operation of a processing function to process and analyse the SST data ?at national level to produce SST
information and services for transmission to the SST service provision function.
The SST support framework shall not cover the development of new SST sensors.
SST services: the SST services shall be of a civilian nature. They shall comprise the following services: (i) the generation of collision
avoidance alerts during the launch, early orbit, in-orbit operation and disposal phases of spacecraft missions; (ii) the

characterisation of in-orbit fragmentations, break-ups or collisions; (iii) the risk assessment of the uncontrolled re-entry of space objects and
space debris into the Earth's atmosphere and the generation of related information, including the estimation of the
timeframe and likely location of possible impact.
Commissions role: the Commission shall: (i) manage the SST support framework and ensure its implementation; (ii) monitor risks related
to the SST support framework; (iii) ensure the update of SST user requirements as appropriate; (iv) define general guidelines for the
governance of the SST support framework; and (v) facilitate the broadest possible participation of Member States.
The Commission shall provide to the European Parliament and to the Council , in a timely manner, all relevant information on the
implementation of the SST support framework, in particular to provide transparency and clarity regarding: (a) the indicative efforts and the
different Union sources of funding; (b) participation in the SST support framework and the actions supported thereby; (c) the evolution of the
networking of Member State SST assets and of SST service provision; and (d) the exchange and use of SST information.
Participation of Member States: any Member State wishing to participate in the implementation of the actions shall submit an application to the
Commission demonstrating compliance with a certain number of criteria:
Member States which comply with the criteria shall designate a national entity to represent them. The designated national entities shall
constitute a consortium.
Responsibility for the operation of sensors, the processing of data and the implementation of data policy shall lie with the participating Member
States. The assets of participating Member States shall remain fully under national control.
The European Union Satellite Centre (SATCEN) may cooperate with the consortium by concluding the necessary implementing arrangements
with the participating Member States.
Monitoring and evaluation: no later than 1 July 2018, the Commission shall forward a report on the implementation of the SST support
framework to the European Parliament and the Council. This report may be accompanied by proposals for amendments, where appropriate,
including the possibility for a basic act within the meaning of the Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 (on financial rules applicable to the
EUs general budget) for SST.

2013/0064(COD) - 16/04/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish a Framework for Space Surveillance and Tracking Support (SST).
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision No 541/2014/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a Framework for Space
Surveillance and Tracking Support.
CONTENT: space debris has become a serious threat to the security, safety and sustainability of space activities. This Decision aims to
establish an SST support framework with the aim of supporting the setting up and operation of services consisting of:
·

assessing and reducing the risks to in-orbit operations of European spacecraft relating to collisions and enabling spacecraft
operators to plan and carry out mitigation measures more efficiently;

·

reducing the risks relating to the launch of European spacecraft;

·

surveying uncontrolled re-entries of spacecraft or space debris into the Earth's atmosphere and providing more accurate and efficient
early warnings;

·

seeking to prevent the proliferation of space debris.

The actions supported by the SST support framework, include the establishment and operation of a sensor function consisting of a network of
Member State ground-based and/or space-based sensors, including national sensors developed through ESA, to survey and track space
objects and to produce a database thereof.
The SST support framework should promote the evolution of the networking of Member State SST assets for SST service provision. SST
service provision should benefit all operators, public and private, of space-based infrastructures.
The SST support framework shall compliment the actitivites carried out under programmes such as Horizon 2020, Copernicus and Galileo. It
should contribute to ensuring the peaceful use and exploration of outer space.
The operation of SST services should be based on a partnership between the Union and the Member States and use existing as well as future
national expertise and assets, including those developed through ESA.
Member States should retain ownership and control over their assets and should remain responsible for their operations, maintenance and
renewal. The SST support framework should not provide financial support for the development of new SST sensors.
The Commission and the Member States should promote and facilitate participation by the greatest number of Member States in the SST
support framework, subject to compliance with participation criteria. All Member States which comply with the criteria shall designate a national
entity to represent them. The designated national entities shall constitute a consortium and conclude an agreement laying down the rules and
mechanisms for their cooperation in the implementation of the actions.
The Commission shall monitor the implementation of the SST support framework. By 1 July 2018, the Commission shall forward a report
concerning the achievement of the objectives of this Decision.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 16.06.2014.

