Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2097(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Maintaining milk production in mountain areas, disadvantaged areas and
outermost regions after the expiry of the milk quota regime

Subject
3.10.01.06 Less-favoured agricultural areas
3.10.05.02 Milk and dairy products
3.10.15 Agricultural production, farm surpluses, shortages and quotas,
non-marketing premiums
4.70.06 Outlying and outermost regions, overseas countries and territories

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE DORFMANN Herbert

31/01/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D ALVES Luís Paulo

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Agriculture and Rural Development

CIOLOŞ Dacian

Key events
10/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

05/11/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

13/11/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

11/12/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

11/12/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/12/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0383/2013

Summary

T7-0577/2013

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2097(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AGRI/7/11978

Documentation gateway

Committee draft report

PE506.029

18/07/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE506.030

18/09/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0383/2013

13/11/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0577/2013

11/12/2013

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)260

06/05/2014

2013/2097(INI) - 13/11/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted the own-initiative report by Herbert DORFMANN (EPP, IT) on maintaining milk
production in mountain areas, disadvantaged areas and outermost regions after the expiry of the milk quota.
Europes dairy sector will experience a major shift after expiry of the quotas in 2015. This substantial change is likely to cause market
disruptions to the dairy sector, especially in the less favoured areas and the outermost regions. For these areas, milk production is often the
only source of income and the local community depends heavily on the dairy sector.
In order to secure a stable future for the sector and to avoid the depopulation of rural areas along with negative economic and environmental
consequences, further steps at European level are required.
Given the irreplaceable nature of milk production in some outermost regions, Member called on the European Commission and the Member
States to use, in these regions, the POSEI programmes to strengthen support in the area of direct payments and market measures and the
rural development programmes to strengthen support under the second pillar of the CAP.
Members considered it essential that a stock grazing premium be earmarked under the first pillar of the CAP and under the POSEI in the
outermost regions for farms with grazing and forage areas for livestock.
They also stressed the important role of coupled payments under the first agricultural policy pillar.
The report also called on the Member States and regions to formulate, where applicable, a specific rural development programme for milk
production in these areas in the framework of rural development.
Members stressed that second-pillar measures (e.g. compensation allowances, agro-environmental premiums, individual or collective
investment aid for production, processing and marketing, start-up aid for young farmers and aid to promote quality, diversification, innovation)
were of great importance for sustainable milk production in these areas. Therefore, they urged that:
Member States and regions be given the level of funding and the necessary opportunities to ensure the payment of adequate and
clearly differentiated compensatory allowances;
sustainable and organic forms of agriculture be supported;
adequate compensation payments from the second CAP pillar should offset the higher investment costs of milk production in mountain
areas and outermost regions.
The report also pointed out that initiatives concerning in-situ processing and marketing on farms or in mountain pastures should be funded
under the second CAP pillar. It also stated that small farmers in mountains areas and disadvantaged areas should be supported in
establishing producer organisations which strengthen their bargaining power.
The Commission is called upon to:
redefine a coherent rural and milk development programme for mountain areas, for disadvantaged milk production areas and for
Member States where most of the milk is produced by very small farms;
develop programmes in cooperation with producers, producers associations and marketing bodies based, for example, on the
fundraising model to reduce the impact of the anticipated rapid decline in milk prices;
implement the EU school milk programme more efficiently;
bear in mind the special characteristics of products with a protected designation of origin in the framework of the definition and
application of the new mountain product designation.
Members called on the Commission to closely follow the development of milk production in these areas and to review the economic impact of
the expiry of milk quotas on dairy farms in these areas. They asked the Commission to submit to the European Parliament and the Council a
report addressing this issue by 2017, accompanied by a legislative proposal if milk production has decreased significantly in these regions.

2013/2097(INI) - 11/12/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on maintaining milk production in mountain areas, disadvantaged areas and outermost regions
after the expiry of the milk quota.
Europes dairy sector will experience a major shift after expiry of the quotas in 2015. This substantial change is likely to cause market
disruptions to the dairy sector, especially in the less favoured areas and the outermost regions. For these areas, milk production is often the
only source of income and the local community depends heavily on the dairy sector.
In order to secure a stable future for the sector and to avoid the depopulation of rural areas, Parliament recommended additional measures be
taken at European level.
Strengthened assistance: in view of the irreplaceable nature of milk production in some outermost regions, Members called on the European

Commission and the Member States to use, in these regions, the POSEI programmes to strengthen support in the area of direct payments and
market measures and the rural development programmes to strengthen support under the second pillar of the CAP.
The expiry of the milk quota in mountain areas and in the outermost regions must be evaluated separately, in light of the particular
characteristics of such areas. Particular attention should be paid to the needs of small farms in these areas.
Direct payments under the first pillar: these payments, even under the current CAP reform, are based on historic reference amounts, which
can seriously disadvantage grassland areas and milk production in these regions. Parliament, therefore, called on Member States affected by
such situations to introduce without delay a system correct the disadvantage suffered by these regions when implementing agricultural reforms
at national level.
Parliament considered it essential that a stock grazing premium be earmarked under the first pillar of the CAP and under the POSEI in the
outermost regions for farms with grazing and forage areas for livestock.
It also stressed the important role of coupled payments under the first agricultural policy pillar.
Parliament takes the view that permanent grassland and pastureland, which can generally be used for no other purpose than cattle, sheep and
goat breeding in these areas, must never be treated as inferior to other types of farmland for the purpose of calculating direct payments from
the first pillar.
Rural development (second pillar): Parliament called on the Member States and regions to formulate, where applicable, a specific rural
development programme for milk production in these areas in the framework of rural development.
Members stressed that second-pillar measures (e.g. compensation allowances, agro-environmental premiums, individual or collective
investment aid for production, processing and marketing, start-up aid for young farmers and aid to promote quality, diversification, innovation)
were of great importance for sustainable milk production in these areas. Therefore, they urged that:
Member States and regions be given the level of funding and the necessary opportunities to ensure the payment of adequate and
clearly differentiated compensatory allowances;
sustainable and organic forms of agriculture be supported;
adequate compensation payments should offset the higher investment costs of milk production in mountain areas and outermost
regions.
Parliament also called for initiatives concerning in-situ processing and marketing on farms or in mountain pastures to be funded under the
second CAP pillar.
Other measures: Members called for the introduction of measures to allow the production of typical products in an artisanal way and for
hygiene and marketing rules to be adjustable to the size of markets and their demands.
Small farmers in mountain areas and disadvantaged areas should be supported in establishing producer organisations which strengthen their
bargaining power.
The Commission is called upon to:
redefine a coherent rural and milk development programme for mountain areas, for disadvantaged milk production areas and for
Member States where most of the milk is produced by very small farms;
develop programmes in cooperation with producers, producers associations and marketing bodies based, for example, on the
fundraising model to reduce the impact of the anticipated rapid decline in milk prices;
implement the EU school milk programme more efficiently;
bear in mind the special characteristics of products with a protected designation of origin in the context of the definition and application
of the new mountain product designation.
Parliament stressed that a milk production market monitoring tool (Milk Observatory) is needed to provide early warning of the risks of market
imbalances. It called on the Commission to closely follow the development of milk production in mountain areas, disadvantaged areas and
outermost regions and to review the economic impact of the expiry of milk quotas on dairy farms. It called on the Commission to submit to the
European Parliament and the Council a report addressing this issue by 2017, accompanied by a legislative proposal if milk production has
decreased significantly in these regions.

