Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0088(COD)

Procedure completed

EU trade mark
Amending Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 2006/0267(CNS)
See also 2013/0089(COD)
Subject
2.10.03 Standardisation, EC/EU standards and trade mark, certification,
compliance
3.50.15 Intellectual property, copyright
3.50.16 Industrial property, European patent, Community patent, design and
pattern

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Legal Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

Shadow rapporteur
Verts/ALE ANDERSSON Max
ECR KARIM Sajjad
GUE/NGL MAŠTÁLKA Jiří

Former committee responsible
JURI

Legal Affairs

ALDE WIKSTRÖM Cecilia

24/04/2013

25/04/2013

Former committee for opinion
INTA

International Trade

S&D CUTA George Sabin

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

PPE BASTOS Regina

IMCO

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

29/05/2013

Commissioner

Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs BIEŃKOWSKA Elżbieta

Key events
27/03/2013

Legislative proposal published

16/04/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

03/12/2013

Debate in Council

17/12/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

12/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

24/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

25/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

25/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st

COM(2013)0161

Summary

A7-0031/2014

Summary

T7-0118/2014

Summary

reading/single reading
26/05/2014

Debate in Council

Summary

25/09/2014

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations after 1st
reading in Parliament

16/06/2015

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at early 2nd reading interinstitutional
negotiations

12/11/2015

Council position published

26/11/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 2nd reading

03/12/2015

Vote in committee, 2nd reading

07/12/2015

Committee recommendation tabled for
plenary, 2nd reading

14/12/2015

Debate in Parliament

15/12/2015

Decision by Parliament, 2nd reading

15/12/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

16/12/2015

Final act signed

24/12/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

10373/1/2015

Summary

A8-0354/2015

Summary

T8-0439/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0088(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 2006/0267(CNS)
See also 2013/0089(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 118-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/00927

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0161

27/03/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0095

27/03/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0096

27/03/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

N7-0073/2014
OJ C 032 04.02.2014, p. 0023

11/07/2013

EDPS

PE516.715

31/07/2013

EP

Committee draft report
Committee opinion

INTA

PE514.625

15/10/2013

EP

Opinion on the legal basis

JURI

PE521.700

16/10/2013

EP

Summary

Summary

Amendments tabled in committee

PE522.795

24/10/2013

EP

PE516.700

07/11/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0031/2014

12/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0118/2014

25/02/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)446

20/05/2014

13511/2015

03/11/2015

CSL

10373/1/2015

12/11/2015

CSL

Summary

COM(2015)0589

24/11/2015

EC

Summary

PE572.858

27/11/2015

EP

Committee recommendation tabled for
plenary, 2nd reading

A8-0354/2015

07/12/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 2nd reading

T8-0439/2015

15/12/2015

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

IMCO

Council statement on its position
Council position
Commission communication on Council's
position
Committee draft report

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2015/2424
OJ L 341 24.12.2015, p. 0021 Summary
Corrigendum to final act 32015R2424R(01)
OJ L 071 16.03.2016, p. 0322
Corrigendum to final act 32015R2424R(02)
OJ L 110 26.04.2016, p. 0004
Corrigendum to final act 32015R2424R(05)
OJ L 267 30.09.2016, p. 0001
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2013/0088(COD) - 27/03/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to foster innovation and economic growth by making trade mark registration systems all over the EU more accessible.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council (amending Council Regulation No (EC) 207/2009).
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: in an increasingly competitive environment, the growing number of trade mark applications at both national and EU levels,
and the growing number of trade mark users demonstrates the crucial role of trade marks in terms of market success and commercial value.
This development has been accompanied by growing expectations on the part of stakeholders for more streamlined and high-quality trade
mark registration systems, which are more consistent, publicly accessible and technologically up-to-date.
In its Small Business Act of 2008, the Commission pledged to make the Community trademark system more accessible to SMEs. Furthermore,
in its 2008 Communication on an Industrial Property Rights Strategy for Europe the Commission underlined its commitment to effective and

efficient trademark protection and to a trademark system of high quality. It concluded that it was time for an overall evaluation, which could
form the basis for a future review of the trademark system in Europe and for the further improvement of cooperation between the Office for
Harmonisation in the Internal Market (OHIM) and National Offices.
Lastly, in its 2011 Intellectual Property Rights Strategy for Europe, the Commission announced a review of the trade mark system in Europe
with a view to modernising the system, both at EU and at national level, by making it more effective, efficient and consistent overall. The
Council has also called on the Commission to present proposals for the revision of Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 and Directive 2008/95/EC.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the impact assessment identified one main problem that the revised Regulation needs to address: the low level of
cooperation among trade mark offices in Europe. The following options were considered to solve the problems and to achieve three
corresponding objectives.
·

Providing an adequate legal basis for cooperation: Option 1: no specific legal basis; Option 2: legal basis allowing optional
cooperation; Option 3: legal basis obliging mandatory cooperation.

·

Technical capacity building at National Offices: Option 1: each office to procure and develop the required facilities and tools; Option
2: optional access to tools; Option 3: mandatory access to tools.

·

Securing long-term financing for cooperation activities: Option 1: from Member States; Option 2: from EU budget; Option 3: from
OHIM budget.

The impact assessment concluded that option 3 (legal basis obliging mandatory cooperation, mandatory access to tools, and financing from
OHIM budget) would in all cases be proportionate and best suited to achieving the objectives pursued.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 118 (1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: the main common objective of this initiative and of the parallel proposal for the recast of Directive 2008/95/EC is to foster
innovation and economic growth by making trade mark registration systems all over the EU more accessible and efficient in terms of lower
costs and complexity, increased speed, greater predictability and legal security.
As regards this proposal to revise the Regulation, the Commission is not proposing a new system, but well-targeted modernisation of existing
provisions, with the main aims being:
1) Adapting the terminology in the Regulation to the Lisbon Treaty and adapting provisions to the Common Approach on decentralised
agencies: throughout the Regulation, the term Community trade mark is replaced by European trade mark. The term Office, insofar as it refers
to the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market, is replaced by the term Agency.
2) Streamlining procedures to apply for and register a European trade mark:
·

since National Offices hardly ever receive applications for European trade marks any more, the option for filing these at National
Offices should be abolished;

·

with regard to the filing date, it is proposed to abolish the one-month period and to link the obligation to pay with the filing of the
application, so that applicants will have to provide evidence that they submitted or authorised their payment when they filed their
application;

·

current search regimes are abolished, in view of the fact that they do not provide a reliable trade mark clearance tool;

·

the current one-month period between the Agency notifying the applicant of search reports and publication of the application is
abolished, which will speed up the registration procedure.

3) Increasing legal certainty by clarifying provisions and removing ambiguities:
·

the proposed new definition of a European trademark leaves the door open to registering matter that can be represented by
technological means offering satisfactory guarantees;

·

the absolute grounds for refusal are fully aligned with the EU law on geographical indications;

·

it is clarified that infringement claims are without prejudice to earlier rights;

·

in cases of both double identity and similarity, it is only the origin function which matters;

·

in accordance with the rulings of the Court of Justice, it is appropriate to treat trade name use of a protected trade mark as an
infringing act, if the requirements of use for goods or services are met;

·

the trade mark owner may prevent the use of his trade mark in comparative advertising where such comparative advertising does
not satisfy the requirements of Directive 2006/114/EC;

·

it is clarified that goods may not be imported into the EU even if only the consignor is acting for commercial purposes.

·

bearing in mind the outcome of the Philips/Nokia judgment, the proposal entitles right holders to stop third parties from bringing
goods, from third countries, bearing an unauthorised trade mark which is essentially identical to the trade mark registered in respect
of those goods, into the customs territory of the Union, regardless of whether they are released for free circulation;

Other amendments concern the following provisions: limitation of the effects of a European trademark; designation and classification of goods
and services; European certification marks, and tasks of the Agency, which are defined in one new Article.
4) Establishing an appropriate framework for cooperation between OHIM and national offices to promote convergence of practices and
developing common tools: the proposal contains provisions for mandatory cooperation between the Agency and Member States, and
stipulates the main areas for cooperation and specific common projects of Union interest which the Agency will coordinate. It further sets up a
funding mechanism enabling the Agency to finance those common projects by means of grants.
5) Aligning the framework to Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the proposal has no implications for the EU budget.

DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2013/0088(COD) - 12/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the report by Cecilia WIKSTRÖM (ALDE, SE) on the proposal for a regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 on the Community trade mark.
The parliamentary committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading under the ordinary legislative
procedure should be to amend the Commissions proposal as follows:
European Union trade mark: given that the term European applies to an area larger than the territory of the European Union, Members
proposed to replace the term European trade mar by the term European Union trade mark.
The name European Union Trade Marks and Designs Agency was replaced by European Union Intellectual Property Agency.
Signs likely to constitute a European Union trade mark: it is stipulated that the representation can be in any form so long as it uses generally
available technology. The sign should be capable of being represented in the register in a manner which is clear, precise, self-contained,
easily accessible, durable and objective.
A sign should therefore be permitted in any appropriate form, taking account of generally available technology which enables the competent
authorities and the public to determine with precision and clarity the subject matter of protection.
Absolute grounds for refusal: with regard to geographical indications covered by Regulation (EC) No 110/2008 of the European Parliament and
the Council, Members also proposed to include spirit drinks. Members considered that the proposal should contribute to improving the
performance of the entire registration system and to ensure that trade marks are not registered where there are absolute grounds for refusal,
including, in particular, where the trade mark is descriptive or non-distinctive, or of such a nature as to deceive the public, for instance as to the
nature, quality or geographical origin of the goods or service.
To these ends, third parties should be able to submit to the central industrial property offices of the Member States written observations
explaining which of the absolute grounds constitute an obstacle to registration.
Combating counterfeiting: Members considered that this provision should not harm the interests of legitimate trade in goods that can lawfully
be placed on the market in their destination countries. In order not to hamper legitimate flows of goods, this provision should therefore not
apply if the third party proves that the final destination of the goods is a country outside the Union and if the proprietor of the European Union
trade mark is not able to prove that his trade mark is also validly registered in that country of final destination.
Where the country of final destination has not yet been determined, the proprietor of the European Union trade mark should have the right to
prevent all third parties from bringing the goods out of the Union again unless the third party proves that the final destination of the goods is a
country outside the Union and the proprietor of the European Union trade mark is not able to prove that his trade mark is also validly registered
in that country of final destination.
Small consignments: in order to more effectively prevent the entry of counterfeit goods, particularly in the context of sales over the internet
delivered in small consignments, the proprietor of a validly registered trade mark should be entitled to prohibit the importing of such goods into
the Union where it is only the consignor of the counterfeit goods who acts in the course of trade.
In cases where such measures are taken, Member States should ensure that the individuals or entities that had ordered the goods are
informed of the reason for the measures as well as of their legal rights vis-a-vis the consignor.
Limitation of the effects of a European Union trade mark: the amended text stipulates that the trade mark should not entitle the proprietor (i) to
prohibit a third party from using the trade mark for a due cause for any non-commercial use of a mark; (ii) to prohibit a third party from using, in
the course of trade, an earlier right which only applies in a particular locality if that right is recognised by the laws of the Member State in
question and within the limits of the territory in which it is recognised.
Fees: the fees structure is an important element of the EU trade mark system and should therefore be directly regulated in the Regulation and
not by means of delegated acts.
Priority claims: Members consider that the formal conditions of the application should not be entirely left to delegated acts. Some basic rules
should be directly established in the basic act. In particular, it is stipulated that only the formal content of the application can be specified by
delegated acts, not the content in terms of substance.
Revocation: the changes that the Commission proposed would have the effect of impeding proprietors of European Union trade marks
attacked in cancellation proceedings for non-use asking for their conversion into one or several national marks before a decision on the
cancellation is taken. The same provision should be extended to cases where the European Union trade mark is the object of an action for a
declaration of invalidity.
Management Board: the Management Board should be composed of one representative of each Member State, two representatives of the
Commission and one representative of the European Parliament and their respective alternates.
The provisions regarding the Executive Board were deleted. Members considered that there was no convincing evidence that such an
Executive Board would provide additional efficiency in this agency.
Members also proposed that the Executive Director should be appointed by the Management Board from a list of at least three candidates
proposed by a pre-selection committee of the Management Board composed of representatives of the Member States, of the Commission and
of the European Parliament.
Mediation and arbitration centre: the report proposed the creation of a mediation and arbitration centre which is independent of the
decision-making instances. The centre shall establish a register of mediators and arbitrators who help parties to resolve disputes.

2013/0088(COD) - 25/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 551 votes to 83 with 17 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 on the Community trade mark.
Parliaments position adopted at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commissions proposal as follows:
European Union trade mark: given that the term European applies to an area larger than the territory of the European Union, Members
proposed to replace the term Community trade mark by the term European Union trade mark.
The name European Union Trade Marks and Designs Agency was replaced by European Union Intellectual Property Agency.
Signs likely to constitute a European Union trade mark: it is stipulated that the representation can be in any form so long as it uses generally
available technology. The sign should be capable of being represented in the register in a manner which is clear, precise, self-contained,
easily accessible, durable and objective.
A sign should therefore be permitted in any appropriate form, taking account of generally available technology which enables the competent
authorities and the public to determine with precision and clarity the subject matter of protection.
Absolute grounds for refusal: with regard to geographical indications covered by Regulation (EC) No 110/2008 of the European Parliament and
the Council, Members also proposed to include spirit drinks amongst the grounds for refusing registration.
Rights conferred by the EU trade mark: in order to more effectively prevent the entry of counterfeit goods, particularly in the context of sales
over the internet delivered in small consignments, the text states that the proprietor of a validly registered European Union trade mark should
be entitled to prohibit the importing of such goods into the Union where it is only the consignor of the counterfeit goods who acts in the course
of trade. In cases where such measures are taken, Member States should ensure that the individuals or entities that had ordered the goods
are informed of the reason for the measures as well as of their legal rights vis-a-vis the consignor.
With the aim of strengthening trade mark protection and combating counterfeiting more effectively, and without prejudice to WTO rules, in
particular Article V of the GATT on freedom of transit, the proprietor of a European Union trade mark should be entitled to prevent third parties
from bringing goods into the customs territory of the Union without being released for free circulation there, where such goods come from third
countries and bear without authorisation a trade mark which is essentially identical to the European Union trade mark registered in respect of
such goods. This should be without prejudice to the smooth transit of generic medicines, in compliance with the international obligations of the
European Union, in particular as reflected in the 'Declaration on the TRIPS agreement and public health' adopted by the Doha WTO Ministerial
Conference on 14 November 2001.
Limitation of the effects of a European Union trade mark: a European Union trade mark shall not entitle the proprietor to prohibit a third party
from using the trade mark for the purpose of identifying goods or services as those of the proprietor of the trade mark, in particular where the
use of the trade mark:
·

is made in comparative advertising satisfying all conditions set forth in Directive 2006/114/EC;

·

is made to bring to the attention of consumers the resale of genuine goods that have originally been sold by or with the consent of
the proprietor of the trade mark;

·

is made to put forward a legitimate alternative to the goods or services of the proprietor of the trade mark;

·

is made for the purposes of parody, artistic expression, criticism or comment.

Furthermore, the trade mark should not entitle the proprietor (i) to prohibit a third party from using the trade mark for a due cause for any
non-commercial use of a mark; (ii) to prohibit a third party from using, in the course of trade, an earlier right which only applies in a particular
locality if that right is recognised by the laws of the Member State in question and within the limits of the territory in which it is recognised.
Amendment of the register: the text states that where the register is amended, the exclusive rights conferred by the European Union trade
mark shall not prevent any third party from continuing to use a trade mark in relation to goods or services where and to the extent that the use
of the trade mark for those goods or services commenced before the register was amended.
In addition, the amendment of the list of goods or services recorded in the register shall not give the proprietor of the European Union trade
mark the right to oppose or to apply for a declaration of invalidity of a later trade mark where and to the extent that the later trade mark was
either in use, or an application had been made to register the trade mark, for goods or services before the register was amended, and the use
of the trade mark in relation to those goods or services did not infringe the proprietor's rights based on the literal meaning of the record of the
goods and services in the register at that time.
Fees: the fees structure is an important element of the EU trade mark system and should therefore be directly regulated in the Regulation and
not by means of delegated acts.
Priority claims: Members consider that the formal conditions of the application should not be entirely left to delegated acts. Some basic rules
should be directly established in the basic act. In particular, it is stipulated that only the formal content of the application can be specified by
delegated acts, not the content in terms of substance.
Revocation: the changes that the Commission proposed would have the effect of impeding proprietors of European Union trade marks
attacked in cancellation proceedings for non-use asking for their conversion into one or several national marks before a decision on the
cancellation is taken. The same provision should be extended to cases where the European Union trade mark is the object of an action for a
declaration of invalidity.
Interruption of proceedings: Members wanted to set out in the basic act the rules regarding
Interruption of proceedings before the Agency.
Common projects: the proposal provided for a framework of cooperation between the Agency and Member States offices, which defined
essential areas of cooperation and allowed the Agency to coordinate in these areas certain common projects of interest to the Union and
Member States. Parliament felt that it should not be mandatory for Member States to implement the results of such common projects.

Management Board: the Management Board should be composed of one representative of each Member State, two representatives of the
Commission and one representative of the European Parliament and their respective alternates.
The provisions regarding the Executive Board were deleted. Members considered that there was no convincing evidence that such an
Executive Board would provide additional efficiency in this agency.
Members also proposed that the Executive Director should be appointed by the Management Board from a list of at least three candidates
proposed by a pre-selection committee of the Management Board composed of representatives of the Member States, of the Commission and
of the European Parliament.
Mediation and arbitration centre: Parliament proposed the creation of a mediation and arbitration centre that is independent of the
decision-making instances. The centre shall establish a register of mediators and arbitrators who help parties to resolve disputes.

2013/0088(COD) - 26/05/2014 Debate in Council
The Council took note of a Presidency report on the progress made in the ongoing reform of the Community trademark system. The European
Parliament adopted its position in first reading on the draft regulation and the directive on 25 February.
Following the completion of the first technical examination of the Commission proposal for the Regulation in December 2013, the Presidency
tabled a compromise proposal, the examination of which was concluded in March 2014. Taking into consideration delegations' comments, the
Presidency has recently tabled two new compromise proposals concerning both the Regulation and the Directive, which should be treated as a
package.
Discussions have shown the existence of strong support amongst delegations for updating and streamlining the technical provisions of both
the proposed Directive and Regulation with the aim of providing a modern and more legally secure EU and national trade mark system to
users.
A wide convergence of views amongst delegations was seen on the majority of issues, such as:
·

taking due into account the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality concerning trade mark registration procedures;

·

abolishing the requirement of graphical representability of a sign;

·

proposed provisions on grounds of non-registrability which could obtain in other Member States than those where the application for
registration was filed, or which obtain only where a trade mark in a foreign language is translated or transcribed in any script or
official language of the Member State, should be deleted;

·

an earlier trade mark cannot be treated as having reputation outside the Member State concerned;

·

trade marks should not be registered if they are excluded from registration pursuant to national legislation providing for protection of
designations of origin and geographical indications;

·

removing the proposed reference to the function of a trade mark as an indication of origin from the double identity rule;

·

providing for harmonisation as regards trade marks as objects of property at a lower level than the one proposed by the Commission;

·

retaining the possibility of ex officio examination of relative grounds by national offices.

A few issues however remain outstanding and will most likely have to be addressed at a higher political level. These issues are the following:
·

the level of harmonisation of national procedures;

·

the extension of rights with regard to goods brought into the customs territory (transit issue);

·

the extent of the proposed recourse to delegated acts;

·

the funding by OHIM of future cooperation between OHIM and national trademarks offices and the use of OHIM's budgetary
surpluses.

·

the future governance of the Office for Harmonisation in the Internal Market (OHIM), the modalities of future cooperation between
OHIM and national trade mark offices, including the funding of such cooperation by OHIM, the use of the OHIM budgetary surpluses
and the amount of fees.

The Presidency aims to intensify the efforts to reach an agreement within the Council on the whole package by the end of the first semester
2014. The Council instructed its preparatory bodies to take the work forward.

2013/0088(COD) - 12/11/2015 Council position
The Council adopted its position in first reading regarding reform of the Community trademark system. This reform includes a proposal for a
directive to approximate the laws of the Member States on trademarks as well as a parallel proposal amending Regulation (EC) No 207/2009
on the Community trademark. The reform aims to foster innovation and economic growth by making trade mark registration systems all over
the EU more accessible and efficient for businesses in terms of lower costs and complexity, increased speed, greater predictability and legal
security.
With respect to the Councils position on the amendment of the Regulation on the Community trademark, the following main points have been
integrated into the new system:
the adaptation of terminology to the requirements of the Lisbon Treaty (change from Community trade mark to European Union trade
mark);

re-naming the Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market (Trade marks and Designs) (OHIM) to European Union Intellectual
Property Office (Office);
a new structure setting out a lower level of fees for applications for trademarks and holders of trademarks. The fees will be fixed
directly in Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 in the form of an annex, at a level ensuring that: (i) the revenue they produce is in principle
sufficient for the budget of the Office to be balanced; (ii) there is coexistence and complementarity between the EU trade mark and the
national trade mark systems, taking into account the size of the market covered by the EU trade mark and the needs of small and
medium-size enterprises; and (iii) the rights of proprietors of an EU trade mark are enforced efficiently in the Member States;
the provision of an offsetting mechanism enabling Member States to recoup their expenses arising from the provision of services and
procedures related to the enforcement of the European Union trade mark. The overall offsetting of the costs will correspond to 5 % of
the yearly revenue of the Office, with the option of doubling this amount in case of a budgetary surplus;
strengthening cooperation between national offices and the Office to promote convergence of practices and tools in the field of trade
marks and designs. The total amount of funding shall not exceed 15 % of the yearly revenue of the Office;
streamlining technical provisions concerning searches, publication of the application, observations by third parties, revision of
decisions inter partes, continuation of proceedings, opposition period for international registrations;
improvements in the governance structure and implementation of strict financial procedures by the Office;
implementation by national offices of quick and efficient administrative procedures in cases of forfeiture or nullity of a trademark ;
extension of the absolute grounds for refusal to cover designations of origin, geographical indications, traditional terms for wine,
traditional specialities guaranteed and plant variety rights;
extension of the relative grounds for refusal to cover designations of origin and geographical indications;
the entitlement of European Union trade mark holders to prevent the distribution and sale of labels and packaging and of similar items
which may subsequently be used in relation to infringing goods or services;
an explicit provision ensuring that European Union trade mark rights cannot be invoked against prior rights on the mark;
the extension of European Union trade mark protection to cover the use of the mark in trade or company names;
clarification that the right to prevent third countries goods into the customs territory of Member States will lapse if the declarant or the
holder of the goods in question proves that the trade mark holder is not entitled to prohibit the placing of the goods on the market in
the country of final destination;
comprehensive provisions regarding the designation and classification of goods and services in accordance with the case law of the
Court of Justice;
the introduction of the possibility to obtain a European Union certification mark;
providing the Office with the possibility of establishing a Mediation Centre;
the appointment of the Executive Director for a period of five years by the Council by simple majority, from a list of candidates
proposed by the Management Board, following an open and transparent selection procedure;
the alignment of the Regulation to Article 290 TFEU, with a preference for incorporating into the basic act as many provisions as
practicable, including the provisions setting the level of fees.

2013/0088(COD) - 24/11/2015 Commission communication on Council's position
The Commission gave its opinion on the position of the Council on the adoption of a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council
amending Council Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 on the Community trade mark.
The proposal for a Regulation aims at:
streamlining procedures to apply and register an EU trade mark;
modernising and improving the current provisions;
establishing an appropriate framework for cooperation between OHIM and national offices for the purpose of promoting convergence
of practices and developing common tools;
updating the governance of OHIM;
adapting Regulation 207/2009 to the Lisbon Treaty;
resolving key issues pertaining to the financial equilibriums within the EU trade mark system.
Despite concerns related to certain budgetary aspects of the compromise, the Commission can support the compromise reached, especially
those changes which strengthen the position of trade mark holders and have the effect of providing greater legal certainty in the application of
the law on trade marks.
The Council's position in first reading encompasses a significant number of amendments introduced by the European Parliament, including
those required by parallel changes in Directive 2008/95. These amendments aimed to:
complement the transitional period in the Proposal for a Regulation which adjusts the specifications of EU trade marks filed before the
change in classification practice in the light of the case law of the Court of Justice by providing safeguards to third parties that had filed
trade mark applications in the meantime;
set the amount of fees payable to the OHIM which is currently addressed in Commission Regulation (EC) No 2869/95 directly in
Regulation 207/2009 itself in the form of an Annex;
change the name of the agency to "European Union Intellectual Property Office". The Commission regrets that the new name does not
represent the actual core activity and does not adequately reflect the fact that the "Office" is an "agency" of the EU. On the other hand,
although the Commission can endorse the idea supported by the co-legislators to set up a mediation centre within the agency, it would
prefer that its tasks do not extend to arbitration activities.
As regards the new cooperation framework between national intellectual property offices and the EU agency, the Commission approved the
amendments aiming to:
make this cooperation mandatory, however, by giving national offices the possibility to opt-out in certain circumstances and to ensure
a close consultation of trade mark users on the projects developed in this context;
increase the maximum amount of budget allocated to this activity to 15% of the annual revenues of the agency, while the European
Parliament had supported an increase to 20%.

With respect to the governance of the agency, while the Commission regrets that the Council followed the European Parliament's view and
deleted the provisions in the Proposal for a Regulation allowing for the setting up of an Executive Board, it supports the new composition of the
Management Board including a representative of the European Parliament.
As regards the European Parliament amendments not included in Council position at first reading, the Commission:
regretted the deletion of a procedure from the proposal on the selection and appointment of the Director of OHIM. It stated that this
should not be considered as a precedent for future reforms of other EU agencies;
welcomed, on the other hand, the fact that the Council did neither take on board the European Parliament's proposal to maintain the
current provision in Regulation 207/2009 allowing the Director of the agency to make proposals to amend the Regulation, nor to
formally attribute the nomination powers to the Director instead of the Management Board;
supported the Council's opposition to further complementing limitations of the effects of a trade mark as favoured by the European
Parliament whilst accepting the final compromise of adding clarifying language in the relevant recital to address in particular the issue
of fundamental rights and freedoms including artistic expression;
supported the Council's deletion of the relevant provision on the import of small consignments.
As regards the new provisions introduced by the Council, the Commission:
agreed on a compromise solution with respect to the provision on goods in transit, whereby the right to prevent goods being brought
into the EU territory shall lapse if the declarant/holder of the goods is able to show before the competent court that the trade mark
proprietor is not entitled to prohibit the placing of the goods on the market of the country of final destination;
supported the Councils position to adopt new amounts of fees payable to the OHIM (to be set in an Annex to Regulation 207/2009)
with the aim of bringing renewal fees down to the same level of application fees;
accepted the addition of a new legal basis to offset Member States for costs incurred by their national offices as a functional part of the
EU trade mark system;
approved the re-introduction of a provision, originally proposed by the Commission and deleted by the European Parliament, which
permits to transfer a budgetary surplus of the OHIM to the EU budget . While the Commission fully endorsed the principle of such a
transfer, it regretted that the conditions established by the Council are likely to heavily limit the scope of application of this new
provision in practice;
regretted the introduction by the Council of provisions on the use of implementing acts and on the respective committee procedures
for their adoption as this would require the use of the ordinary legislative procedure even for small technical changes.
In a statement on certain budgetary aspects of the Agreement, the Commission regretted in particular that the co-legislators have been unable
to agree on one of the key elements of its proposal concerning the budget of the OHIM: the automatic review of the level of the fees in case of
significant recurrent surplus and the automatic transfer of such surplus to the EU budget.
The Commission will continue to review the level of the fees charged by the OHIM in view of proposing to adjust them as closely as possible to
the costs of the services provided to the industry and of preventing the accumulation of significant surpluses within the OHIM.
Moreover, in line with the principle of administrative autonomy, the Commission will pursue all appropriate means to ensure that these
agencies, Institutions and bodies effectively bear such costs or that they refund the EU budget of these costs.

2013/0088(COD) - 07/12/2015 Committee recommendation tabled for plenary, 2nd reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the recommendation for second reading contained in the report by Cecilia WIKSTRÖM (ADLE, SE)
on the Council position at first reading with a view to the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending
Council Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 on the Community trade mark and Commission Regulation (EC) No 2868/95 implementing Council
Regulation (EC) No 40/94 on the Community trade mark, and repealing Commission Regulation (EC) No 2869/95 on the fees payable to the
Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs).
The committee recommended that the European Parliament approve the Council position at first reading without amendment.

2013/0088(COD) - 15/12/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, 2nd reading
The European Parliament adopted a legislative resolution on the Council position at first reading with a view to the adoption of a regulation of
the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 on the Community trade mark and Commission
Regulation (EC) No 2868/95 implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 40/94 on the Community trade mark, and repealing Commission
Regulation (EC) No 2869/95 on the fees payable to the Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs).
Parliament approved the Council position at first reading without amendment.

2013/0088(COD) - 16/12/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to reform the EU trade mark system with a view to making trade mark registration systems throughout the European Union more
accessible and efficient in order to foster innovation and economic growth.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2015/2424 of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No
207/2009 on the Community trade mark and Commission Regulation (EC) No 2868/95 implementing Council Regulation (EC) No 40/94 on the
Community trade mark, and repealing Commission Regulation (EC) No 2869/95 on the fees payable to the Office for Harmonization in the
Internal Market (Trade Marks and Designs).
CONTENT: this Regulation amends Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 on the Community trade mark as well as the parallel directive to the recast

of Directive 2008/95/EC creating a new legal framework for the reform of the current trademark system whose aim is to strengthen trade mark
protection and combat counterfeiting more effectively.
The new legal framework is also aimed at encouraging innovation and economic growth by making trade mark registration systems all over the
European Union more accessible and efficient for businesses in terms of lower costs and complexity, increased speed, greater predictability
and legal certainty.
Adjustments to terminology: the amending Regulation replaces Community trade mark by European Union trade mark. In order to better reflect
the actual work carried out by the Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market (trade marks and designs), its name should be replaced by
European Union Intellectual Property Office (the Office).
Signs of which an EU trade mark may consist: in order to allow for more flexibility while also ensuring greater legal certainty with regard to the
means of representation of trade marks, the Regulation deletes the requirement of graphic representability from the definition of an EU trade
mark. A sign should be permitted to be represented in any appropriate form using generally available technology, and thus not necessarily by
graphic means, as long as the representation is clear, precise, self-contained, easily accessible, intelligible, durable and objective.
Extension of the grounds of absolute refusal: the Regulation extends the scope of those absolute grounds to cover also protected traditional
terms for wine and traditional specialities guaranteed.
Legal certainty: in order to ensure legal certainty and full consistency with the principle of priority, under which a registered earlier trade mark
takes precedence over later registered trade marks, the Regulation provides that the enforcement of rights conferred by an EU trade mark
should be without prejudice to the rights of proprietors acquired prior to the filing or priority date of the EU trade mark.
Rights conferred by an EU trade mark: the registration of an EU trade mark shall confer on the proprietor exclusive rights therein. The
proprietor of that EU trade mark may prohibit: (i) affixing the sign to the goods or to the packaging thereof; (ii) importing or exporting the goods
under the sign; (iii) using the sign as a trade or company name or part of a trade or company name; (iv) using the sign in comparative
advertising in a manner that is contrary to Directive 2006/114/EC.
Furthermore, the proprietor should not be entitled to prevent the fair and honest use of the EU trade mark for the purpose of identifying or
referring to the goods or services as those of the proprietor and therefore being in accordance with honest practices in industrial and
commercial matters.
Combatting counterfeiting: the Regulation stipulates that the proprietor of an EU trade mark should be entitled to prevent third parties from
bringing goods, in the course of trade, into the Union without being released for free circulation there, where such goods come from third
countries and bear without authorisation a trade mark which is identical or essentially identical with the EU trade mark registered in respect of
such goods. The entitlement of the proprietor of an EU trade mark shall lapse if evidence is provided by the declarant or the holder of the
goods that the proprietor of the EU trade mark is not entitled to prohibit the placing of the goods on the market in the country of final
destination.
Goods and services protected by the EU trademark: the new Regulation includes rules for the designation and classification of goods and
services in Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 in accordance with the case-law of the Court of Justice of the European Union.
It also adds a set of specific provisions for the purpose of providing protection to European Union certification marks (EU certification marks)
which allow a certifying institution or organisation to permit adherents to the certification system to use the mark as a sign for goods or
services complying with the certification requirements.
Procedural provisions: the Regulation provides for the implementation of efficient and expeditious administrative procedures by the national
offices for revocation or declaration of invalidity of trade marks. It introduces provisions to streamline technical measures as regards the
regime of EU and national trade mark searches, the publication of the application, the observations by third parties, review of the inter partes
procedure, the rules governing the calculation and duration of time limits for the opposition of international registrations.
Fees to be paid by applicants and proprietors of trade marks: the Regulation sets out the fee amounts directly in Regulation (EC) No 207/2009
in the form of an annex. The amounts of the fees should be fixed at a level which ensures that: (i) the revenue they produce is in principle
sufficient for the budget of the Office to be balanced; (ii) there is coexistence and complementarity between the EU trade mark and the national
trade mark systems, also taking into account the size of the market covered by the EU trade mark and the needs of small and medium-sized
enterprises; and third, the rights of proprietors of an EU trade mark are enforced efficiently in the Member States.
Offsetting mechanism: the setting up of an offsetting mechanism to cover expenses incurred by national industrial property offices resulting
from the handling of procedures involving EU trade marks. 5% of the Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market (OHIM) annual revenue is
foreseen for the offsetting mechanism, with the possibility of increasing this amount by another 5% in case of a substantive budgetary surplus.
Cooperation between the national offices and the Office: the Regulation establishes an appropriate framework for cooperation between the
Office and the industrial property offices of the Member States, including the Benelux Office for Intellectual Property, defining key areas of
cooperation and enabling the Office to coordinate relevant common projects of interest to the Union and the Member States and to finance, up
to a maximum amount, those projects. That financial support may take the form of grants and in-kind contributions. The total amount of funding
shall not exceed 15 % of the yearly revenue of the Office.
Governance: new provisions enhance the governance structure and provide for the establishment of sound financial procedures within the
Office. The Executive Director shall be appointed by the Council by simple majority, from a list of candidates proposed by the Management
Board, following an open and transparent selection procedure. The term of office of the Executive Director shall be five years.
ENTRY INTO FORCE AND APPLICATION: 23.03.2016.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts specifying the detailed arrangements of the Regulation.
The power to adopt delegated acts shall be conferred on the Commission for an indeterminate period of time from 23 March 2016. The
European Parliament or the Council may formulate objections with regard to the delegated act within a period of two months of its notification
(this period may be extended by two months). If the European Parliament and the Council object, the delegated act may not enter into force.

