Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2884(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2013 progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina

Subject
8.20 Enlargement of the Union
Geographical area
Bosnia and Herzegovina

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE PACK Doris

02/10/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D BOZKURT Emine
ALDE LUDFORD Baroness
Sarah
Verts/ALE CORNELISSEN
Marije
ECR TANNOCK Charles
GUE/NGL VULJANIĆ Nikola
EFD BELDER Bas

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

FÜLE Štefan

Key events
21/10/2013

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

17/12/2013

Debate in Council

05/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

06/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

06/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

06/02/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

T7-0102/2014

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2884(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Summary

Committee dossier

AFET/7/14250

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE524.563

13/12/2013

EP

Motion for a resolution

B7-0074/2014

28/01/2014

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0102/2014

06/02/2014

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)414

18/06/2014

Summary

2013/2884(RSP) - 06/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 468 votes to 80 with 35 abstentions a resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on Bosnia
and Herzegovina.
General considerations: Parliament was deeply concerned at the continuing lack of common vision displayed by the political leaders of the
countrys three ethnic communities. It noted that the complex and inefficient institutional architecture deriving from Annex 4 of the Dayton
Agreement, as well as the inaction of the BiH political leaders and their inability to compromise, had continued to have a negative impact on
the countrys capacity to progress towards the EU and to improve citizens lives.
Political groups at all levels of power in the country were urged to step up cooperation and dialogue in order to make progress on the reform
path. Members called for a shift away from the nationalist and ethnocentric rhetoric coming from the leadership of the three constitutive
peoples in BiH. They reiterated that constitutional reform remained key to transforming BiH into an effective and fully functional state, and
urged the Federation to consider concrete proposals in this regard, including the merger of some cantons and the redistribution of
competences. All political parties were asked to take part in this process in a constructive and open manner and to make use of the advice and
guidance that the Venice Commission can provide during this process.
Whilst welcoming the six-point agreement reached in Brussels on 1 October 2013, Parliament deplored the obstruction of its implementation
by centralist forces.
It invited the Commission to further strengthen efforts to facilitate an agreement on the implementation of the Sejdi?-Finci ruling guaranteeing
equal rights for all constituent peoples and citizens.
Members asked the EUs Heads of State and Government and Foreign Ministers to strengthen their personal commitment to the country.
Political criteria: Parliament condemned political posturing and called for more political accountability of political leaders to the people of
Bosnia and Herzegovina. It wanted all political parties represented in the BiH Parliamentary Assembly to urgently adopt the changes to the
electoral law needed to enable the October 2014 general elections to be held, reiterating that the decisions of the BiH Constitutional Court
were final and binding and must therefore be implemented.
Members expressed serious concern about the inefficiency of the judicial system and the growing inability to implement court rulings. They
also expressed concern about the financial sustainability of the public administration, its fragmentation and politicisation and the lack of
political will for its reform. Parliament stressed the need for action to counter the high rates of corruption at all levels of public life and the
complex connections between political actors, business and the media, and noted that that organised crime, money laundering and trafficking
in human beings, drugs and goods continued to take place in the absence of effective institutions. It welcomed the agreement between BiH,
Montenegro and Serbia on the establishment of a joint coordination centre to strengthen the fight against cross-border crime.
Members went onto express concern about the growing political and financial pressure on the media, and threats against journalists, and
about hate speech, threats, harassment and discrimination, particularly towards the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender/transsexual and
intersex (LGBTI) community.
Parliament was satisfied that the backlog of war crimes cases has also been reduced but called for efforts to be stepped up as regards the
investigation and prosecution of these crimes, including an adequate level of witness protection.
Socio-economic issues: Members urged the competent authorities to strengthen domestic economic policy coordination and to improve the
composition and efficiency of public spending and of the large ineffective public sector, with its multiple overlapping competences, and to
safeguard financial sector stability by strengthening the legislative and regulatory framework. They stressed that the weak enforcement of the
law and anti-corruption measures hampered the business environment and discouraged foreign investment. Parliament was also concerned
about the countrys inefficient social protection arrangements despite a high level of public expenditure. It called for labour market reforms in
order to tackle the very high unemployment rate, and further measures to facilitate the participation in the labour market of the countrys many
young unemployed.
Regional cooperation: whilst commending BiH for its constructive role in regional cooperation, Parliament called on it to continue its efforts to
resolve outstanding border and property issues with its neighbouring countries. BiH should also continue to cooperate with the Commission
regarding the adaptation of the Interim Agreement / Stabilisation and Association Agreement, especially in terms of cross-border trade.
Lastly, Parliament called on EU Member States to shorten the asylum procedures for citizens of Western Balkan countries that enjoy visa-free
travel within the Schengen zone as an effective means of reducing the number of unfounded asylum applications, while still giving the
applicants the right to make their case in a full interview.

