Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0253(COD)

Procedure completed

Single Resolution Mechanism and Single Resolution Fund: uniform rules
and procedure for the resolution of credit institutions and certain investment
firms
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 2009/0142(COD)
Amended by 2015/0270(COD)
Amended by 2016/0361(COD)
Subject
2.50.03 Securities and financial markets, stock exchange, CIUTS,
investments
2.50.04 Banks and credit
2.50.10 Financial supervision
2.80 Cooperation between administrations
5.20.02 Single currency, euro, euro area
5.20.03 European Central Bank (ECB), ESCB
8.40.08 Agencies and bodies of the EU

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D FERREIRA Elisa

02/07/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE WORTMANN-KOOL
Corien
ALDE GOULARD Sylvie
Verts/ALE GIEGOLD Sven
Verts/ALE LAMBERTS
Philippe
ECR FORD Vicky
GUE/NGL HÄNDEL Thomas
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

BUDG

Budgets

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

CONT

Budgetary Control

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI
AFCO

Legal Affairs
Constitutional Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

Appointed

NI STOYANOV Dimitar

17/09/2013

PPE LE GRIP Constance

14/10/2013

Commissioner
BARNIER Michel

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
10/07/2013

Legislative proposal published

COM(2013)0520

Summary

10/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

15/11/2013

Debate in Council

17/12/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

08/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

28/01/2014

Debate in Council

04/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

06/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

06/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

06/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

18/02/2014

Debate in Council

11/03/2014

Debate in Council

15/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/07/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

15/07/2014

Final act signed

15/07/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

30/07/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

A7-0478/2013

Summary

T7-0095/2014

Summary

Summary

Summary

T7-0341/2014

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0253(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 2009/0142(COD)
Amended by 2015/0270(COD)
Amended by 2016/0361(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/7/13435

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal
Committee draft report

COM(2013)0520

10/07/2013

EC

PE519.706

25/09/2013

EP

Summary

Economic and Social Committee: opinion,
report

CES5008/2013

17/10/2013

ESC

Amendments tabled in committee

PE521.747

21/10/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE521.793

22/10/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE521.797

22/10/2013

EP

CON/2014/0076
OJ C 109 11.04.2014, p. 0002

06/11/2013

ECB

European Central Bank: opinion, guideline,
report

Summary

Committee opinion

JURI

PE521.523

07/11/2013

EP

Committee opinion

AFCO

PE519.819

12/12/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0478/2013

08/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at
1st reading/single reading

T7-0095/2014

06/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0341/2014

15/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

COM(2014)0710

24/11/2014

EC

32015Q1224
OJ L 339 24.12.2015, p. 0058

16/12/2015

EU

Document attached to the procedure
For information

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2014/806
OJ L 225 30.07.2014, p. 0001 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

Delegated acts
2014/2882(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2015/3039(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2015/3036(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2017/2851(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2013/0253(COD) - 10/07/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish a single European framework of resolution rules for credit establishments and to ensure the consistent application of
these resolution rules.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.

BACKGROUND: the need to rapidly achieve the Banking Union to ensure financial stability and growth in the euro area as well as throughout
the single market was underlined by the Commission in its communications entitled A Roadmap towards a Banking Union (September 2012)
and A blueprint for a deep and genuine economic and monetary union: Launching a European Debate (November 2012).
In March 2013, the European Council committed to complete the Banking Union via the following steps.
the remaining legislative procedures to set up the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) conferring powers on the ECB to supervise
Euro Area banks should be concluded as a priority;
agreement should be reached in the summer of 2013 on how the European Stability Mechanism (ESM) could, following the
establishment of the SSM and a review of bank balance sheets including the definition of legacy assets, recapitalise banks directly;
likewise, in summer 2013, agreement should be reached on the Commissions proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and
of the Council establishing a framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms;
lastly, the Commissions proposal for a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) together with appropriate and effective backstop
arrangements should be examined as a matter of priority with the intention of adopting them during the current parliamentary cycle.
It was agreed that the Banking Union would cover all Euro Area Member States and those non-Euro Area Member States that choose to join.
As recognised by the European Council, in the Banking Union, bank supervision and resolution need to be exercised by the same level of
authority. The same EU-wide single rulebook of prudential requirements6 and rules on bank resolution will apply within the Banking Union and
in all other Member States.
The swift agreement on a Single Supervisory Mechanism in April 2012 has laid the ground for a Banking Union, as integral part of the
Economic and Monetary Union. The Single Supervisory Mechanism is set to enter into force in mid-2014. The ECB will assume ultimate
responsibility for the supervision of all Euro Area banks. The Single Resolution Mechanism meanwhile should commence operations in
January 2015, when the Directive which will provide the rulebook governing bank resolution across the internal market is set to enter into force
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the Commission has taken into account the analysis carried out in the Impact Assessment conducted for the
adoption of the proposal for Directive establishing a framework for the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms which
assessed operational and legal aspects relevant to the establishment of a single resolution mechanism (SRM).
With regard to the ability of the SRM to produce efficient decisions, it is considered that a central decision-making level will contribute to
minimizing the costs of resolution both since it can attain significant advantages in terms of economies of scale over a network, and because it
is instrumental to the enforceability and optimality of the resolution decision.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: the proposal aims to preserve the integrity of the Member States banking markets participating in the Single Supervisory
Mechanism (SSM) by the putting in place of a Single Resolution Mechanism (SRM) to deal with failing banks.
The SRM would permit the application of uniform rules to any bank in difficulty in a participating Member State and to proceed effectively
towards the resolution of bank failures in such a way as to minimise the cost for the taxpayer and for the real economy.
Structure of the SRM: the composition of the SRM ensures that its decision-making structures are legally sound and effective, including in
times of crisis. The decision-making structures of the Single Resolution Mechanism include the Single Resolution Board, the national
resolution authorities of participating Member States and the European Commission. The tasks of the SRM are shared between Single
Resolution Board and the national resolution authorities.
The European Commission will participate in the SRM only in so far as needed to perform specific tasks provided for in this proposed
Regulation and in relation to State aid scrutiny under the Treaty.
Resolution - operation and procedure: to ensure that all participating Member States have full confidence in the quality and impartiality of the
bank resolution process, resolution decisions will be prepared and monitored centrally by a Single Resolution Board to ensure a coherent and
uniform approach is applied.
The objective of resolution is to ensure the continuity of the banks critical functions, to protect financial stability, to minimise reliance on
taxpayers money, and to protect depositors.
Resolution is triggered by means of the following process:
the ECB, as bank supervisor, notifies that a bank is failing to Commission, to the Resolution Board and to the relevant national
authorities and ministries;
the Resolution Board assesses if there is a systemic threat and no private sector solution and, if so, the Resolution Board
recommends to the Commission to initiate resolution;
on the basis of the Resolution Boards recommendations, or of its own initiative, the Commission will have the power to initiate the
resolution procedure; in this case, it would also indicate to the Resolution Board the framework of the resolution tools that will be
applied in each case and on the use of the Fund;
the national resolution authorities execute the resolution measures decided by the Board according to the national law. If the national
resolution authorities do not comply with the decisions of the Board, the Board has the power to supersede the national resolution
authorities and address certain decisions for the implementation of the resolution measures directly to the banks.
Single Bank Resolution Fund: to support the resolution process and enhance its effectiveness, the proposed Regulation establishes a Single
Bank Resolution Fund. This Fund will be able to pool significant resources from bank contributions and therefore protect taxpayers more
effectively than national funds, while at the same time providing a level playing field for banks across participating Member States.
The primary objective of the Single Resolution Fund is to ensure financial stability, rather than to absorb losses or provide capital to an
institution under resolution. The Fund should not be considered as a bailout fund.
On the basis of 2011 data on banks and an estimated amount of covered deposits held in banks in the euro-area, the 1% target level for the
Single Resolution Fund would correspond to around EUR 55 billion. A transitional period of 10 years is foreseen before the Fund reaches its
full target level.
If no disbursements are made from the Fund during the initial build-up phase, the banking industry would annually contribute around one tenth

of the target amount or in absolute terms around EUR 5.5 billion.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the Resolution Board will be fully financed from contributions from the financial institutions. Around 6 000
Eurozone banks, in addition to their annual contributions to the Single Bank Resolution Fund, will pay a fixed pro rata of this amount to fully
cover the Boards budgetary expenses. However, there will be some minor implications on the Unions budget in the start-up phase of the
Board.
The incidence on the Commissions administrative expenditure is estimated at EUR 10.575 million for the period 2014-2020.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2013/0253(COD) - 06/11/2013 European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report
Opinion of the European Central Bank on a proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing uniform rules
and a uniform procedure for the resolution of credit institutions and certain investment firms in the framework of a Single Resolution
Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution.
The European Central Bank, consulted on 3 September 2013 by the Council, fully supports the establishment of a Single Resolution
Mechanism (SRM), which will contribute as a necessary complement to the Single Supervisory Mechanism, to strengthening the architecture
and stability of the economic and monetary union.
The ECB is of the view that the general principles set out below are of key importance for the SRM to be effective, and welcomes that they are
largely reflected in the proposed regulation:
the SRMs scope should encompass all credit institutions established in Member States participating in the SSM;
a strong and independent single resolution authority (SRA) should be at the centre of the SRM, with sufficient decision-making
authority to take resolution action in the interest of stability within the euro area and of the Union as a whole;
the decision-making process should allow for timely and efficient decision-making, if necessary, within a very short time, such as a few
days or, where necessary, a few hours. It should be based on adequate resolution planning;
the SRA should have adequate powers, tools and financial resources to resolve institutions as provided for in the forthcoming Bank
Recovery and Resolution Directive (BRRD);
the SRA should have adequate powers, tools and financial resources to resolve institutions;
the envisaged framework for the SRM should provide for close coordination between the SRMs resolution function and the SSMs
supervisory function, while adhering to and respecting the respective institutional responsibilities.
The ECB strongly supports the envisaged timeline for the SRM. Under this timeline, the SRM would enter into force by the middle of 2014 and
would become fully operational by 1 January 2015.
The ECBs specific observations concern the following issues:
Governance and accountability of the Single Resolution Board: the responsibilities of authorities involved in the resolution process should be
more precisely defined to avoid any duplication or overlap of powers. With regard to the Resolution Boards powers, a fuller description of how
these powers will be executed would ensure, at the same time, that there is sufficient flexibility to deal with each individual resolution case. The
proposed regulation has to ensure that any actual resolution decision by the Commission is taken as prompt as necessary.
Cooperation between resolution and supervisory authorities: the ECB considers it crucial that the respective roles and responsibilities of
resolution authorities and supervisory authorities are kept distinct before any crisis is envisaged, and at the first stage of a crisis, where the
supervisor may apply early intervention measures to a credit institution, and when assessing the conditions for resolution and the write down of
capital instruments.
The ECBs participation in the Resolution Board and general involvement of central banks: the ECB recommends that the ECB will have an
open invitation to observe in all (plenary and executive) meetings of the Resolution Board.
Resolvability assessment and the minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL): while consultation with the supervisor is
sufficient regarding the assessment itself, measures to remove impediments to resolvability should be jointly determined and implemented in
cooperation with the supervisor. This assessment should not assume any financial support by the SBRF, other than for the provision of
temporary liquidity. The MREL should therefore be determined by the Resolution Board in cooperation with the competent authorities.
Bail-in: the proposed regulation provides that the bail-in provisions shall apply from 1 January 2018. This means that from 2015 until 2018, the
SRM may need to resolve banks without this resolution tool.
In the light of this, the ECB supports implementing the bail-in tool earlier than 2018. Furthermore, having the bail-in tool in place would
contribute towards legal certainty, consistency and predictability, thus avoiding ad hoc solutions.
Covered deposits should have a super priority, while eligible deposits from natural persons and small- and medium-sized enterprises should
take priority over other senior unsecured claims.
Single bank resolution fund: the proposed regulation provides for a target level of at least 1% of covered deposits for the SBRF. The ECB is of
the view that covered deposits are not the most appropriate benchmark, given that they do not entirely reflect possible funding costs in
resolution. This benchmark should therefore be complemented by a reference value relating to total liabilities, which should be adequately
calibrated by the Resolution Board, while keeping the 1 % of covered deposits as a floor.
Backstop arrangements: the ECB notes that the proposed regulation remains vague on the envisaged design of the additional backstop
arrangements. In particular, while the proposed regulation provides for the possibility of borrowing from third parties, it does not specify
whether the additional backstop arrangements would also include temporary access to public funds or would solely draw on borrowing from
the private sector.
Against this background, the ECB considers it important that participating Member States cater for a joint and solid public backstop to be

available upon the entry into force of the proposed regulation.
This public backstop could comprise a credit line granting the SRM access to joint fiscal resources from the participating Member States. To
satisfy the principle of fiscal neutrality, the credit line would have to be fully recouped in case it were to be activated.
Relation with the State aid framework: more analysis may be warranted in the future regarding the application of State aid rules by analogy
and with regard to the interplay between the State aid considerations and financial stability considerations in the context of resolution.

2013/0253(COD) - 08/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the report by Elisa FERREIRA (S&D, PT) on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council establishing uniform rules and a uniform procedure for the resolution of credit institutions and certain
investment firms in the framework of a Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution Fund and amending Regulation (EU) No
1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
The parliamentary committee recommended that Parliaments position at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure should amend
the Commissions proposal as follows:
Purpose: uniform rules and procedure should be applied by the Single Resolution Board (SRB), jointly with the Commission and the resolution
authorities of the participating Member States, in the framework of a single resolution mechanism laid down by the regulation. The resolution
mechanism would underpin the Single Bank Resolution Fund.
General principles: Parliament added that:
·

every action, proposal or policy of the Board, the Commission or of a national resolution authority in the framework of the SRM
should be undertaken with a view to promoting the stability of the financial system within the Union and within each participating
Member State;

·

decisions should neither require Member States to provide extraordinary public financial support nor directly impinge on the fiscal
responsibilities of the Member States;

·

the Board should ensure that the representatives of the employees of the entities concerned are informed and, where appropriate,
consulted;

·

all actions should respect the principle of non-discrimination with regard to any Member State or group of Member States;

·

the Commission should act independently, strictly in accordance with the objectives and principles set out in the Regulation and in
the Directive laying down a framework for recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms [BRRD]. The separation
of tasks should be guaranteed through appropriate organisational adjustments.

Resolution procedure: Parliament introduced amendments to the decision-making procedure.
Where the ECB assesses that a bank is in a situation of known or likely default, it shall notify that assessment without delay to the Commission
and the Board.
When it considers that all the conditions are met, the Board should transmit to the Commission a draft decision to place the institution under
resolution. The Commission would then decide whether it adopts the Boards draft decision and would propose a framework of the resolution
tools to be applied to the bank in question and, where applicable, of the use of the Fund.
Where the Commission intends not to adopt the draft decision submitted by the Board or to adopt it with amendments, it should send the draft
decision back to the Board, explaining why it does not intend to adopt it or, as the case may be, explaining the reasons for its intended
amendments, and requesting its revision.
The Commission may establish a deadline within which the Board may amend its initial draft decision on the basis of the Commission's
proposed amendments and resubmit it to the Commission. Except in duly justified cases of emergency, the Board shall have at least five
working days to revise the draft decision following a request by the Commission.
The Single Resolution Board: the Single Resolution Board would be accountable to the European Parliament and to the Council. The Board
should act independently and its members should have the necessary expertise on bank restructuring and insolvency. It should have the
capacity to deal with large banking groups and have the capacity to act swiftly and impartially. It should ensure that appropriate account is
taken of national financial stability, financial stability of the Union and the internal market.
The appointment of the Executive Director and the Deputy Executive Director is subject to the European Parliaments approval.
Upon request, the Executive Director shall hold confidential oral discussions behind closed doors with the Chair and Vice-Chairs of the
competent committee of the European Parliament where such discussions are required for the exercise of the European Parliaments powers
under the Treaty.
Rules on transparency and access to documents would also be based on those laid down for the ECBs banking supervisor.
Members also increased the role of national parliaments in the system.
Single Resolution Fund: with a view to breaking the link between sovereigns and banks and ensuring the efficiency and the credibility of the
SRM, in particular while the Fund is not entirely funded, Parliament suggested that the SRB should endeavour to contract for the Fund a loan
facility, preferably utilising a European public instrument, to ensure the immediate availability of adequate financial means to be used where
the amounts raised or available are not sufficient. Any loan from that loan facility should be reimbursed by the Fund within an agreed
timeframe.
Any expenses incurred by the use of the borrowings have to be borne by the Board itself and not by the Union budget or the participating
Member States.

2013/0253(COD) - 06/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st reading/single
reading
The European Parliament adopted amendments (441 votes to 141, with 17 abstentions) to the proposal for a regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council establishing uniform rules and a uniform procedure for the resolution of credit institutions and certain investment
firms in the framework of a Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution Fund and amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of
the European Parliament and of the Council.
The matter was referred back to the committee responsible for reconsideration. The vote was postponed until a later session.
The main amendments adopted in plenary are as follows :
Purpose: Parliament stipulated that the uniform rules and the uniform banking resolution procedure should be applied by the Single Resolution
Board (SRB), jointly with the Commission and the resolution authorities of the participating Member States, in the framework of a single
resolution mechanism laid down in the Regulation. The resolution mechanism would underpin the Single Bank Resolution Fund.
General principles: Parliament added that:
·

every action, proposal or policy of the Board, the Commission or of a national resolution authority in the framework of the SRM
should be undertaken with a view to promoting the stability of the financial system within the Union and within each participating
Member State with full regard and duty of care for the unity and integrity of the internal market;

·

decisions or actions of the Board or of the Commission should neither require Member States to provide extraordinary public financial
support nor directly impinge on the fiscal responsibilities of the Member States;

·

when making decisions or taking actions, the Board should ensure that the representatives of the employees of the entities
concerned are informed and, where appropriate, consulted;

·

actions, proposals and policies of the Commission, the Board and national resolution authorities should respect the principle of
non-discrimination with regard to any Member State or group of Member States;

·

the Commission should act independently, separately from its other tasks, and strictly in accordance with the objectives and
principles set out in the Regulation and in the Directive laying down a framework for recovery and resolution of credit institutions and
investment firms [BRRD]. The separation of tasks should be guaranteed through appropriate organisational adjustments.

Resolution procedure: Parliament introduced amendments to the decision-making procedure.
Where the ECB, on its own initiative or following a communication from a national competent authority of a participating Member State,
assesses that a bank is in a situation of known or likely default, it shall notify that assessment without delay to the Commission and the Board.
When it considers that all the conditions are met, the Board should transmit to the Commission a draft decision to place the institution under
resolution. The Commission would then decide whether it adopts the Boards draft decision and would propose a framework of the resolution
tools to be applied to the bank in question and, where applicable, of the use of the Fund.
Where the Commission intends not to adopt the draft decision submitted by the Board or to adopt it with amendments, it should send the draft
decision back to the Board, explaining why it does not intend to adopt it or, as the case may be, explaining the reasons for its intended
amendments, and requesting its revision.
The Commission may establish a deadline within which the Board may amend its initial draft decision on the basis of the Commission's
proposed amendments and resubmit it to the Commission. Except in duly justified cases of emergency, the Board shall have at least five
working days to revise the draft decision following a request by the Commission.
The Single Resolution Board: the Single Resolution Board would consist of (i) the Executive Director, (ii) the Deputy Executive Director, (iii) a
representative appointed by the Commission, (iv) a representative appointed by the ECB, and (v) members appointed by each participating
Member State, representing the national resolution authorities, each of whom would have voting rights.The European Banking Authority (EBA)
should attend the meetings of the Board as an observer. The Board should be accountable to the European Parliament and to the Council.
The Board should act independently and its members should have the necessary expertise on bank restructuring and insolvency. It should
have the capacity to deal with large banking groups and have the capacity to act swiftly and impartially. It should ensure that appropriate
account is taken of national financial stability, financial stability of the Union and the internal market.
The appointment of the Executive Director and the Deputy Executive Director is subject to the European Parliaments approval.
Upon request, the Executive Director shall hold confidential oral discussions behind closed doors with the Chair and Vice-Chairs of the
competent committee of the European Parliament where such discussions are required for the exercise of the European Parliaments powers
under the Treaty.
Rules on transparency and access to documents would also be based on those laid down for the ECBs banking supervisor.
Members also increased the role of national parliaments in the system.
Single Resolution Fund: the proposed Regulation provides that in 10 years a European resolution fund should be operational, financed by the
banks contributions and representing 1% of deposits covered.
With a view to breaking the link between sovereigns and banks and ensuring the efficiency and the credibility of the SRM, in particular while
the Fund is not entirely funded, Parliament suggested that the SRB should endeavour to contract for the Fund a loan facility, preferably
utilising a European public instrument, to ensure the immediate availability of adequate financial means to be used where the amounts raised
or available are not sufficient. Any loan from that loan facility should be reimbursed by the Fund within an agreed timeframe.
Any expenses incurred by the use of the borrowings have to be borne by the Board itself and not by the Union budget or the participating
Member States.

2013/0253(COD) - 15/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 570 votes to 88 with 13 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council establishing uniform rules and a uniform procedure for the resolution of credit institutions and certain
investment firms in the framework of a Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single Bank Resolution Fund and amending Regulation (EU) No
1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
The matter had been referred back to the committee responsible during the plenary session of 6 February 2014.
Parliament adopted its position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary were the result
of a compromise agreement between Parliament and Council. They amend the proposal as follows :
Purpose: the regulation would establish uniform rules and a uniform procedure for the resolution of banks that are established in participating
Member States, meaning Member States whose currency is the euro or Member States whose currency is not the euro which have
established a close cooperation in accordance with Council Regulation on the single supervisory mechanism (SSM).
Parliament and Council agreed that the uniform rules and the uniform banking resolution procedure should be applied by the Single Resolution
Board (SRB), jointly with the Commission and the Council, in the framework of a single resolution mechanism laid down in the Regulation. The
resolution mechanism would underpin the Single Bank Resolution Fund.
It is stipulated that the use of the Fund shall be contingent upon the entry into force of an agreement among the participating Member States
on transferring the funds raised at national level towards the Fund as well as on a progressive merger of the different funds raised at national
level to be allocated to national compartments of the Fund.
General principles: Parliament added that:
·

every action, proposal or policy of the SRB , the Commission or of a national resolution authority in the framework of the SRM should
be undertaken with a view for the unity and integrity of the internal market;

·

decisions or actions of the SRB or of the Commission or Council should not directly impinge on the fiscal responsibilities of the
Member States;

·

where the Board takes a decision that is addressed to a national resolution authority, the national resolution authority shall have the
right to specify further the measures to be taken.

In order to ensure equitable conditions within the internal market as a whole, the regulation should be compatible with the directive on the
recovery and resolution of banks.
Resolution procedure: the SRB shall be responsible for drawing up and adopting the resolutions plans and may require national resolution
authorities to prepare and submit to the Board draft resolution plans.
The resolution plan shall not assume any of the following: (i) extraordinary public financial support besides the use of the Fund, (ii) any central
bank emergency liquidity assistance, (iii) any central bank liquidity assistance provided under non-standard collateralisation, tenor and interest
rate terms.
Group resolution plans shall include a plan for the resolution of the group, headed by the EU parent undertaking established in a participating
Member State, as a whole, either through resolution at the level of the EU parent undertaking or through break up and resolution of the
subsidiaries.
Resolution objectives: the resolution objectives are the following, inter alia: (i) to avoid significant adverse effects on financial stability in the
Union and Member States concerned, in particular by preventing contagion, including to market infrastructures, and by maintaining market
discipline; (ii) to protect client funds and client assets.
Resolution procedure: the Council of Ministers will be involved in validating the way in which a troubled bank is to be dealt with (resolution
scheme) only at the European Commissions express request. The procedure takes place in three phases:
Phase 1: the Board considers the adoption of a resolution scheme if:
·

the entity is failing or likely to fail;

·

there is no reasonable prospect that any alternative measures (early intervention, conversion of capital etc.) would prevent its failure
within a reasonable timeframe;

·

a resolution action is necessary in the public interest.

Phase 2: immediately after its adoption, the SRB transmits the resolution scheme to the Commission:
·

if no objections within 24 hours after its transmission, the resolution scheme enters into force;

·

within first 12 of these 24 hours, the Commission can request the Council (with a simple majority) to: (i) object to the scheme on the
ground that the scheme adopted by the SRB does not fulfil the public interest criterion; (ii) approve or object the Commissions
proposal to use a higher or lower amount of the Fund than the Board suggested in the scheme.

·

where the Council has approved the proposal of the Commission for modification of the resolution scheme on the ground that it does
not satisfy the public interest criterion or the Commission has objected, the Board shall, within 8 hours modify the resolution scheme
in accordance with the reasons expressed.;

·

where the Council objects to the placing of an institution under resolution on the ground that the public interest criterion is not fulfilled,
the relevant entity shall be orderly wound up in accordance with the applicable national law.

Phase 3: once agreed, the scheme is transmitted to the National Resolution Authority(ies) for implementation.
Single Resolution Board: the Board shall be accountable to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission for the implementation

of this Regulation. At the request of the European Parliament, the Chair shall participate in a hearing by the competent committee of the
European Parliament on the execution of the resolution tasks by the Board. A hearing shall take place at least once every calendar year. The
Board may be required to reply in writing to any observations or questions submitted by the national parliaments.
Neither Member States, the Unions institutions or bodies, nor any other public or private body shall seek to influence the Chair, the Vice-Chair
or the members of the Board.
Parliament sought to reduce political interference on the decisions. In order to ensure a corresponding decision-making by the Board, when
resolution action is required above the threshold of EUR 5 billion, any member of the plenary may, in accordance with a strict deadline,
request the plenary session to decide.
Single resolution fund: the Single Bank Resolution Fund should be established. It should be filled in accordance with the rules on transferring
the funds raised at national level towards the Fund as laid down in the agreement.
Eight years as from 1 January 2016, the available financial means of the Fund shall reach at least 1% of the amount of covered deposits of all
credit institutions authorised in all the participating Member States.
During the initial period of time, contributions to the Fund should be spread out in time as evenly as possible until the target level is reached
but with due account of the phase of a business cycle and the impact pro-cyclical contributions may have on the financial position of
contributing institutions.
Parliament should also strengthen the borrowing capacity of the funds.
Under no circumstances shall the Union budget nor the national budgets be held liable for expenses or losses of the Fund.

2013/0253(COD) - 15/07/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish a single European framework of resolution rules for credit establishments and to ensure the consistent application of
these resolution rules.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) No 806/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing uniform rules and a uniform
procedure for the resolution of credit institutions and certain investment firms in the framework of a Single Resolution Mechanism and a Single
Resolution Fund and amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010.
CONTENT: this Regulation establishes a single resolution mechanism (SRM) for failing banks, with a central decision-making board and a
single resolution fund.
The aim is to ensure the orderly resolution of failing banks without recourse to taxpayers' money. This will involve both a systematic recourse
to the bail-in of shareholders and creditors, in line with the bank recovery and resolution directive, and the possible recourse to a single fund
fully financed by banks.
The SRM will form one of the key elements of Europe's banking union, along with the single supervisory mechanism (SSM). It will cover all
banks established in the euro area and in other member states that choose to participate.
The European Parliament, in its resolution of 7 July 2010 with recommendations to the Commission on Cross- Border Crisis Management in
the Banking Sector, requested the Commission to submit one or more legislative proposals relating to an EU crisis-management framework,
an EU financial stability fund, and a resolution unit.
The main elements of the Regulation are as follows:
Resolution plans: upon notification by the European Central Bank (as supervisor) that a bank is failing or likely to fail, or on its own initiative
after having previously informed the ECB, the board will adopt a resolution scheme placing the bank into resolution. It will determine the
application of resolution tools and the use of the single resolution fund (SRF).
The board will be responsible for the planning and resolution phases of cross-border banks and those directly supervised by the ECB, while
national resolution authorities will be responsible for all other banks.
Resolution objectives: the resolution objectives are the following: (i) to ensure the continuity of critical functions; (ii) to avoid significant adverse
effects on financial stability, in particular by preventing contagion, including to market infrastructures, and by maintaining market discipline; (iii)
to protect public funds by minimising reliance on extraordinary public financial support; (iv) to protect depositors covered by Directive
2014/49/EU and investors covered by Directive 97/9/EC; (v) to protect client funds and client assets.
Resolution procedure: this procedure, which involves the Commission and the Council, strengthens the necessary operational independence
of the Board. The resolution scheme will enter into force within 24 hours of its approval by the board , unless the Council, acting by simple
majority on a proposal by the Commission, objects. Within 12 hours of approval of the resolution scheme by the board, the Commission may
propose to the Council to object to the resolution scheme on the grounds that it is not necessary in the public interest, or to approve or object
to a material modification of the amount of funds provided for in the resolution scheme.
For cross-border banks and for banks directly supervised by the ECB which are under the responsibility of the single resolution board, national
resolution authorities will be responsible for executing bank resolution schemes under the board's instructions. Should a national authority not
comply with a decision of the board, the latter will be able to address executive orders directly to the troubled bank.
To guarantee Member States' budgetary sovereignty, the Regulation prohibits decisions requiring a member state to provide extraordinary
public support or impinging on its budgetary sovereignty and fiscal responsibilities.
Single Resolution Board: the Board shall have an autonomous budget which is not part of the Union budget. It shall be operational from 1
January 2015. It shall consist of a chairperson, four full-time appointed members and the representatives of the national resolution authorities
of all the participating Member States. The ECB and the Commission will each designate a representative as a permanent observer. The
board will exercise its tasks in either a plenary or executive format.
In order to reduce political interference in decision, the plenary session will be responsible for individual resolution decisions requiring more

than EUR 5 billion in capital, or twice that amount in liquidity support, from the SRF. Moreover, once the accumulated use of funds over any
12-month period reaches EUR 5 billion, the plenary will be responsible for evaluating the application of resolution tools, in particular the use of
the SRF, and for giving guidance to the executive session for subsequent resolution decisions.
The Single Resolution Board shall be accountable to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission for the implementation of this
Regulation. At the request of the European Parliament, the Chair shall participate in a hearing by the competent committee of the European
Parliament on the execution of the resolution tasks by the Board. A hearing shall take place at least once every calendar year. The Board may
be required to reply in writing to any observations or questions submitted by the national parliaments.
Single Resolution Fund: the Single Resolution Fund is hereby established. It shall be filled in accordance with the rules on transferring the
funds raised at national level towards the Single resolution fund.
By the end of an initial period of eight years from 1 January 2016, the available financial means of the Fund shall reach at least 1 % of the
amount of covered deposits of all credit institutions authorised in all of the participating Member States . During the initial period, contributions
to the Fund shall be spread out in time as evenly as possible until the target level is reached.
The individual contribution of each bank will be calculated pro-rata to the amount of its liabilities (excluding own funds and covered deposits)
with respect to the aggregate liabilities (excluding own funds and covered deposits) of all the institutions authorised in the participating Member
States. Contributions will be adjusted in proportion to the risk profile of each institution.
The Fund should be able to contract borrowings or other forms of support from institutions, financial institutions or other third parties in the
event that the ex-ante and ex-post contributions are not immediately accessible or do not cover the expenses incurred by the use of the Fund
in relation to resolution actions. Under no circumstances shall the Union budget or the national budgets be held liable for expenses or losses
of the Fund.
From 1 January 2015, the Board shall submit a monthly report approved in its plenary session to the European Parliament, to the Council and
to the Commission on whether the conditions for the transfer of contributions to the Fund have been met.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 20.08.2014. With certain exceptions set out in Regulation, it shall be applicable from 01.01.2016.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in order to supplement the Regulation. The power to adopt
delegated acts shall be conferred on the Commission for a
an indeterminate period. The European Parliament or the Council may raise objections to a delegated act within a period of three months from
the date of notification (this may be extended by three months). If the European Parliament or Council express objections, the delegated act
will not enter into force.

