Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2045(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Tackling youth unemployment: possible ways out

Subject
4.15 Employment policy, action to combat unemployment
4.40.10 Youth

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE SKRZYDLEWSKA
Joanna Katarzyna

26/10/2012

Shadow rapporteur
S&D REGNER Evelyn
ALDE HIRSCH Nadja
ECR MCINTYRE Anthea
GUE/NGL MURPHY Paul
GUE/NGL ZUBER Inês
Cristina
Committee for opinion

Appointed
19/02/2013

REGI

Regional Development

S&D ALVES Luís Paulo

CULT

Culture and Education

S&D MENÉNDEZ DEL VALLE 08/03/2013
Emilio

Women's Rights and Gender Equality

PPE ANGELILLI Roberta

FEMM

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

Commission DG

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

ANDOR László

11/03/2013

Key events
14/03/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

09/07/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

22/07/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

10/09/2013

Debate in Parliament

11/09/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

11/09/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/09/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2045(INI)

A7-0275/2013

Summary

T7-0365/2013

Summary

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/7/12144

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE508.047

08/04/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE510.867

28/05/2013

EP

Committee opinion

FEMM

PE508.138

30/05/2013

EP

Committee opinion

CULT

PE510.555

20/06/2013

EP

Committee opinion

REGI

PE510.752

21/06/2013

EP

PE514.692

24/06/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0275/2013

22/07/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0365/2013

11/09/2013

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2013)816

19/12/2013

Amendments tabled in committee

2013/2045(INI) - 22/07/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the report by Joanna Katarzyna SKRZYDLEWSKA (EPP, PL) on tackling youth
unemployment: possible ways out.
Members emphasise that national and EU policy measures to boost youth employment should be coherent and mutually reinforcing. They
deplore the fact that the current crisis measures aimed at reducing public spending in the crisis countries have already had a direct negative
impact on young people through cuts in education, employment creation and support services. They point out that young unemployed people
come from a wide variety of groups and therefore have to be classified according to their needs and abilities if the measures taken are to be
implemented to more useful effect.
In this context, they invite the Commission and the Member States to take measures to:
where there is more than 25% youth unemployment in the regions, to develop a one-year relief plan to tackle youth unemployment by
creating jobs for at least 10 % of the young people affected;
avoid wasting available resources by checking the possibility of applying examples of best practices from other Member States to their
own labour markets;
provide active support to Member States that agree to reform their vocational training systems;
draw up qualitative guidelines for a modern dual education system, backed up by a list of broadly defined, non-academic key
occupations in Europe;
ensure the involvement of student and youth organisations in the reforms under way;
prioritise the areas of science, technology, engineering and mathematics in their educational programmes;
encourage and support the participation of young people and especially women, through education, civil society and quality youth
initiatives, in democratic life.
Avoidance of budget cuts and significant investment in measures in favour of young people: Members are deeply concerned at the budget
cuts in the Member States in the area of education, training and youth policy, which could result in young people being locked out of both
education and employment. They invite the Member States and regional and local authorities to set up integrated territorial development
strategies, including training and employment components, starting with measures to avoid early school leaving. Recognising the particularly
difficult situation in certain regions where the level of unemployment among young people is above 25 %, Members welcome the fact that EU
support for youth employment will be further boosted through the proposed EU Youth Employment Initiative, with a maximum budget of EUR 8
billion over the seven-year period 2014-2020. At the same time, they stress that, according to the ILO, EUR 21 billion would be needed to
implement the Youth Guarantee effectively in the eurozone alone. The specific budget allocation for this employment initiative for young
people and the corresponding allocation from the European Social Fund (ESF) should therefore be frontloaded.
Youth Guarantee: while welcoming the decision of the EPSCO Council on 28 February 2013 to agree on a Council recommendation on
implementing a Youth Guarantee, they invite the Member States to take action to implement Youth Guarantee schemes in an ambitious
manner at national level. They call for the extension of the target groups to include young people under the age of 30, including graduates and

those leaving training systems without qualifications.
Members inform the Member States that Parliament intends to monitor closely all Member State activities to make the Youth Guarantee a
reality. They also stress that efforts and funding aimed at implementing Youth Guarantee schemes should not discourage the structural efforts
and reforms that are required to make the education systems and labour markets in some Member States fit for the future.
They call on the Commission to provide in its programmes for measures aimed specifically at tackling youth unemployment, following an
integrated global approach.
As specifically regards the provisions to be set in place in regard to the Youth Guarantee, Members propose a series of measures designed to
bring about tangible and effective results.
Plan of action on youth employment: Members call on the Commission and Member States, in cooperation with youth stakeholders and with
Parliament, to develop a plan of action on youth employment identifying short-term, medium-term and long-term measures. They recommend
that, in Member States with a dual vocational training system, there should be an alternative apprenticeship scheme, and thus a Youth
Guarantee scheme, in the form of vocational training with more than one employer for young people under the age of 18 who cannot obtain an
apprenticeship. They also encourage the fostering of a rapprochement between the worlds of work and education so that training paths such
as dual training can be designed that combine theoretical notions with practical experience. They also highlight the need to reassert the value
of internships in companies.
Preventing early school-leaving and discrimination in schools: Members call on the Member States to intensify their efforts to reduce early
school leaving in order to achieve the goal set out in the EU 2020 strategy of a dropout rate no higher than 10 % by 2012. They invite the
Member States to make use of a wide range of measures to fight early school leaving and illiteracy, e.g. reducing class sizes, providing
assistance for pupils who cannot afford to complete their compulsory education, etc.
Members also call on the Member States to implement the measures set out in their national Youth Guarantee Schemes, taking into account a
gender perspective at all stages of the preparation, programming and implementation of these measures. They invite the Commission and the
Member States to take such measures as are necessary to counteract the stereotype that entrepreneurship is a risky and male-dominated
activity.
European Youth Corps: Members call on the Commission to put forward a proposal for a European Youth Corps programme, with the aim of
enabling young people under the age of 30 across Europe to do voluntary work in another Member State than their own for up to three months
. The objective would be to give young people the chance to use and upgrade their educational and social skills, increase their knowledge of
another Member State, and promote friendship and integration across the EU.
Align measures financed under the Structural Funds with the fight against unemployment: Members call on the Commission and the Member
States, when making decisions relating to the 2014-2020 programming period, to lay down more stringent and quantifiable criteria concerning
the setting, monitoring and evaluation of Structural Fund objectives, with specific targets relating to the fight against youth unemployment,
which should also be measurable in terms of gender (in the period 2007-2011, 52 % of European Structural Fund beneficiaries were women).
They also call for consideration to be given to a further adaptation of the ESF in order to provide additional support in the areas of young
womens training, access to employment and childcare. They call on the Member States to make full and coordinated use of the available EU
funding (ERDF, ESF, CF, EAFRD and EMFF), thus enabling young people to play an active part in the economy and society.
EURES: Members stress the need to introduce reforms to EURES with the aim of proactively matching jobseekers and job-changers to
existing vacancies. Members call on the Member States, in the absence of specific figures on youth migration flows, to create mechanisms for
the research, monitoring and evaluation of such mobility that can be transferred to EURES.
Improving qualifications: Members invite the Commission and the Member States to implement transparency and harmonisation in the
recognition of qualifications within the Union, in particular through the European Credit System for Vocational Education and Training,
Europass and the European Qualifications Framework. They stress that the problem of brain waste needs to be addressed, since having
highly qualified and skilled young people working far below their potential results in non-use of their actual skills and qualifications, while at the
same time having negative effects on them in social and psychological terms. Member States are urged to ensure that basic training in
job-seeking skills is incorporated into university courses.
Combating womens unemployment: Members recall that unemployment among young women (under 25) is continuing to rise. It has increased
from 18.8 % in 2009 to 22.1 % in 2012 and, according to the latest available data, now stands at 22.9 %. They point out that attitudes such as
discouragement, self-exclusion and disaffection with work are becoming increasingly widespread and that young women still face worse labour
market conditions than young men.
In this context, Members call on the Member States to pursue policies to encourage the presence of women in sectors and careers where they
are under-represented, such as the field of science and technology and to combat gender segregation, both in education and in the labour
market. Likewise, measures are called for close the gaps with regard to entering the labour market, careers and pay. They take the view that
helping women to return to the labour market requires multidimensional policy solutions incorporating lifelong learning and action to combat
precarious work and promote work with rights and differentiated work organisation practices, at the womans request, so that women do not
have to give up their careers or take career breaks.

2013/2045(INI) - 11/09/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 517 votes to 77, with 86 abstentions a resolution on tackling youth unemployment: possible ways out.
Parliament emphasises that national and EU policy measures to boost youth employment should be coherent and mutually reinforcing. It
deplores the fact that the current crisis measures aimed at reducing public spending in the crisis countries have already had a direct negative
impact on young people through cuts in education, employment creation and support services. It points out that young unemployed people
come from a wide variety of groups and therefore have to be classified according to their needs and abilities if the measures taken are to be
implemented to more useful effect.
In this context, Parliament invites the Commission and the Member States to take measures to:

where there is more than 25% youth unemployment in the regions, develop a one-year relief plan to tackle youth unemployment by
creating jobs for at least 10 % of the young people affected;
avoid wasting available resources by checking the possibility of applying examples of best practices from other Member States to their
own labour markets;
provide active support to Member States that agree to reform their vocational training systems;
draw up qualitative guidelines for a modern dual education system, backed up by a list of broadly defined, non-academic key
occupations in Europe;
ensure the involvement of student and youth organisations in the reforms under way;
prioritise the areas of science, technology, engineering and mathematics in their educational programmes;
encourage and support the participation of young people and especially women, through education, civil society and quality youth
initiatives, in democratic life.
Avoidance of budget cuts and significant investment in measures in favour of young people: Parliament is deeply concerned at the budget cuts
in the Member States in the area of education, training and youth policy, which could result in young people being locked out of both education
and employment. It invites the Member States and regional and local authorities to set up integrated territorial development strategies,
including training and employment components, starting with measures to avoid early school leaving.
Parliament highlights the role of the proposed EU Loan Guarantee Facility for full-time Master's students in the EU and third countries in
further facilitating youth mobility and contributing to multidimensional university ranking.
Recognising the particularly difficult situation in certain regions where the level of unemployment among young people is above 25 %,
Parliament welcomes the fact that EU support for youth employment will be further boosted through the proposed EU Youth Employment
Initiative, with a maximum budget of EUR 8 billion over the seven-year period 2014-2020. At the same time, it stresses that, according to the
ILO, EUR 21 billion would be needed to implement the Youth Guarantee effectively in the eurozone alone. The specific budget allocation for
this employment initiative for young people and the corresponding allocation from the European Social Fund (ESF) should therefore be
frontloaded.
Youth Guarantee: while welcoming the decision of the EPSCO Council on 28 February 2013 to agree on a Council recommendation on
implementing a Youth Guarantee, Parliament invites the Member States to take action to implement Youth Guarantee schemes in an
ambitious manner at national level. It calls for the extension of the target groups to include young people under the age of 30, including
graduates and those leaving training systems without qualifications.
Parliament informs the Member States that it intends to monitor closely all Member State activities to make the Youth Guarantee a reality. It
also stresses that efforts and funding aimed at implementing Youth Guarantee schemes should not discourage the structural efforts and
reforms that are required to make the education systems and labour markets in some Member States fit for the future.
Parliament calls on the Commission to provide in all its programmes for measures aimed specifically at tackling youth unemployment, following
an integrated global approach.
As specifically regards the provisions to be set in place in regard to the Youth Guarantee, Parliament proposes a series of measures designed
to bring about tangible and effective results.
Youth NEET Not in Education, Employment or Training): Parliament calls on the Member States to present, in the framework of the European
Semester, proposals as to how they will make progress in better integrating NEETs via the Youth Guarantee and other instruments. It stresses
the need to increase the employability and participation of young people by boosting lifelong learning and making social security schemes both
more inclusive and activating. It calls for the removal of the practical and logistical barriers faced by young people having more complex needs
or with disabilities when entering the labour market.
It also urges the Member States to draw up a strategy to provide incentives including financial incentives for pupils from vulnerable groups to
complete their secondary education.
Plan of action on youth employment: Parliament calls on the Commission and Member States, in cooperation with youth stakeholders and with
Parliament, to develop a plan of action on youth employment identifying short-term, medium-term and long-term measures. It recommends
that, in Member States with a dual vocational training system, there should be an alternative apprenticeship scheme, and thus a Youth
Guarantee scheme, in the form of vocational training with more than one employer for young people under the age of 18 who cannot obtain an
apprenticeship.
Partnerships between businesses and the educational sector and traineeships: Parliament calls on the Member States to improve cooperation
and strengthen partnerships between businesses and the educational sector at all levels, with the aim of linking curricula more closely to the
demands of the labour market. It invites the Commission and the Member States to propose a Quality Framework for Traineeships, making
sure that traineeships are tailored to the needs of young people to develop relevant skills. Parliament stresses the need to encourage all
undertakings of a certain size to offer traineeships under a dual training scheme unless they are in major financial difficulty, and to recruit
trainees at the end of their traineeships.
It also calls on the Member States to pay particular attention to high youth unemployment rates among young migrants.
Preventing early school-leaving and discrimination in schools: Parliament calls on the Member States to intensify their efforts to reduce early
school leaving in order to achieve the goal set out in the EU 2020 strategy of a dropout rate no higher than 10 % by 2012. It invites the
Member States to make use of a wide range of measures to fight early school leaving and illiteracy, e.g. reducing class sizes, providing
assistance for pupils who cannot afford to complete their compulsory education, etc.
Parliament also calls on the Member States to implement the measures set out in their national Youth Guarantee Schemes, taking into
account a gender perspective at all stages of the preparation, programming and implementation of these measures. It invites the Commission
and the Member States to take such measures as are necessary to counteract the stereotype that entrepreneurship is a risky and
male-dominated activity.
European Youth Corps: Parliament calls on the Commission to put forward a proposal for a European Youth Corps programme, with the aim of
enabling young people under the age of 30 across Europe to do voluntary work in another Member State than their own for up to three months
. The objective would be to give young people the chance to use and upgrade their educational and social skills, increase their knowledge of
another Member State, and promote friendship and integration across the EU.

Align measures financed under the Structural Funds with the fight against unemployment: Parliament calls on the Commission and the
Member States, when making decisions relating to the 2014-2020 programming period, to lay down more stringent and quantifiable criteria
concerning the setting, monitoring and evaluation of Structural Fund objectives, with specific targets relating to the fight against youth
unemployment, which should also be measurable in terms of gender (in the period 2007-2011, 52 % of European Structural Fund beneficiaries
were women). It also calls for consideration to be given to a further adaptation of the ESF in order to provide additional support in the areas of
young womens training, access to employment and childcare. It calls on the Member States to make full and coordinated use of the available
EU funding (ERDF, ESF, CF, EAFRD and EMFF), thus enabling young people to play an active part in the economy and society.
EURES: Parliament stresses the need to introduce reforms to EURES with the aim of proactively matching jobseekers and job-changers to
existing vacancies. It calls on the Member States, in the absence of specific figures on youth migration flows, to create mechanisms for the
research, monitoring and evaluation of such mobility that can be transferred to EURES.
Improving qualifications: Parliament invites the Commission and the Member States to implement transparency and harmonisation in the
recognition of qualifications within the Union, in particular through the European Credit System for Vocational Education and Training,
Europass and the European Qualifications Framework. It stresses that the problem of brain waste needs to be addressed, since having highly
qualified and skilled young people working far below their potential results in non-use of their actual skills and qualifications, while at the same
time having negative effects on them in social and psychological terms. It calls on the Member States, at the same time, to take all necessary
action to prevent the phenomenon of brain drain through sustainable measures which ensure employment opportunities for highly-skilled
workers in their own Member State or region.
Member States are also urged to ensure that basic training in job-seeking skills is incorporated into university courses.
Combating womens unemployment: Parliament recalls that unemployment among young women (under 25) is continuing to rise. It has
increased from 18.8 % in 2009 to 22.1 % in 2012 and, according to the latest available data, now stands at 22.9 %. It points out that attitudes
such as discouragement, self-exclusion and disaffection with work are becoming increasingly widespread and that young women still face
worse labour market conditions than young men.
In this context, Parliament calls on the Member States to pursue policies to encourage the presence of women in sectors and careers where
they are under-represented, such as the field of science and technology and to combat gender segregation, both in education and in the
labour market. Likewise, measures are called for close the gaps with regard to entering the labour market, careers and pay. It takes the view
that helping women to return to the labour market requires multidimensional policy solutions incorporating lifelong learning and action to
combat precarious work and promote work with rights and differentiated work organisation practices, at the womans request, so that women
do not have to give up their careers or take career breaks.
Lastly, Parliament calls for measures to encourage green jobs for young people.
It should be noted that two alternative motions for resolution that were tabled by the GUE/NGL and Greens/EFA groups respectively were
rejected in plenary.

