Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2095(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU Member States' preparedness to an effective and timely start of the new
cohesion policy programming period

Subject
4.70.02 Cohesion policy, Cohesion Fund (CF)

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
REGI

Regional Development

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D VAUGHAN Derek

18/03/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE VAN NISTELROOIJ
Lambert
Verts/ALE DELLI Karima
ECR VLASÁK Oldřich
GUE/NGL ERNST Cornelia
Committee for opinion
BUDG

European Commission

Budgets

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

S&D DAERDEN Frédéric

20/05/2013

Commission DG

Commissioner

Regional and Urban Policy

HAHN Johannes

Key events
10/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

18/12/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

07/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

14/01/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

14/01/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/01/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0007/2014

Summary

T7-0015/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2095(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

REGI/7/12767

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE519.777

30/09/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE521.786

21/10/2013

EP

PE519.799

15/11/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0007/2014

07/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0015/2014

14/01/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)320

26/05/2014

Committee opinion

BUDG

2013/2095(INI) - 07/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Regional Development adopted an own-initiative report by Derek VAUGHAN (S&D, UK) on EU Member States
preparedness to an effective and timely start of the new Cohesion Policy Programming period.
The report stressed the necessity of ensuring an effective and timely start to the new Cohesion Policy Programming period . Members
welcomed the adoption of both the multiannual financial framework (MFF) for 2014-2020 and the legal framework for cohesion policy
Progress in Member States: the report highlighted that Member States are at very different stages in their preparations.
According to Members, the Commission should increase its support to ensure that these Member States partnership agreements (PAs) and
operational programmes (OPs) are agreed as soon as possible. Therefore, reviewing Member States progress during the preparation stages
would help reduce delays. Furthermore, during the implementation phase the Commission could come to the rescue of those Member States
that are lagging behind.
The report stressed that active and well informed national and regional administrations that engage with the Commission could have a positive
impact on advancing preparations. It strongly recommends, therefore, that the Commission and the national and regional authorities have a
steady flow of information, such as details of upcoming implementing acts.
Common Provisions Regulation: the report welcomed the improvements made to the regulation that will introduce a stronger and more
integrated approach to cohesion policy funding through the Common Strategic Framework. It called on the Member States to introduce even
more measures simplifying the bureaucracy and administration of the programmes.
Members underlined the importance of the Smart Specialisation Strategy, considering that the next programming period will be aimed at
enhancing the effectiveness of funding by making funding conditional on compliance with certain criteria.
Effectiveness of funds: Members welcomed the fact many Member States mentioned their focus on a results-led approach. They considered
that national operational programmes should take into account development objectives at local and regional level and pointed out that
generating synergies between the various sources of available EU funding and the budgets of the Member States and of regional and local
authorities should be encouraged.
On the basis of successful experiences from the 2007-2013 round, the Committee welcomed the fact that Member States are seeking to
enhance the leveraging of private sector funding in order to open up alternative sources of funding to complement traditional financing
methods.
Synergies with other policies and instruments: Members were encouraged by the fact that some Member States are looking at developing the
use of new instruments such as Community-Led Local Development (CLLD), an excellent way of encouraging bottom-up participation from a
cross-section of community actors.
Simplification: Members called on Member States and regional and local authorities to exchange best practice geared to simplifying
procedures, and, while acknowledging that stringent rules on controls and auditing are necessary, to ensure that they are proportionate so as
not to add an unnecessary burden.
Partnership agreements (PAs): the report underlined the Commissions call for Member States and regions to strive to ensure that the PAs and
OPs prepared are of the highest possible quality. According to the Members, this would help to generate quality project proposals, targeted at
specific objectives, ensuring that EU funding has the greatest possible impact.
Underlining that the principle of multi-level governance is essential to effective management of the cohesion policy, Members stressed the
need to involve regional and local authorities and stakeholders fully in the preparation, implementation and evaluation of the programmes.

2013/2095(INI) - 14/01/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on EU Member States preparedness to an effective and timely start of the new Cohesion
Policy Programming period.

Parliament emphasised the need to ensure an effective and timely start to the new Cohesion Policy Programming period.
It underlined the satisfactory outcome achieved by the adoption of the multiannual financial framework (MFF)for 2014-2020 and the legal
framework for cohesion policy with a view to ensuring the swift and effective launch of the new cohesion policy.
In the current economic, financial and social crisis, cohesion policy funding in a number of Member States represents a key source of public
investment. This is why the Member States and the regions must tackle, as soon as possible, the implementation of the new round of cohesion
policy funding at the start of 2014.
The resolution also pointed out that the backlog of outstanding commitments (or RAL, from the French reste à liquider) amounted to two-thirds
of cohesion policy funding by the end of the MFF for 2007-2013; it stressed the need to find a reliable means of reducing the risk of the
implementation of EU programmes being blocked owing to a lack of payments.
Progress in Member States:the Parliament highlighted that Member States are at very different stages in their preparations. Some Member
States are dealing with a significant reduction in their budgets for the next programming period while in others there is ongoing debate on the
distribution of budgets within the Member States. Parliament recognised that both of these issues could cause a delay in preparations.
According to Members, the Commission should increase its support to ensure that these Member States partnership agreements (PAs) and
operational programmes (OPs) are agreed as soon as possible. Therefore, reviewing Member States progress during the preparation stages
would help reduce delays. Furthermore, during the implementation phase, the Commission could come to the rescue of those Member States
that are lagging behind.
The resolution stressed that active and well informed national and regional administrations that engage with the Commission could have a
positive impact on advancing preparations. Parliament strongly recommends, therefore, that the Commission and the national and regional
authorities have a steady flow of information, such as details of upcoming implementing acts.
Common Provisions Regulation: Parliament welcomed the improvements made to the regulation that will introduce a stronger and more
integrated approach to cohesion policy funding through the Common Strategic Framework. It called on the Member States to introduce even
more measures simplifying the bureaucracy and administration of the programmes.
Members underlined the importance of the Smart Specialisation Strategy, considering that the next programming period will be aimed at
enhancing the effectiveness of funding by making funding conditional on compliance with certain criteria. Furthermore, cohesion policy should
not serve as a guarantee for other EU policies aimed at macroeconomic reforms in the Membe r States.
Effectiveness of funds: Parliament welcomed the fact many Member States mentioned their focus on a results-led approach. It considered that
national operational programmes should take into account development objectives at local and regional level and pointed out that generating
synergies between the various sources of available EU funding and the budgets of the Member States and of regional and local authorities
should be encouraged.
On the basis of successful experiences from the 2007-2013 round, Parliament welcomed the fact that Member States are seeking to enhance
the leveraging of private sector funding in order to open up alternative sources of funding to complement traditional financing methods. It
stressed the importance of setting out clear rules for using innovative financial instruments, such as loans, guarantees and equity investments,
as complements to grants in order to encourage cooperation between enterprises, public sector organisations and educational institutions.
Synergies with other policies and instruments: Members were encouraged by the fact that some Member States are looking at developing the
use of new instruments such as Community-Led Local Development (CLLD), an excellent way of encouraging bottom-up participation from a
cross-section of community actors.
Simplification: Parliament welcomed the positive steps taken towards simplification and greater transparency in the management of European
Structural and Investment (ESI) funds; it noted, however, that in reality simplification could be difficult to achieve due to the differences that
remain between the funds introduced by the fund-specific regulations.
Members called on Member States and regional and local authorities to exchange best practice geared to simplifying procedures, and, while
acknowledging that stringent rules on controls and auditing are necessary, to ensure that they are proportionate so as not to add an
unnecessary burden.
Partnership: Parliament emphasised that the decision-making process and the formulation of PAs must involve collaboration at national,
regional and local level in the planning, development and implementation of EU cohesion policy funding programmes. Underlining that the
principle of multi-level governance is essential to effective management of the cohesion policy Members stressed the need to involve regional
and local authorities and stakeholders fully in the preparation, implementation and evaluation of the programmes.
In this context, they welcomed the increased involvement of all the relevant stakeholders, local and regional representatives, NGOs, economic
and social partners, private businesses and universities.

