Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2081(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Common foreign and security policy in 2012. Annual report from the Council
to the European Parliament

Subject
6.10 Common foreign and security policy (CFSP)

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE BROK Elmar

19/02/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D PAŞCU Ioan Mircea
Committee for opinion
BUDG

Budgets

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

PPE NEYNSKY Nadezhda

24/04/2013

Key events
10/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

10/10/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

15/10/2013

Debate in Council

15/10/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

23/10/2013

Debate in Parliament

24/10/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

24/10/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

24/10/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0330/2013

Summary

T7-0453/2013

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2081(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 132-p1; Treaty on
European Union TEU 036

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/7/12555

Documentation gateway

Committee opinion

PE510.794

27/06/2013

EP

Committee draft report

PE510.554

10/09/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE516.926

26/09/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0330/2013

15/10/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0453/2013

24/10/2013

EP

Summary

BUDG

2013/2081(INI) - 15/10/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Elmar BROK (EPP, DE) on the Annual Report from the Council to the
European Parliament on the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
Members highlighted that the first quarter of the twenty-first century is characterised by a period of prolonged structural change that is
transforming the global order which demands a fresh approach to shaping a new multi-polar world order that is inclusive and underpinned by
the rule of law and a pluralist democratic model as well as universal values, including human rights. They noted that many obstacles lie ahead,
not least in engaging with emerging powers in reforming the multilateral system. The world financial crisis and the growing assertiveness of
new emerging economies pose major political, economic, social, cultural and environmental challenges, including internal problems, for all
parties. Members stressed that addressing such challenges requires collective and united EU action.
Defend the interests of the EU: Members considered that the EU must defend its citizens' interests in the world in a determined, unified
manner, while always basing its policies on the promotion of the fundamental values on which the Union is founded. In this respect, Members
underlined the need for EU foreign policy to be flexible in responding to emerging threats and challenges in many areas. The EU needs not
only to be coherent and consistent in its external action, but, also develop a common vision. It is for this reason that Members demanded that
the instrument of enhanced cooperation be used to secure greater capacity to act, and to overcome the inappropriate use of the veto within
the Council. A joint or unified approach should give the EU the strength to pursue its interests and defend its values in this world.
Members stressed that the effectiveness of the EU's external action also depends on the full support of its citizens and on the legitimacy it
acquires by being anchored in the EU's fundamental values of democracy. They called for Parliament to be regularly informed of foreign policy
priorities of the Union.
Building a new, comprehensive approach to the EUs foreign policy: Members urged the Member States to play a constructive role in the
Union's foreign and security policy and to improve the Union's effectiveness as a cohesive global actor. The need to develop closer
cooperation in order to guarantee military security is stressed.
Overall, Members regretted the fact that the EU has not yet developed a clear strategy for its relations with the rest of the world and that its
activities are defined more by reaction than by action. They demanded, therefore, a fundamental strategic debate, which should include the
Council, the Commission and Parliament and welcomed the European Global Strategy initiative pursued by the foreign ministers of Sweden,
Spain, Poland and Italy.
Members stated that there should be closer coordination of EU internal policies and Member States' policy choices in key areas such as
connectivity, trade, transport, energy, the environment and communication. They called on the Council and the VP/HR to respond to
Parliament's recommendation on the 2013 review of the organisation and the functioning of the EEAS in order to ensure the further
development of an appropriate structure within the EEAS in which geographic and thematic expertise are integrated and drive a
comprehensive approach to policy planning, formulation and implementation.
Providing leadership and coherence in EU foreign policy: stressing the political leadership role that the VP/HR is expected to play in ensuring
the unity, consistency and effectiveness of Union action, Members congratulated Mrs Ashton her on her success in bringing the parties
together in the EU-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia. They considered that these examples of leadership should be applied to
Central Asia to the Middle East and from the Horn of Africa across the Sahel. Members called for a review of the infrastructure distribution and
staffing of EU delegations in order to ensure that the Unions efficiency, visibility and representation in third countries reflects the EUs political
ambitions and expected priorities. They regretted the Councils rationale for cutting the multiannual financial framework, which will reduce the
Union's capacity to promote peace, security and sustainable economic development and its credibility in respect of such efforts. They stressed
the importance of ensuring that the new external relations financial instruments under consideration by Parliament and the Council are fully
funded, tailored to furthering the Unions strategic interests.
Assessing the achievements of the VP/HR and of the Council in 2011: Members welcomed the steps taken by the Council, with the VP/HRs
support, in the 2011 Annual Report towards mapping out the Unions foreign policy in a forward-looking and strategic policy document. They
considered, however, the Councils Annual Report still falls short of the ambitions of the Lisbon Treaty in important ways, and therefore called
for the following in future:
establish clear priorities and strategic guidelines for the CFSP;
set out a framework for assessing existing strategic partners and developing new partnerships, including with international and
regional organisations;
set out a roadmap for making progress on important innovations of the Lisbon Treaty, in particular (1) by making operational the
assignment of special tasks and missions to a core group of Member States, (2) through the establishment by capable and willing
Member States of permanent structured cooperation in defence, and (3) by enhancing the role of, and providing more resources for,
the European Defence Agency;
address acute problems in CSDP decision-making, inter alia in relation to funding procedures and the financing of operations, that
result in incomprehensible delays between the taking of political decisions to launch a mission and the actual deployment of that
mission on the ground (Libya and Mali being the most recent in a long line of examples).

In this respect, Members called on the Council to request that the VP/HR set out in the next Annual Report her foreign policy objectives for the
years 2014 and 2015, along with the timeframe and necessary resources for their implementation. These priorities should focus on the EUs
strategic aims, starting with the transatlantic partnership, the economic and political development of its Eastern and Southern Neighbourhoods,
and the Middle East Peace Process.
They called on the Council and the VP/HR, when drawing up future Annual Reports on the CFSP, to engage with the Committee on Foreign
Affairs at an early stage in order to discuss foreign policy objectives for the coming years. Members also welcomed the initiative of holding a
European Council Summit in December 2013.
Strategic priorities: Members welcomed the development of strategic partnerships as a format for the EU's engagement with both established
and emerging powers. These partnerships should focus on:
USA in order to cooperate closely with regard to the peaceful resolution of the conflicts and crises arising as a result of Irans nuclear
programme and the transition process in the Arab Spring countries and the Middle East;
Russia in order to strengthen the dialogue with this country with regard to Syria, discrimination of LGBT communities, as well as
restricting the freedom of expression;
China to further develop its comprehensive, strategic partnership with this country, promoting both parties' global interests, joint
projects based on geostrategic standards, and mutual respect;
Turkey given its status as a candidate country and its growing international standing as regards providing vital humanitarian
assistance to Syrians fleeing violence across the borders.
Members considered that enlargement remains an important tool of EU foreign policy and is in the EUs long-term strategic interest. However,
they stressed, that the enlargement policy needs to take into account the EUs own integration capacity and the genuine commitment of the
Western Balkan countries and of Turkey to take up their responsibilities and address outstanding concerns.
The report stressed that the EU needs to put further effort into, place a higher priority on, and show greater commitment to, the European
Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) at a time when this policy is in difficulty. It called for the principles underlying the new ENP approach, as set out
by the VP/HR and the Commission in the relevant joint communications, in particular the 'more-for-more', differentiation and mutual
accountability principles and the 'partnership with society', to be fully operational and for Union assistance to be fully aligned to this new
approach.
As regards the Southern Neighbourhood, Members called for further actions with the Arab Spring countries.
Members regretted the fact that the EU gave up its common policy of an arms embargo on Syria, thereby undermining a common approach on
the matter. They invited the Member States to show solidarity and to provide help to refugees from Syria and displaced persons within Syria.
Members also made a number of recommendations with a view to strengthening the EUs position in South Africa, Latin America, Asia and
Afghanistan.
The called on the EU and the Members States to reconfirm the EUs commitment to advancing effective multilateralism, with the UN system at
its core and called on the VP/HR to take stock of the effectiveness of the EUs Strategy Against the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass
Destruction and its policies for tackling conventional weapons, including arms exports.
It should be noted that this report is subject to a minority opinion which rejects the approach which is based on promoting the militarisation as
the core element in CFSP. It preferred a CFSP based on peaceful principles.

2013/2081(INI) - 24/10/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 389 votes to 114 with 58 abstentions, a resolution on the Annual Report from the Council to the
European Parliament on the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
Parliament highlighted the fact that the first quarter of the twenty-first century was characterised by a period of prolonged structural change
that was transforming the global order which demanded a fresh approach to shaping a new multi-polar world order that was inclusive and
underpinned by the rule of law and a pluralist democratic model as well as universal values, including human rights. It noted that many
obstacles lie ahead, not least in engaging with emerging powers in reforming the multilateral system. The world financial crisis and the growing
assertiveness of new emerging economies posed major political, economic, social, cultural and environmental challenges, which required
collective and united EU action.
Defend the interests of the EU: Parliament considered that the EU must defend its citizens' interests in the world in a determined, unified
manner, while always basing its policies on the promotion of the fundamental values on which the Union is founded. In this respect, EU foreign
policy must be flexible in responding to emerging threats and challenges in many areas. The EU needed not only to be coherent and
consistent in its external action, but, also develop a common vision. For this reason, Parliament demanded that the instrument of enhanced
cooperation be used to secure greater capacity to act, and to overcome the inappropriate use of the veto within the Council. A joint or unified
approach should give the EU the strength to pursue its interests and defend its values in the world.
Parliament stressed that the effectiveness of the EU's external action also depends on the full support of its citizens and on the legitimacy it
acquires by being anchored in the EU's fundamental values of democracy. It called for Parliament to be regularly informed of foreign policy
priorities of the Union.
Building a new, comprehensive approach to the EUs foreign policy: Parliament urged Member States to play a constructive role in the Union's
foreign and security policy and to improve the Union's effectiveness as a cohesive global actor. The need to develop closer cooperation in
order to guarantee military security is stressed.
Overall, Members regretted the fact that the EU had not yet developed a clear strategy for it relations with the rest of the world and that its
activities were defined more by reaction than by action. It demanded, therefore, a fundamental strategic debate, which should include the
Council, the Commission and Parliament and called, as a contribution to this debate, for the European Council in December to further
elaborate on the European Global Strategy initiative.

Parliament also stressed that a comprehensive understanding of the CFSP covered all areas of foreign policy, including the progressive
framing of the CSDP, which could lead to a common defence.
It called on the Council and the VP/HR to respond to Parliament's recommendation on the 2013 review of the organisation and the functioning
of the EEAS in order to ensure the further development of an appropriate and gender-balanced structure within the EEAS (with the
participation of the relevant Commission services), in which geographic and thematic expertise are integrated and drive a comprehensive
approach to policy planning, formulation and implementation.
Providing leadership and coherence in EU foreign policy: stressing the political leadership role that the VP/HR is expected to play in ensuring
the unity, consistency and effectiveness of Union action, Parliament congratulated Lady Ashton on her success in bringing the parties together
in the EU-facilitated dialogue between Kosovo and Serbia. It considered that these examples of leadership should be applied to Central Asia to
the Middle East and from the Horn of Africa across the Sahel. It called for a review of the infrastructure distribution and staffing of EU
delegations in order to ensure that the Unions efficiency, visibility and representation in third countries reflected the EUs political ambitions and
expected priorities. Parliament regretted the Councils rationale for cutting the multiannual financial framework, which would reduce the Union's
capacity to promote peace, security and sustainable economic development and its credibility in respect of such efforts. It stressed the
importance of ensuring that the new external relations financial instruments under consideration by Parliament and the Council were fully
funded, tailored to furthering the Unions strategic interests.
Assessing the achievements of the VP/HR and of the Council in 2011: Parliament welcomed the steps taken by the Council, with the VP/HRs
support, in the 2011 Annual Report towards mapping out the Unions foreign policy in a forward-looking and strategic policy document. It
considered, however, the Councils Annual Report still falls short of the ambitions of the Lisbon Treaty in important ways, and therefore called
for the following in future:
establish clear priorities and strategic guidelines for the CFSP;
setting out a framework for assessing existing strategic partners and developing new partnerships, including with international and
regional organisations;
setting out a roadmap for making progress on important innovations of the Lisbon Treaty, in particular (1) by making operational the
assignment of special tasks and missions to a core group of Member States, (2) through the establishment by capable and willing
Member States of permanent structured cooperation in defence, and (3) by enhancing the role of, and providing more resources for,
the European Defence Agency;
addressing acute problems in CSDP decision-making, inter alia in relation to funding procedures and the financing of operations, that
result in incomprehensible delays between the taking of political decisions to launch a mission and the actual deployment of that
mission on the ground (Libya and Mali being the most recent in a long line of examples).
In this respect, Parliament called on the Council to request that the VP/HR set out in the next Annual Report her foreign policy objectives for
the years 2014 and 2015, along with the timeframe and necessary resources for their implementation. These priorities should focus on the
EUs strategic aims, starting with the transatlantic partnership, the economic and political development of its Eastern and Southern
Neighbourhoods, and the Middle East Peace Process.
It called on the Council and the VP/HR, when drawing up future Annual Reports on the CFSP, to engage with the Committee on Foreign
Affairs at an early stage in order to discuss foreign policy objectives for the coming years. Members also welcomed the initiative of holding
a European Council Summit in December 2013. Parliament called for this meeting to deliver a clear roadmap with timelines for achieving key
objectives, including, in the first instance, the timely review of the European Security Strategy and the use of a White Book serving as a
common template for concurrent national security and defence reviews. It stressed the need to develop closer cooperation in order to
guarantee military security and achieve savings.
Strategic priorities: Parliament welcomed the development of strategic partnerships as a format for the EU's engagement with both established
and emerging powers. These partnerships should focus on the USA, Russia, China and Turkey (given the latters status as a candidate country
and its growing international standing as regards providing vital humanitarian assistance to Syrians fleeing violence although the most
important reforms have yet to be carried out in Turkey.)
Parliament considered that enlargement remains an important tool of EU foreign policy and was in the EUs long-term strategic interest.
However, it stressed that enlargement policy needs to take into account the EUs own integration capacity and the genuine commitment of the
Western Balkan countries and of Turkey to take up their responsibilities and address outstanding concerns.
Parliament stressed that the EU needed to put further effort into, place a higher priority on, and show greater commitment to, the European
Neighbourhood Policy (ENP) at a time when this policy was in difficulty. It called for the principles underlying the new ENP approach, as set
out by the VP/HR and the Commission in the relevant joint communications, in particular the 'more-for-more', differentiation and mutual
accountability principles and the 'partnership with society', to be fully operational and for Union assistance to be fully aligned to this new
approach. As regards the Southern Neighbourhood, Members called for further actions with the Arab Spring countries.
Parliament regretted the fact that the EU gave up its common policy of an arms embargo on Syria, thereby undermining a common approach
on the matter. It invited the Member States to show solidarity and to provide help to refugees from Syria and displaced persons within Syria.
Parliament also made a number of recommendations with a view to strengthening the EUs position in South Africa, Latin America, Asia and
Afghanistan. It called for the EU to have a greater presence in the Asia-Pacific region, with a focus beyond China, India and Japan, and
extending particularly to Indonesia and the Philippines.
It called on the EU and the Members States to reconfirm the EUs commitment to advancing effective multilateralism, with the UN system at its
core and called on the VP/HR to take stock of the effectiveness of the EUs Strategy Against the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction
and its policies for tackling conventional weapons, including arms exports. Lastly, Parliament reiterated its call for the EU to play a more active
role in the resolution of the Western Sahara conflict, which currently represented an insurmountable obstacle to the full development of
good-neighbourly relations in the Maghreb.

