Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0186(COD)

Awaiting Council 1st reading position / budgetary conciliation
convocation

Implementation of the Single European Sky. Recast
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 549/2004 2001/0060(COD)
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 550/2004 2001/0235(COD)
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 551/2004 2001/0236(COD)
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 552/2004 2001/0237(COD)
Subject
3.20.01 Air transport and air freight
3.20.15.02 Air transport agreements and cooperation
3.40.14 Industrial competitiveness

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
TRAN

Transport and Tourism

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE MARINESCU
Marian-Jean

11/07/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D DANELLIS Spyros
ALDE MEISSNER Gesine
Verts/ALE LICHTENBERGER
Eva
ECR FOSTER Jacqueline
GUE/NGL KOHLÍČEK Jaromír
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI

Legal Affairs

EFD SPERONI Francesco
Enrico

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Mobility and Transport

Appointed

12/11/2013

Commissioner
KALLAS Siim

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the
Regions

Key events
11/06/2013

Legislative proposal published

01/07/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

30/01/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

06/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

11/03/2014

Debate in Parliament

COM(2013)0410

Summary

A7-0095/2014

Summary

12/03/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

12/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

08/10/2014

Debate in Council

03/12/2014

Debate in Council

Summary

T7-0220/2014

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0186(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Recast

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 549/2004 2001/0060(COD)
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 550/2004 2001/0235(COD)
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 551/2004 2001/0236(COD)
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 552/2004 2001/0237(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 100-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Awaiting Council 1st reading position / budgetary conciliation convocation

Committee dossier

TRAN/7/13015

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0410

11/06/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0206

11/06/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0207

11/06/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE522.770

06/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE524.603

27/11/2013

EP

Economic and Social Committee: opinion, report

CES5372/2013

11/12/2013

ESC

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0095/2014

06/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T7-0220/2014

12/03/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)455

10/06/2014

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Summary

2013/0186(COD) - 11/06/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to improve the competitiveness of the European air transport system with the further development of the Single European Sky
(SES) initiative.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the Single European Sky (SES) initiative aims to improve the overall efficiency of the way in which European airspace is
organised and managed through a reform of the industry providing air navigation services (ANS).
The experience gained with SES I since 2004 and SES II since 2009 has shown that the principles and direction of the SES are valid and
warrant a continuation of their implementation. However, the initiative is experiencing significant delays in its implementation, notably in the
achievement of the performance goals and the deployment of its basic elements (such as functional airspace blocks (FABs) or National
Supervisory Authorities (NSAs)).
This process of the recasting of the SES legal framework, known under the abbreviation of SES 2+ , is intended to accelerate the
implementation of the reform of air navigation services without departing from its original objectives and principles. It is also part of the Single
Market Act II initiative and aims hence to improve the general competitiveness and growth of the EU economy and not just that of the air traffic
management system.
The SES2+ package essentially deals with two problems:
1. the insufficient efficiency of Air Navigation: ANS provision remains relatively inefficient in terms of cost- and flight efficiency as well as
the capacity offered. In the US, for example, the en-route airspace is controlled by a single service provider as opposed to 38 en-route
service providers in Europe. The US service provider controls almost 70% more flights with 38% fewer staff;
2. fragmented ATM system: the European ATM system consists of 27 national authorities overseeing in total over a hundred Air
Navigation Service Providers (ANSPs), with the associated variance in systems, rules and procedures.
The specific objectives of the initiative are: (i) to improve the performance of air traffic services in terms of efficiency and (ii) to improve the
utilisation of air traffic management capacity.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the Commission undertook an impact assessment to support legislative proposals on improving efficiency, safety
and competitiveness of the Single European Sky.
LEGAL BASE: Article 100(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: the Commission proposes merging the four SES regulations into a single regulation, structured into chapters based on the actors
concerned.
National authorities: the proposal strenghten the national authorities, as regards their independence, their expertise and their resources. For
that purpose, it:
describes the level of independence required from the authorities vis-à-vis the service providers they are intended to oversee (a
transitional period is foreseen until 2020);
more explicit requirements are set on the competences and independence of the staff hired, as well as strengthening the independent
funding of the authorities through the route charges;
to improve expertise amongst the authorities, a network of national authorities is foreseen, including also the possibility of pooling
experts so that States may benefit from experts coming from other Member States.
Performance and charging schemes: the amendments proposed seek to rationalise the process of target setting and to allow focusing of target
setting more at the local level. This allows for more educated tailored setting of targets.
Small adjustments to support this have also been made to the provisions on charging and the text has also been updated so that the provision
concerning funding of authority tasks covers also the extension of the European Aviation Safety Agencys (EASA) tasks.
Functional Airspace Blocks: the aim of the revision is to undertake a strategic redirection of Functional Airspace Blocks (FABs) to give them
more of a performance focus. The sector needs to be given more flexibility to develop the FABs, even to devise different types of FABs,
depending on where they expect to find the most synergies. Therefore the focus of the proposal is now more on flexible "industrial
partnerships" and the measure of success will be the level of performance improvements achieved.
Support services: according to the proposal, the core air traffic services, which are considered to be natural monopolies, would remain under
the requirement to designate them, but support services should be allowed to develop freely, using the full potential of expertise also from
other sectors. A safeguard clause has been included to ensure vital security and economic interests are not endangered. A transitional period
is foreseen until 2020.
Network Management: the provisions have been reorganised, in particular as regards the services that the Network Manager provides. A
reference to the aeronautical information portal has been added as this service is already to some extent integrated in the Network Manager.
Secondly, the terminology has been harmonised with that used ibn Regulation (EC) No 1108/2009 naming the "functions" as "services" and
treating the Network Manager consistently in the same manner as other service providers insofar as certification, oversight and safety
requirements are concerned.
Lastly, a provision has been included to cover the further development of the Network Manager in the direction of an industrial partnership by
2020.
Involvement of airspace users: the need to introduce more customer focus on the air navigation service providers has given rise to a new
provision to ensure the airspace users are consulted and also involved in the approval of investment plans.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the proposal has no implications for the EUs budget.

DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2013/0186(COD) - 06/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Transport and Tourism adopted the report by Marian-Jean MARINESCU (EPP, RO) on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and Council on the implementation of the Single European Sky (recast).
The parliamentary committee recommended that the position of the European Parliament adopted at first reading under the ordinary legislative
procedure modify the Commission proposal as follows.
Purpose of the regulation: this regulation should lay down rules for the creation and proper functioning of the Single European Sky in order to
ensure current air traffic safety standards, to contribute to the sustainable development of the air transport system, and in particular, reducing
climate impact.
The Single European Sky shall comprise a coherent network at the pan-European level and, subject to specific arrangements with the
neighbouring countries, in third-countries, an integrated operating airspace, network management and air traffic management for the benefit of
all airspace users.
National aviation authorities: these shall be legally distinct and independent, in particular in organisational, hierarchical and decision-making
terms and with their annual budget - from any company, organisation, public or private entity or personnel falling within the scope of authority
activity as provided for in Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 or having an interest in the activities of such entities.
Staff of the national aviation authorities shall be recruited under clear and transparent rules and criteria which guarantee their independence.
They shall not be seconded from air navigation service providers (ANSPs) or companies under the control of ANSPs.
Persons who have been in charge of strategic decisions for more than six months shall have no professional position or responsibility with any
of the air navigation service providers after their term in the national aviation authority, for a period ofat least 12 months for staff in managerial
positions (at least six months for staff in non-managerial positions).
Definitions: the Members added important definitions, namely that of a local performance target and industrial partnership which, according to
the proposal, will now be a driving force within newly-structured functional airspace blocks (FABs).
The definition of the human factor was also introduced, meaning the social, cultural and staffing conditions in the air traffic management (ATM)
sector
The human factor must be monitored and brought into the core of the Single European Sky framework.
Cooperation between national aviation authorities: The Commission and the European Aviation Agency (EAA) shallfacilitate active cooperation
of these authorities to enable them to exchange their best practices and to develop common solutions, including stronger cooperation at the
regional level, and placing at their disposal a platform for these exchanges.
This cooperation should take place in a network that convenes at regular intervals (at least once a year).
The purpose and tasks of the network was spelled out in more detail: it must, among others, provide opinions to the Commission and the EAA
on rule-making and certification and provide recommendations designed to facilitate the provision of cross-border services.
Certification of air navigation service providers: the issue of certificates shall confer on air navigation service providers the possibility of offering
their services to any Member State, and if appropriate, neighbouring third countries, within a functional airspace block, subject to mutual
agreement between the relevant parties.
Provision of support services: support services means communication, navigation and surveillance (CNS), meteorological services (MET) and
aeronautical information services (AIS) as well as other services and activities, which are linked to, and support the provision of, air navigation
services.
According to the report, there should be no statutory impediments to providers of support services that would prevent their ability to compete
within the Union on the basis of equitable, non-discriminatory and transparent conditions for the purpose of providing these services.
Members proposed that air navigation service providers, when drawing up their business plans, should call for offers from different support
services providers, with a view to choosing the financially and qualitatively most beneficial provider.
Binding selection criteria for the entity procuring those services shall be, in particular, cost and energy efficiency, overall service quality,
interoperability and safety of services, as well as transparency of the procurement process.
System and performance criteria: Members proposed that a performance review body (PRB) be established as a European economic
regulatorunder the supervision of the Commission, with effect from 1 July 2015. The PRB shall be functionally and legally separate from any
service provider, whether at national or pan-European level.
The compliance of the local performance plans and local targets with the Union-wide performance targets shall be assessed by the
Commission in cooperation with the PRB.
In addition to the introduction of sanctions, an appropriate compensation mechanism must also be established in order to address the problem
stemming from the lack of synchronisation in SESAR deployment and lost investment resulting thereof.
The Commission may propose financial mechanisms to improve the synchronisation of air-based and ground-based capital expenditure
related to the deployment of SESAR technologies.
Implementation of the ATM Master Plan: implementation of the ATM Master Plan shall be coordinated by the Commission. The Network
Manager, the PRB and the Deployment Manager shall contribute to the implementation of the ATM Master Plan in accordance with the
provisions of this regulation.

The Commission shall adopt, by implementing acts, measures establishing the governance of implementation of the ATM Master Plan,
including defining and selecting the body responsible at management level (Deployment Manager).
Industrial partnerships: Members stipulated that industrial partnerships should be separate from FABs, which are a state initiative. What is
more, industrial partnerships need not overlap with FABs in terms of the Member States concerned and therefore should be classed as a
separate type of cooperation.

2013/0186(COD) - 12/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 489 votes to 154 with 34 abstentions, a legislative resolution on proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and Council on the implementation of the Single European Sky (SES) (recast).
Parliaments position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Implementation of the SES: Parliament stressed that the Regulation should be implemented as swiftly as possible In order to ensure that the
expected increase in air traffic did not cause or exacerbate congestion in European airspace, with all the economic, environmental and security
costs that that would entail, fragmentation of that airspace should be remedied.
The implementation of the Single European Sky should have a positive impact in terms of growth, employment and competitiveness in Europe,
in particular by increasing demand for jobs requiring advanced qualifications.
Objectives: the regulation lays down rules for the creation and proper functioning of the Single European Sky in order to ensure current air
traffic safety standards, to contribute to the sustainable development of the air transport system, such as reducing climate impact.
The Single European Sky should comprise a coherent pan-European and, subject to specific arrangements with the neighbouring countries,
third-country network of routes, an integrated operating airspace, network management and air traffic management based only on safety,
efficiency and interoperability, for the benefit of all airspace users.
The application of the regulation to Gibraltar airport shall be suspended until the arrangements set out in the Joint Declaration made by the
Foreign Ministers of the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom on 2 December 1987 are applied.
National aviation authority: the amended text provides for Member States designation of a national body to act as the national aviation
authority.
The authorities should be legally distinct and independent, in particular in organisational, hierarchical and decision-making terms, including
separate annual budget allocation, from any company, organisation, public or private entity or personnel falling within the scope of authority
activity as provided for in this Regulation and in Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 or having an interest in the activities of such entities. The
national aviation authorities shall ensure compliance with these provisions on the date of entry into force of this Regulation or at the latest by 1
January 2017.
Staff of the national aviation authorities shall be recruited under clear and transparent rules and criteria, which guarantee their independence.
They should not be seconded from air navigation service providers (ANSPs) or companies under the control of ANSPs.
As regards persons who have been in charge of strategic decisions, for more than six months, they must have no professional position or
responsibility with any of the air navigation service providers after their term in the national aviation authority, for a period of at least 12 months
for staff in managerial positions and at least six months for staff in non-managerial positions.
The authority's top management shall be appointed for a fixed term of between three and seven years.
Definitions: Members added certain definitions, such as 'local performance plans' and 'industrial partnership' supporting one or more functional
airspace blocks, in order to maximise performance.
The text also contained a definition of human factor meaning the social, cultural and staffing conditions in the ATM sector.
Cooperation between national aviation authorities: the Commission and the European Agency for Aviation (EAA) should facilitate cooperation
among the authorities them in order to enable the exchange of best practices and to develop a common approach, including through
enhanced cooperation at regional level, by providing a platform for such exchanges. This cooperation should take place on a regular basis (at
least once a year.)
The tasks and objectives of the network were more clearly defined : inter alia, they may provide opinions to the Commission and the EAA on
rule-making and certification and provide opinions, guidelines and recommendations designed to facilitate the provision of cross-border
services.
Certificates: the issue of certificates shall confer on air navigation service providers the possibility of offering their services to
any Member State, other air navigation service providers, airspace users and airports within the Union and neighbouring third countries, if
appropriate, within a functional airspace block, subject to mutual agreement between the relevant parties.
Provision of support services: ' support services' were defined as CNS (communication, navigation and surveillance), MET (meteorological)
and AIS (aeronautical information) services as well as other services and activities, which are linked to, and support the provision of, air
navigation services.
Parliament stated that there should be no statutory impediments to providers of support services that would prevent their ability to compete
within the Union on the basis of equitable, non-discriminatory and transparent conditions for the purpose of providing these services.
Members proposed that air navigation service providers, when drawing up their business plans, should call for offers from
different support services providers, with a view to choosing the financially and qualitatively most beneficial provider.
In the choice of an external provider of support services, the provisions of Directive 2004/18/EC shall be complied with, including cost and
energy efficiency, overall service quality, interoperability and safety of services, as well as transparency of the procurement process
The Commission shall conduct a comprehensive study on the operational, economic, safety and social impacts of the introduction of market

principles to the provision of support services, and shall submit that study to the European Parliament and the Council by 1 January 2016.
Performance criteria and system: Parliament proposed a performance review body (PRB) be established as a European economic regulator
under the supervision of the Commission, with effect from 1 July 2015. The PRB shall be functionally and legally separate from any service
provider, whether at national or pan-European level.
The compliance of the local performance plans and local targets with the Union-wide performance targets shall be assessed by the
Commission in cooperation with the PRB.
Union-wide performance targets shall be set with a view to ensuring that each functional airspace block retains sufficient flexibility to achieve
the best results.
Compensation mechanism: in addition to the introduction of sanctions, an appropriate compensation mechanism must also be established in
order to address the problem stemming from the lack of synchronisation in SESAR deployment and resulting lost investment. The Commission
may propose financial mechanisms to improve the synchronisation of air-based and ground-based capital expenditure related to the
deployment of SESAR technologies
Implementation of the ATM Master Plan: implementation of the ATM Master Plan shall be coordinated by the Commission. The Network
Manager, the PRB and the Deployment Manager shall contribute to the implementation of the ATM Master Plan in accordance with the
provisions of the regulation.
The Commission should adopt, by implementing acts, measures establishing the governance of implementation of the ATM Master Plan,
including defining and selecting the body responsible at management level (Deployment Manager).
The Deployment Manager should recommend to the Commission binding deadlines for deployment and appropriate corrective actions
concerning delayed implementation.
Industrial partnerships: Members stipulated that industrial partnerships should be separate from FABs, which were a state initiative. What is
more, industrial partnerships need not overlap with FABs in terms of the Member States concerned and therefore should be classed as a
separate type of cooperation.

