Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2153(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Consumer protection - Protection of consumers in utilities services

Subject
2.40.02 Public services, of general interest, universal service
4.60.06 Consumers' economic and legal interests

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO

Rapporteur

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Appointed

S&D WEIDENHOLZER Josef 18/06/2013
Shadow rapporteur
PPE GÁLL-PELCZ Ildikó
ALDE SCHMIDT Olle
ECR HARBOUR Malcolm
GUE/NGL HÄNDEL Thomas
EFD SALVINI Matteo

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Health and Food Safety

MIMICA Neven

Key events
12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

03/03/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

10/03/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

15/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

15/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/04/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0163/2014

Summary

T7-0342/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2153(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

IMCO/7/13387

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE522.759

07/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE524.871

10/12/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0163/2014

10/03/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0342/2014

15/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)470

25/09/2014

2013/2153(INI) - 10/03/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted an own-initiative report by Josef WEIDENHOLZER (S&D, AT) on
consumer protection protection of consumers in utilities services.
The report stressed the need for consumers to have access to affordable and high-quality utility services throughout the EU, given that such
services are essential for ensuring social and territorial cohesion while contributing to European economic competitiveness. Access to utility
services should be facilitated for all consumers, irrespective of their financial circumstances.
Enhanced consumer information regarding utility services is needed and the Member States should have the necessary flexibility to take
vulnerable consumers into account.
Members noted that some aspects of basic consumer rights are covered by Directive 2011/83/EU on consumer rights and that the common
characteristics of utility services are outlined in the relevant sectoral legislation.
The Commission and the Member States are called upon to pay more attention to, and invest more in, consumer information and education
campaigns in the context of utility services that target the right messages at the right consumer segment.
The report focused on the four major sectors which in recent years have been liberalised integrated to a large extent into the internal market:
Energy: Members believed that an open, transparent and integrated internal energy market is needed by 2014 and called on the Member
States properly to transpose, apply and better monitor the third internal energy market package. They pointed out the need for enhanced
consumer information, in particular with a view to improving the services offered, and allowing for the comparability and transparency of tariffs,
hence achieving non-discriminatory pricing, whilst taking into account the various factors and situations linked to energy and vulnerable
consumers.
The report regretted that current energy prices do not necessarily factor in external costs, namely the environmental damage associated with a
given energy source or production method, which may nevertheless be passed on to society as a whole in the long run. Members called for
measures to encourage greater price transparency for consumers in this regard.
Recalling that smart grids allow consumers to observe and adapt their energy consumption, the report pointed out that some of the
cost-benefit analyses that have been conducted by Member States give no indication of substantial cost savings for consumers. The use of
smart meters must remain the choice of the consumer.
Telecommunications: the report stressed that the consumer aspect of the digital single market and the electronic communications sector is of
utmost importance, and called for all consumers to have high-quality electronic communications services. It also stressed the importance of
deploying new infrastructures in order to narrow the digital divide. Members:
reiterated their proposals to make it easier for customers to switch electronic communication service providers without additional fees
other than the actual switching cost, without loss of data and with a minimum of formalities;
supported proposals to promote independent information on pricing, billing and service quality, including data speeds.
Postal services: the report stressed that more delivery options and better transparency, information and prices are preconditions for increasing
consumers confidence in the delivery market.
The Commission noted that Directive 97/67/EC, as amended by Directives 2002/39/EC and 2008/6/EC, ensures that postal services provide a
universal service. The Commission should ensure that this guarantee is fulfilled by the Member States. Postal services operators should be
encouraged to improve interoperability and to accelerate the roll-out of streamlined processes aimed at reducing costs, increasing the
availability and quality of delivery services.
Members reiterated the suggestions made in Parliaments recent report on parcel delivery on the need to assist service improvements and
reduce costs, in particular to meet the needs of online consumers and retailers in a better way. They welcomed the introduction of flexible
delivery and return options and called for further incentives to improve interoperability and the quality of services.
Public transport: the report emphasised that consumers with access to efficient local public transport should be targeted, regardless of whether
they reside in areas where such service could be less profitable. Members States are invited to take the appropriate action in this respect.
Members pointed out that, as a result of an ageing population, efficient public transport services will gain in importance in the future, and that
they are also essential if the Europa 2020 climate objectives are to be achieved. They called for: (i) the development of common tools to
ensure optimised multimodality in efficient, high-quality public transport services; (ii) a holistic approach with regard to elderly people and
people with limited mobility.

2013/2153(INI) - 15/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

The European Parliament adopted by 588 votes to 21, with 68 abstentions, a resolution on consumer protection protection of consumers in
utilities services.
The resolution stressed the need for consumers to have access to affordable and high-quality utility services throughout the EU, given that
such services are essential for ensuring social and territorial cohesion while contributing to European economic competitiveness. Access to
utility services should be facilitated for all consumers, irrespective of their financial circumstances.
Enhanced consumer information regarding utility services is needed and the Member States should have the necessary flexibility to take
vulnerable consumers into account.
Members noted that some aspects of basic consumer rights are covered by Directive 2011/83/EU on consumer rights and that the common
characteristics of utility services are outlined in the relevant sectoral legislation.
Pointing out that consumer protection is effective only if consumers rights can be enforced, Parliament called on the Member States to
implement fully the provisions of the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive (2005/29/EC), the Directive on Misleading and Comparative
Advertising (2006/114/EC) and the Consumer Rights Directive (2011/83/EU), the alternative dispute resolution (ADR) (2013/11/EU) and
Regulation (EU) No 524/2013 on online dispute resolution (ODR).
The Commission and the Member States are called upon to pay more attention to, and invest more in, consumer information and education
campaigns in the context of utility services that target the right messages at the right consumer segment.
Stressing the fundamental role of customer service on behalf of utility service providers, Members encouraged utility service providers to train
their employees accordingly and ensure that all customers have easy access to personalised assistance at all times.
The resolution focused on the four major sectors which in recent years have been liberalised integrated to a large extent into the internal
market:
(1) Energy: Parliament believed that an open, transparent and integrated internal energy market is needed by 2014 and called on the Member
States properly to transpose, apply and better monitor the third internal energy market package. It pointed out the need for enhanced
consumer information, in particular with a view to improving the services offered, and allowing for the comparability and transparency of tariffs,
hence achieving non-discriminatory pricing, whilst taking into account the various factors and situations linked to energy and vulnerable
consumers.
The resolution regretted that current energy prices do not necessarily factor in external costs, namely the environmental damage associated
with a given energy source or production method, which may nevertheless be passed on to society as a whole in the long run. Members called
for measures to encourage greater price transparency for consumers in this regard.
Recalling that smart grids allow consumers to observe and adapt their energy consumption, the resolution pointed out that some of the
cost-benefit analyses that have been conducted by Member States give no indication of substantial cost savings for consumers. The use of
smart meters must remain the choice of the consumer.
(2) Telecommunications: the resolution stressed that the consumer aspect of the digital single market and the electronic communications
sector is of utmost importance, and called for all consumers to have high-quality electronic communications services. It also stressed the
importance of deploying new infrastructures in order to narrow the digital divide. Parliament:
reiterated their proposals to make it easier for customers to switch electronic communication service providers without additional fees
other than the actual switching cost, without loss of data and with a minimum of formalities;
supported proposals to promote independent information on pricing, billing and service quality, including data speeds.
(3) Postal services: Parliament stressed that more delivery options and better transparency, information and prices are preconditions for
increasing consumers confidence in the delivery market.
The Commission noted that Directive 97/67/EC, as amended by Directives 2002/39/EC and 2008/6/EC, ensures that postal services provide a
universal service. The Commission should ensure that this guarantee is fulfilled by the Member States. Postal services operators should be
encouraged to improve interoperability and to accelerate the roll-out of streamlined processes aimed at reducing costs, increasing the
availability and quality of delivery services.
Members reiterated the suggestions made in Parliaments recent report on parcel delivery on the need to assist service improvements and
reduce costs, in particular to meet the needs of online consumers and retailers in a better way. They welcomed the introduction of flexible
delivery and return options and called for further incentives to improve interoperability and the quality of services.
(4) Public transport: Parliament emphasised that consumers with access to efficient local public transport should be targeted, regardless of
whether they reside in areas where such service could be less profitable. Members States are invited to take the appropriate action in this
respect.
Parliament pointed out that, as a result of an ageing population, efficient public transport services will gain in importance in the future, and that
they are also essential if the Europa 2020 climate objectives are to be achieved. It called for: (i) the development of common tools to ensure
optimised multimodality in efficient, high-quality public transport services; (ii) a holistic approach with regard to elderly people and people with
limited mobility.

