Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0307(COD)

Procedure completed

Prevention and management of the introduction and spread of invasive alien
species
Amended by 2013/0141(COD)
See also 2015/3010(RSP)
Subject
3.70.01 Protection of natural resources: fauna, flora, nature, wildlife,
countryside; biodiversity
6.20.02 Export/import control, trade defence

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D POC Pavel

23/09/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE SOMMER Renate
ALDE GERBRANDY
Gerben-Jan
Verts/ALE DEMESMAEKER
Mark
ECR GIRLING Julie
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed
27/11/2013

INTA

International Trade

ALDE BEARDER Catherine

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Fisheries

ALDE DAVIES Chris

PECH

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Environment

23/09/2013

Commissioner
POTOČNIK Janez

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the
Regions

Key events
09/09/2013

Legislative proposal published

12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

30/01/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

COM(2013)0620

Summary

04/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

16/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

16/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

29/09/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

22/10/2014

Final act signed

29/10/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

04/11/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

A7-0088/2014

Summary

T7-0425/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0307(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amended by 2013/0141(COD)
See also 2015/3010(RSP)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 192-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ENVI/7/13766

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0620

09/09/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0321

09/09/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0322

09/09/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0323

09/09/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE524.576

27/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE526.237

13/01/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE526.283

13/01/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE526.298

13/01/2014

EP

CES6354/2013

22/01/2014

ESC

Economic and Social Committee: opinion,
report
Committee opinion

PECH

PE521.601

23/01/2014

EP

Committee opinion

INTA

PE524.661

24/01/2014

EP

PE528.064

29/01/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

Summary

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0088/2014

04/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0425/2014

16/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2014/1143
OJ L 317 04.11.2014, p. 0035 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2013/0307(COD) - 09/09/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to prevent, minimise and mitigate the adverse impacts of invasive alien species (IAS) on biodiversity and ecosystem services.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: it has been estimated that of the over 12 000 alien species that are found in the European environment, 10-15% have
reproduced and spread, causing environmental, economic and social damage.
Invasive alien species (IAS) are one of the major, and growing, causes of biodiversity loss and species extinction. They can be vectors of
diseases or directly cause health problems. They can damage infrastructure and recreational facilities, hamper forestry or cause agricultural
losses, to mention but a few. IAS are estimated to cost the Union at least EUR 12 billion per year and damage costs are continuing to rise.
The European Union currently lacks a comprehensive framework to address the threats posed by IAS. With the 2020 Biodiversity Strategy, the
Union undertook to halt the loss of biodiversity by 2020, in line with the international commitments adopted by the parties to the Convention for
Biological Diversity in 2010 in Nagoya, Japan.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: in addition to the baseline option (option 0), which would maintain the status quo, the following options were
identified:
Option 1: Enhancing cooperation and supporting voluntary action.
Option 2.1: Basic legislative instrument.
Option 2.2: Basic legislative instrument + permits for release of IAS of Member State.
Option 2.3: Basic legislative instrument + a strict general ban on the release of alien species, unless found to be safe.
Option 2.4: Basic legislative instrument + an obligation for the rapid eradication of newly establishing IAS of Union concern: with this
option, when it comes to rapid response, Member States would not have a choice, but rather an obligation to eradicate quickly any
newly establishing IAS of Union concern and share information. Derogations are possible if approved by the Commission.
Option 2.4 was retained and informs the present proposal.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 192(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
CONTENT: this proposal aims to tackle the issues highlighted above by establishing a framework for action to prevent, minimise and mitigate
the adverse impacts of IAS on biodiversity and ecosystem services. Furthermore, it will seek to limit social and economic damage.
In practical terms, the proposal seeks to attain these objectives through measures addressing : (i) the intentional introduction of IAS into the
Union and their intentional release into the environment; (ii) the unintentional introduction and release of IAS, the need to set up an early
warning and rapid response system; (ii) the need to manage the IAS spread throughout the Union.
The proposal:
provides the tools for prioritising IAS of Union concern to enable Union resources to be prioritised on the basis of risk and scientific
evidence;
establishes the measures necessary to prevent the introduction into the Union and the introduction or release into the environment of
IAS;
sets out the tools to ensure that IAS of Union concern can be detected early in the environment and at the Union borders and
describes the measures that are triggered when these IAS are detected;
establishes the obligations necessary to tackle IAS of Union concern that are already present in the Union or new ones that have
eluded the prevention measures and early detection measures and managed to spread widely.

BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the budgetary implication on the credit appropriations of an administrative nature is estimated at EUR 560 000
for the first seven years (2015-2021).
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).

2013/0307(COD) - 04/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted the report by Pavel POC (S&D, CZ) on the proposal for a
regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the prevention and management of the introduction and spread of invasive alien
species.
The committee recommended that Parliaments position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission proposal as follows:
Initial capping of the list of invasive alien species: whilst the Commission had proposed an initial capping of the number of invasive alien
species of Union concern to the top 3% of some 1500 invasive alien species in Europe, the committee felt that this percentage was arbitrary
and unjustifiable, adding that inclusion on the list should be based on clear criteria, without any limit being set.
In order to ensure that the subset of invasive alien species of Union concern met the objective of placing the emphasis on prevention, it was
essential that the list was constantly revised and kept up- to-date. The list should be open, recognising an estimated 1500 invasive alien
species currently present in the Union and that the rate of invasion was growing, and include all taxonomic groups include groups of species
with similar ecological requirements to prevent derogations from species being traded in the Union to a similar but unlisted species.
'Invasive alien species of Member State concern' was defined a invasive alien species other than invasive alien species of Union concern, for
which a Member State considered that the adverse impact from their release and spread, was of significance for its territory and required
action at the level of that Member State.
Since the Commission proposal only covered those species which were alien to the entire territory of the EU, Members amended the text so
that included in the scope of the regulation were those species which were invasive to one part of the Union, but native to another.
National derogations for invasive alien species of Union concern: invasive alien species of Union concern which are native in a Member State
shall not be subject to the restrictions referred to in the regulation in the territory of the Member State where they are native.
An application for a derogation shall be submitted only if one of certain conditions is met, including a cost-benefit analysis showing that the
costs will be exceptionally high and disproportionate to the benefits.
Selection criteria: species included on the list will be selected on the basis of criteria that take account of the extent to which the species is, or
could become, invasive within the territory of the Union, the scale of the actual or potential impact on biodiversity or ecosystem services, and
human health or economic interests.
Establishment of list through a delegated act: the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts to establish and update a
list setting out invasive alien species and taxonomic groups of species of Union concern on the basis of the criteria laid down in the text. The
list shall take the form of an Annex to the Regulation.
Restrictions on invasive alien species of Union concern: Member States may maintain or lay down more stringent national rules with the aim of
preventing the introduction, establishment and spread of invasive alien species of Union concern.
Restrictions on invasive alien species of Member State concern: Member States shall ensure coordination of their activities with relevant
neighbouring Member States when adopting measures on invasive alien species of Member State concern in their national territory, if there is
a significant risk of spread of such an invasive alien species to the territory of neighbouring Member States, or where a joint action would
prove more effective,
Action plans on the pathways of invasive alien species: within two years from the adoption of the list, there must be comprehensive analyses
of the pathways of unintentional introduction and spread of invasive alien species of Union concern identifying the pathways which require
priority action.
Within three years from the adoption of the list each Member State shall establish and implement an action plan to address the priority
pathways.
Action plans do not have to include the measures of the International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships Ballast Water and
Sediments as the Commission had proposed.
Accountability: the report contained a new clause stating the operator (natural or legal, private or public person), who was ascertained to
be responsible for intentional or negligent introduction or spread of invasive alien species of Union concern, must held accountable and
contributes substantially to meeting the cost of restoration, based on the polluter-pays principle, and with a view to preventing and
remedying ecosystem damage caused by invasive alien species.
Accountability for restoration of the operator ascertained to be responsible for intentional or negligent introduction or spread of invasive alien
species shall continue until that species is effectively removed and the ecosystem is restored.
Information support system: the committee wanted this to be established within 12 months.
Scientific Forum: the implementation of the Regulation, in particular establishing and updating the list of invasive alien species of Union
concern, elements of risk assessment, emergency measures and measures for rapid eradication at an early stage of invasion, should be
driven by sound scientific evidence. This required the effective involvement of relevant members of the scientific community and the
establishment of a dedicated body called the Scientific Forum. .
The Forum will:

·

provide opinions concerning species that may be considered for risk assessment with a view to their possible inclusion (and
removal( in the list of invasive alien species of Union concern; and

·

upon request, conduct risk assessments.

The Scientific Forum shall be chaired by the Commission.
Sanctions: sanctions should take into account the polluter pays principle and apply to all persons (commercial or non-commercial) responsible
for introducing non-native species whether intentionally or not.
Public participation: early and effective public participation was particularly important during the process to adopt or update the list of invasive
alien species of Union concern and the establishment of action plans and measures. Local and regional authorities must also be involved in
decisions taken by Member States on tackling invasive species, as they played a vital role in the implementation of those decisions and in
raising public awareness and providing information.
Report: within 5 years from the date of adoption of the regulation, the Commission shall assess the effectiveness of the regulation including the
appropriateness of financing its implementation, and, on the basis of an examination of the financial background, should make a proposal
concerning Union financial support in the next financial cycle.

2013/0307(COD) - 16/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 606 to 36 votes, with 4 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the prevention and management of the introduction and spread of invasive alien species.
Parliament adopted its position at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary were the result of
a compromise between Parliament and Council. They amend the Commissions proposal as follows:
Purpose: the Regulation set out rules to prevent, minimise and mitigate the adverse impacts of the introduction and spread, both intentional
and unintentional, of invasive alien species on biodiversity within the Union.
Member States must take all necessary steps to prevent the unintentional introduction or spread of invasive alien species of Union concern.
The amended text stated that this should also cover such introduction or spread by gross negligence, where applicable.
Scope: the amended text reflected Parliament suggestion that inclusion on the list of invasive alien species should not be capped at 50 as the
Commission had suggested, but rather should be open and based on clear criteria, which should also make sure that the invasive alien
species having the most significant adverse impact among the potential invasive alien species currently known are those that will be listed.
The list should be developed and updated in line with a gradual and phased-in approach and be focused on species whose inclusion in the list
would effectively prevent, minimise or mitigate their adverse impacts in a cost efficient manner. As species within the same taxonomic group
often have similar ecological requirements and may pose similar risk, the inclusion of taxonomic groups of species into the list of invasive alien
species of Union concern should be allowed, where appropriate.
The Commission would submit a proposal for a list based on those criteria within one year of the entry into force of the Regulation.
The Regulation would not apply, inter alia, to: (i) pathogens that cause animal diseases; (ii) harmful organisms listed in Directive 2000/29/EC.
Selection criteria: invasive alien species of Union concern should only be included on the list under the conditions set out in the amended text,
including: (i) they were, based on available scientific evidence, likely to have significant adverse impacts on biodiversity or the related
ecosystem services, and may also have an adverse impact on human health or the economy; (ii) it was demonstrated by a risk assessment
that action at Union level was required to prevent their introduction, establishment and spread; (ii) it was likely that the inclusion in the list will
effectively prevent, minimise or mitigate their adverse impacts.
In adopting or updating the list (through implementing acts), the Commission should apply these criteria with due consideration to the
implementation cost for the Member States, the cost of non-action, the cost-effectiveness and the socio-economic aspects. The list should
include as a priority those invasive alien species that: (i) were not yet present in the Union or are at an early stage of invasion and were most
likely to have significant adverse impacts; (ii) already established in the Union and had the most significant adverse impacts.
Risk assessment: such an assessment must have regard to a description of the adverse impact on biodiversity and the related ecosystem
services, as well as on human health, safety, and the economy including an assessment of the potential future impacts having regard to
available scientific knowledge.
The Commission should carry out the risk assessments, when proposing species for listing as invasive alien species of Union concern.
Whenever a Member State submitted a request for the inclusion of a species on the list of invasive alien species of Union concern it shoudl be
responsible for carrying out a risk assessment assisted by the Commission if necessary.
Invasive alien species of Member State concern: following Parliaments suggestion, the amended text contained a definition for such species
and included in the scope of the regulation were those species which were invasive to one part of the Union, but native to another. Member
States may establish a national list of invasive alien species of Member State concern. For these invasive alien species, Member States may
apply restrictions as provided in the amended regulation to these species. Those measures shall be compatible with the TFEU and be notified
to the Commission.
Member States may identify, from their national list of Member State concern, species native or non native to the Union that required
enhanced regional cooperation.
Invasive alien species of regional concern which were native in a Member State should not be subject to the certain provisions in the territory
of that Member State. Member States where these species are native should cooperate with the Member States concerned for the
assessment of the pathways and, in consultation with the other Member States, may adopt relevant measures to avoid further spread of these
species.
|Action plans on the pathways of invasive alien species: within 18 months from the adoption of the list, Member States must carry out a

comprehensive analysis of the pathways of unintentional introduction and spread of invasive alien species of Union concern, at least, in their
territory, as well as in their marine and identify the pathways which require priority action. Within three years from the adoption of the, each
Member State should establish and implement one single action plan or a set of action plans to address the priority pathways. Action
plans should include timetables for action and describe the measures to be adopted and, as appropriate, voluntary actions and codes of good
practice. Member States should also ensure coordination with the aim of establishing one single action plan or a set of action plans
coordinated at the appropriate regional level according to the provisions in the text.
Management measures: for those invasive alien species of Union concern which the Member States had found to be widely spread on their
territory, they must have in place effective management measures within 18 months of an invasive alien species being included on the list of
invasive alien species of Union concern.
Permits: by way of derogation from the restrictions set out, a permit system should be established allowing establishments to carry out
research or ex-situ conservation on invasive alien species of Union concern. Where the use of products derived from invasive alien species of
Union concern is unavoidable to advance human health, the permit system could include scientific production and subsequent medicinal use.
The amended text went onto provide that the Commission should adopt, by way of an implementing act, the format of the document serving as
evidence for the permit granted by a Member State, containing certain specified information such as the purpose for which the permit had
been granted.
Authorisations: Parliament and Council agreed on the introduction of a new Article on authorisations, which provided that in exceptional cases,
for reasons of compelling public interest, including those of a social or economic nature, Member States may allow permits for establishments
to carry out activities other than the activities allowed under a permit, following an authorisation by the Commission, in accordance with the
procedure and under the conditions specified the amended text. The Commission should set up and operate an electronic authorisation
system and decide on applications for authorisation within 60 days of receipt.
Following the authorisation by the Commission, the relevant competent authority may issue the permit and was obliged to include in the
permits provisions specified in the authorisation by the Commission.
Official controls: these provisions were strengthened by Parliament and Council in the amended text. Within a year, fully functioning structures
to perform the official controls as described must be in place. Costs incurred while the verification is completed and those arising from the
non-compliance shall be at the expense of the natural or legal person within the Union who brought the goods into the Union, except where
the Member State concerned determines otherwise.
Costs recovery: in accordance with the polluter pays principle, Member States should aim at recovering the costs of the measures needed to
prevent, minimise or mitigate the adverse impacts of the invasive alien species, including environmental and resources costs as well as the
restoration cost.
Cooperation and coordination: enhanced measures on cooperation and coordination are inserted into the text. Member States should make
every effort to ensure close coordination with all Member States concerned and particularly with other Member States sharing the same
marine subregions, the same biogeographical region, the same borders, or the same river basin.
Scientific Forum: the Commission should ensure the participation of representatives of the scientific community appointed by the Member
States to provide advice on any scientific question related to the application of the Regulation.
Penalties: these may include fines, seizure of the non-compliant invasive alien species of Union concern and immediate suspension or
withdrawal of a permit.
Delegated acts: the power to adopt acts should be delegated to the Commission for a period of five years in respect of determining how to
conclude that invasive alien species are capable of establishing viable populations and of spreading, as well as for setting out the common
elements for the development of risk assessments.
Report: by 1 June 2021, the Commission shall assess the application of this Regulation. The review should also examine the effectiveness of
the implementing provisions on invasive alien species of regional concern, the need and feasibility to include native species in the list and
whether further harmonisation is needed to increase the effectiveness of the action plans and measures taken by the Member States.

2013/0307(COD) - 22/10/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to prevent, minimise and mitigate the adverse impacts of invasive alien species on biodiversity and ecosystem services.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) No 1143/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the prevention and management of the
introduction and spread of invasive alien species.
CONTENT: this Regulation sets out rules to prevent, minimise and mitigate the adverse impact on biodiversity of the introduction and spread
within the Union, both intentional and unintentional, of invasive alien species.
Whether it be animals, plants, fungi or micro-organisms, some 12 000 species in the environment of the Union and in other European
countries are alien, of which roughly 10 to 15 % are estimated to be invasive.
The main elements of the Regulation are the following:
List of invasive alien species of Union concern: the Regulation provides that the Commission shall adopt, by means of implementing acts, an
open list of invasive alien species of Union concern, which will be regularly updated and reviewed at least every six years. The draft
implementing acts shall be submitted to the Committee by 2 January 2016.
When proposing species for listing as invasive alien species of Union concern, the Commission shall carry out the risk assessment in relation
to the current and potential range of invasive alien species, having regard to certain elements.
Restrictions: the Regulation stipulates that species on this list may not be intentionally brought into the territory of the EU, nor may they be
kept, bred, transported to, from or within the Union, placed on the market, grown or released into the environment.

Authorisations and permits: the Regulation also provides for a system of authorisations and permits to allow certain activities based on
invasive alien species.
Competent authorities may issue the permits for activities carried out in contained holding that fulfil a certain number of conditions: (i) the
invasive alien species of Union concern is kept in and handled in contained holding; (ii) transport to and from contained holding is carried out
under conditions that exclude escape of the invasive alien species as established by the permit.
Invasive alien species of regional concern and species native to the Union: the Regulation states that Member States may identify, from their
national list of invasive alien species of Member State concern, species native or non-native to the Union that require enhanced regional
cooperation. The Commission shall act to facilitate the cooperation and coordination among those Member States involved.
Action plans on the pathways of invasive alien species: within three years of the adoption of the Union list, each Member State shall establish
and implement one single action plan or a set of action plans to address the priority pathways and to prevent the unintentional introduction and
spread of invasive alien species of concern, at least in their territory, as well as in their marine waters.
Within 18 months of an invasive alien species being included on the Union list, Member States shall have in place effective management
measures for those invasive alien species of Union concern which the Member States have found to be widely spread on their territory.
Restoration of the damaged ecosystems: Member States shall carry out appropriate restoration measures to assist the recovery of an
ecosystem that has been degraded, damaged, or destroyed by invasive alien species of Union concern unless a cost-benefit analysis
demonstrates, on the basis of the available data and with reasonable certainty, that the costs of those measures will be high and
disproportionate to the benefits of restoration.
Early detection: the Regulation also establishes a surveillance system for early detection (within 18 months of the adoption of the Union list,
Member States shall establish a surveillance system of invasive alien species of Union concern) and measures for rapid eradication.
Furthermore, Member States must provide for penalties if the Regulation is not correctly applied (seizure of the non-compliant invasive alien
species of Union concern; immediate suspension or withdrawal of a permit issued).
Information support system: the Commission shall progressively establish an information support system necessary to facilitate the application
of this Regulation. By 2 January 2016 that system shall include a data support mechanism interconnecting existing data systems on invasive
alien species.
The Commission will assess the application of this Regulation by 1 June 2021.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 1.1.2015.
DELEGATED ACTS: in order to take into account the latest scientific developments in the environmental field, the power to adopt acts should
be delegated to the Commission for a period of five years from 1 January 2015.
The European Parliament or the Council may object to a delegated act within a period of two months from the date of notification (this period
may be extended by two months). If the European Parliament or the Council objects, the delegated act shall not enter into force.

