Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Directive

2013/0074(COD)

Procedure completed

Maritime spatial planning

Subject
3.15.02 Aquaculture
3.15.04 Management of fisheries, fisheries, fishing grounds
3.20.03 Maritime transport: passengers and freight
3.20.03.01 Maritime safety
3.20.15.06 Maritime or inland transport agreements and cooperation
3.40.16 Raw materials
3.70.01 Protection of natural resources: fauna, flora, nature, wildlife,
countryside; biodiversity
3.70.05 Marine and coastal pollution, pollution from ships, oil pollution
3.70.20 Sustainable development
4.70.05 Regional cooperation, cross-border cooperation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
TRAN

Transport and Tourism

Rapporteur

Appointed

ALDE MEISSNER Gesine

19/03/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE KUHN Werner
S&D DANELLIS Spyros
Verts/ALE TAYLOR Keith
ECR VAN DALEN Peter
GUE/NGL RUBIKS Alfreds
EFD IMBRASAS Juozas
Committee for opinion
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

S&D PIRILLO Mario

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Fisheries

S&D THOMAS Isabelle

PETI

Petitions

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Maritime Affairs and Fisheries
Environment

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ENVI

PECH

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the

Rapporteur for opinion

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner

18/04/2013

09/04/2013

Regions

Key events
12/03/2013

Legislative proposal published

COM(2013)0133

Summary

15/04/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

05/11/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

13/11/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0379/2013

Summary

11/12/2013

Debate in Parliament

12/12/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

12/12/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0588/2013

Summary

17/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0449/2014

Summary

23/07/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

23/07/2014

Final act signed

23/07/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

28/08/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0074(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Directive

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 043-p2; Treaty on the Functioning
of the EU TFEU 192-p1; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 194-p2;
Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 100-p2

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

TRAN/7/12196

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0133

12/03/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0064

12/03/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0065

12/03/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE516.661

16/07/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE516.626

11/09/2013

EP

CES3176/2013

18/09/2013

ESC

Economic and Social Committee: opinion,
report

Summary

Committee of the Regions: opinion

CDR3766/2013

09/10/2013

CofR

Committee opinion

PECH

PE514.932

17/10/2013

EP

Committee opinion

ENVI

PE516.628

25/10/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0379/2013

13/11/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at
1st reading/single reading

T7-0588/2013

12/12/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0449/2014

17/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Directive 2014/89
OJ L 257 28.08.2014, p. 0135 Summary

2013/0074(COD) - 12/03/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish a framework for maritime spatial planning and integrated coastal management.
PROPOSED ACT : Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council
ROLEOF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the ultimate aim of maritime spatial planning is to draw up plans to identify the utilisation of maritime space for different sea
uses. Maritime spatial planning and integrated coastal management are complementary tools. Applied jointly, they improve sea-land interface
planning and management.
Increased use of coastal and maritime areas as well as climate change effects, natural hazards, and erosion, put pressure on coastal and
marine resources. They require integrated and coherent management to secure sustainable growth and preserve coastal and marine
ecosystems for future generations.
In 2008, the Commission published its Roadmap for Maritime Spatial Planning: achieving common principles in the EU , followed by a 2010
Communication entitled Maritime Spatial Planning in the EU achievements and future development.
This draft directive is an essential part of the ambition to develop the EUs Blue Economy as described in the Commission Communication on
Blue growth: opportunities for marine and maritime sustainable growth.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the impact assessment evaluated the effectiveness and the economic, environmental and social impacts of three
options: (1) guidance and development of best practice, (2) non-binding measures, and (3) legally binding measures, including a
framework-type directive or regulation.
The impact assessment concluded that, even though non-binding options offer some advantages, a legally binding approach by means of a
directive is the most appropriate instrument in order to:
·

ensure predictability, stability, and transparency of maritime spatial planning and integrated coastal management, whilst leaving
flexibility for implementation to Member States and not interfering with the latters competences;

·

ensure that timelines for implementation are coherent with the timeframes of other relevant EU legislation and policy initiatives (e.g.
Renewable Energy Directive, Marine Strategy Framework Directive, Europe 2020 targets, etc.);

·

foster growth of economic activities at sea in a context of increased competition for space.

LEGAL BASIS: Articles 43(2), 100(2), 192(1), and 194(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
CONTENT: the main purpose of the proposed directive is to promote the sustainable growth of maritime and coastal activities and the
sustainable use of coastal and marine resources by establishing a framework for maritime spatial planning and integrated coastal
management in the form of a systematic, coordinated, inclusive and trans-boundary approach to integrated maritime governance.

To ensure the sustainability and environmental health of the various uses, maritime spatial planning and integrated coastal management will
have to employ an ecosystem-based approach that ensures the protection of the natural resources that provide the basis for carrying out
various activities. The proposed action covers all policy areas of the TFEU with an impact on coasts, seas and oceans.
The proposal:
·

obliges Member States to carry out maritime spatial planning and integrated coastal management in accordance with national and
international law. The aim of the action is for Member States to establish a process or processes that cover the full cycle of problem
identification, information collection, planning, decision-making, management, monitoring of implementation, and stakeholder
participation. Planning details and the determination of management objectives are left to Member States. The EU will not take part
in this process;

·

requires Member States actions to aim for coherence of management across sea basins, through trans-boundary cooperation in the
same marine region or sub-region and related coastal zone and appropriate data collection and exchange.

Implementing acts will ensure consistent implementation of the Directive throughout the EU and facilitate reporting from the Member States to
the Commission and, where relevant, the exchange of data between Member States and with the Commission.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the proposal has no implications for the EU budget.

2013/0074(COD) - 13/11/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Transport and Tourism adopted the report by Gesine MEISSNER (ADLE, DE) on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for maritime spatial planning and integrated coastal management (ICM)
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading, following the ordinary legislative procedure,
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Scope: Members stipulated that the Directive should establish a framework for maritime spatial planning involving where appropriate
integrated coastal management aiming at promoting the sustainable development and growth of maritime and coastal economies and the
sustainable use of marine and coastal resources, in particular by supporting the priority areas identified in the Commission Communication of
13 September 2012 on Blue Growth Opportunities for Marine and Maritime Sustainable Growth.
Flexibility for Member States: in accordance with the subsidiarity principle, Members called for the new Directive to ensure more flexibility for
the Member States to choose how to implement ICM. The provisions of this Directive shall apply to all marine waters and coastal zones of the
Union, in compliance with existing Union and national law.
Member States may decide whether to follow an integrated approach or to establish maritime spatial plans and integrated coastal
management strategies separately. They shall remain responsible for designing and determining the content of such plans and strategies,
including the apportionment of maritime space to the different sector activities and maritime and marine uses.
Maritime spatial plans and integrated coastal management strategies shall aim to ensure effective participation of the stakeholders and ensure
effective trans-boundary cooperation between Member States.
Ecosystem-based approach and economic and social criteria: maritime spatial plans and integrated coastal management strategies shall apply
the ecosystem-based approach and economic and social criteria at the same level to support sustainable development and growth in the
maritime sector.
Common minimum requirements for the programmes and strategies: maritime spatial plans and integrated coastal management strategies
should be based on the best available data and, on the other hand, guarantee the necessary flexibility to take future developments into
account.
When establishing maritime spatial plans, Member States shall take into consideration, inter alia, the following uses and activities (i)
installations for the extraction of energy and the production of renewable energy, and for bringing it onshore; (ii) oil, gas and other raw
materials exploration and extraction sites and infrastructures; (iii) existing and potential fishing areas; (iv) nature and species
protection and conservation sites, Natura 2000 areas, other sensitive marine ecosystems and surrounding areas; (v) marine and
coastal tourism; (vi) cultural heritage protection sites; (vii) military training areas.
When establishing integrated coastal management strategies, Member States shall take into consideration: (i) existing formal and
informal practices, networks and cross-border cooperation mechanisms; (ii) relevant activities, installations, facilities and infrastructure;
(iii) protection, conservation, restoration and management of coastal ecosystems, protected deltas and wetland areas; (iv) coastal
landscapes and islands mitigation and adaptation to climate change, in particular increasing the resilience of the ecosystem.
Public participation: Members shall ensure that the relevant stakeholders, the authoritiesat the various levels and the public concerned are
consulted on the draft plans and strategies and have access to the results once available.
Cooperation with third countries: Member States bordering a coastal zone or maritime area of a third country shall, in compliance with
International Maritime Law and Conventions, consult that country and make every effort to cooperate and coordinate their maritime spatial
plans and integrated coastal management strategies with that third country in the marine region or sub-region and the related coastal zone
concerned.

2013/0074(COD) - 12/12/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st reading/single
reading
The European Parliament made some amendments to the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing
a framework for maritime spatial planning and integrated coastal management (ICM).

The matter was referred back to the competent committee for re-consideration. The vote on the legislative resolution was moved to a later
plenary session.
The main amendments were as follows:
Purpose: Parliament wanted the framework for maritime spatial planning to involve integrated coastal management aiming at promoting the
sustainable development and growth of maritime and coastal economies and the sustainable use of marine and coastal resources, in particular
by supporting the priority areas identified in the Commission Communication of 13 September 2012 on Blue Growth Opportunities for Marine
and Maritime Sustainable Growth .
Flexibility for Member States: in accordance with the subsidiarity principle, Members called for the new Directive to ensure more flexibility for
the Member States to choose how to implement ICM. The provisions of the Directive must take into account land-sea interactions and
enhanced cross-border cooperation on the basis of the respective UNCLOS provisions. It shall apply to all marine waters and coastal zones of
the Union, in compliance with existing Union and national law.
·

Member States may decide whether to follow an integrated approach or to establish maritime spatial plans and integrated coastal
management strategies separately. They shall remain responsible for designing and determining the content of such plans and
strategies, including the apportionment of maritime space to the different sector activities and maritime and marine uses.

·

Maritime spatial plans and integrated coastal management strategies shall aim to ensure effective participation of the
stakeholders and ensure effective trans-boundary cooperation between Member States.

Ecosystem-based approach and economic and social criteria: maritime spatial plans and integrated coastal management strategies shall apply
the ecosystem-based approach and economic and social criteria at the same level to support sustainable development and growth in the
maritime sector. They shall promote cross-border cooperation and the multiple use of the same maritime space by different sectors.
Common minimum requirements for the programmes and strategies: maritime spatial plans and integrated coastal management strategies
should be based on the best available data and, on the other hand, guarantee the necessary flexibility to take future developments into
account.
Maritime spatial plans and integrated coastal management strategies shall aim to contribute to the following Union objectives:
·

promoting multimodal links and sustainability ;

·

fostering the sustainable development of the fisheries sector and sustainable growth of the aquaculture sector,

·

ensuring the preservation, protection and improvement of the environment through a representative and coherent network of
protected areas and reduce and prevent marine and coastal areas pollution risks;

·

protect vulnerable coastal areas.

Maritime spatial plans and integrated coastal management strategies may aim to contribute to further national objectives, such as:
·

promoting the sustainable extraction of raw materials;

·

promoting sustainable tourism;

·

ensuring the preservation and protection of cultural heritage;

·

guaranteeing recreational and other use to the public;

·

preserving traditional economic and social characteristics of the maritime economy. Public participation: Members shall ensure that
the relevant stakeholders, the authorities at the various levels and the public concerned are consulted on the draft plans and
strategies and have access to the results once available.

Cooperation with third countries: Member States bordering a coastal zone or maritime area of a third country shall, in compliance with
International Maritime Law and Conventions, consult that country and make every effort to cooperate and coordinate their maritime spatial
plans and integrated coastal management strategies with that third country in the marine region or sub-region and the related coastal zone
concerned.

2013/0074(COD) - 17/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 470 to 96 votes with 9 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for maritime spatial planning and integrated coastal maritime spatial
planning and integrated coastal management.
The report was sent back to committee at the plenary session of 12 December 2013.
Parliament adopted its position at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary are the result
of an agreement negotiated between the European Parliament and the Council. They modify the proposal as follows:
Purpose: Parliament and the Council wanted to establish a framework for maritime spatial planning aiming at promoting the sustainable growth
of maritime economies, the sustainable development of marine areas and the sustainable use of marine resources.
The framework should take into account land-sea interactions and enhanced cross-border cooperation, in accordance with relevant United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) provisions.
The Directive should not interfere with Member States' competence to design and determine, within the marine waters, the extent and
coverage of their maritime spatial plans. It should not apply to town and country planning and not affect the sovereign rights and jurisdiction of
Member States over marine waters which derive from relevant International Law.
Objectives of maritime spatial planning: when establishing and implementing maritime spatial planning, Member States should consider

economic, social and environmental aspects, applying an eco-system based approach. They should aim to contribute to the sustainable
development of energy sectors at sea, of maritime transport, of the fisheries and aquaculture sectors, and the preservation, protection and
improvement of the environment including the resilience to climate change impacts. Other objectives may be pursued such as the promotion of
sustainable tourism and the sustainable extraction of raw materials
Set-up of maritime spatial plans: Member States need at least to ensure that the planning process or processes result in a comprehensive
planning identifying the different uses of maritime space, taking into consideration long term changes due to climate change. The activities and
uses and interests may include for example: i) fishing and aquaculture areas; ii) infrastructures for the exploration, exploitation and extraction
of oil, gas and mineral, as well as other energy resources and the production of renewable energy; iii) maritime transport routes and traffic
flows; iv) military training areas; v) protected areas; vi) raw material extraction areas; vii) scientific research; and viii) tourism and underwater
cultural heritage.
Public participation: stakeholders, authorities and the public concerned should be informed and consulted in the first phases and should have
access to the plans once they are finalised.
Data use and sharing: Member States should organise the use of the best available data, and decide how to organise the sharing of
information, necessary for maritime spatial plans
Cooperation with third countries: Member States should endeavour, where possible, to cooperate with third countries on their actions with
regard to maritime spatial planning in the relevant marine regions and in accordance with international law and conventions, such as by using
existing international fora or regional institutional cooperation.

2013/0074(COD) - 23/07/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish a framework for maritime spatial planning, aiming at promoting the sustainable growth of maritime economies, the
sustainable development of marine areas.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Directive 2014/89/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a framework for maritime spatial
planning.
CONTENT: the Directive establishes a framework for maritime spatial planning aimed at promoting the sustainable growth of maritime
economies, the sustainable development of marine areas and the sustainable use of marine resources.
The Integrated Maritime Policy for the European Union (IMP) identifies maritime spatial planning as a cross-cutting policy tool enabling public
authorities and stakeholders to apply a coordinated, integrated and trans-boundary approach, based on ecosystems.
The Directive is a vital part of the strategy on developing the EUs Blue Growth. Its main points are as follows:
Establishment and implementation of maritime spatial planning: the Directive requires Member States to draw up, in the framework of maritime
spatial planning, plans analysing and organising human activities in marine areas and determining ways of optimising future spatial
development. In this context, Member States must:
·

take into account land-sea interactions and economic, social and environmental aspects as well as safety aspects;

·

aim to promote coherence between maritime spatial planning and the resulting plan or plans and other processes, such as integrated
coastal management;

·

ensure the involvement of stakeholders by means of public participation;

·

organise the use of the best available data (environmental, social and economic data and marine physical data about marine waters);

·

ensure trans-boundary cooperation between Member States bordering marine waters with the aim of ensuring that maritime spatial
plans are coherent and coordinated across the marine region concerned;

·

promote cooperation with third countries, such as by using existing international forums or regional institutional cooperation.

Objectives: through their maritime spatial plans, Member States shall aim to contribute to the sustainable development of energy sectors at
sea, of maritime transport, and of the fisheries and aquaculture sectors, and to the preservation, protection and improvement of the
environment, including resilience to climate change impacts. In addition, Member States may pursue other objectives such as the promotion of
sustainable tourism and the sustainable extraction of raw materials.
The Directive is without prejudice to the competence of Member States to determine how the different objectives are reflected and weighted in
their maritime spatial plan or plans. Maritime spatial plans shall be reviewed at least every ten years.
Implementation: each Member State shall designate the authority or authorities competent for the implementation of the Directive. Member
States shall send copies of the maritime spatial plans to the Commission and to any other Member States concerned within three months of
publication.
The Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council, at the latest one year after the deadline for establishment of the
maritime spatial plans, and every four years thereafter, a report outlining the progress made in implementing the Directive.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 17.9.2014.
TRANSPOSITION: 18.9.2016.

