Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2841(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the Commission communication entitled ?Strengthening the
social dimension of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)'

Subject
4.10.05 Social inclusion, poverty, minimum income
4.10.10 Social protection, social security
4.15 Employment policy, action to combat unemployment
4.40.10 Youth
5.20.01 Coordination of monetary policies, European Monetary Institute
(EMI), Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)

Key players
Committee responsible

European Parliament

EMPL

European Commission

Rapporteur

Appointed

Employment and Social Affairs

Commission DG

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

ANDOR László

Key events
20/11/2013

Debate in Parliament

21/11/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

21/11/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

21/11/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T7-0515/2013

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2841(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Debate or resolution on oral question/interpellation

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 128-p5

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/7/13810

Documentation gateway
For information

COM(2013)0690

02/10/2013

EC

Amendments tabled in committee

PE522.777

06/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE522.933

06/11/2013

EP

Oral question/interpellation by Parliament

B7-0524/2013

14/11/2013

EP

Motion for a resolution

B7-0496/2013

18/11/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
Commission response to text adopted in plenary

T7-0515/2013

21/11/2013

SP(2014)88

10/03/2014

EP

Summary

2013/2841(RSP) - 02/10/2013 For information
This Commission communication on strengthening the social dimension of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) is a further contribution
from the Commission to the debate on deepening EMU.
The crisis revealed gaps in the functioning of the monetary union, although major steps have been taken to reinforce the EUs economic
governance.
The December 2012 European Council supported the development of the social dimension of the EMU, including social dialogue. To this end,
the June 2013 European Council recalled that the social dimension should be strengthened and emphasised the importance of better
monitoring and of taking account of the social and labour market situation in the EMU and it also pointed to the need to improve coordination
of employment and social policies.
The European Parliament also expressed its views, in its resolution of 20 November 2012, on priorities for achieving a genuine EMU, in
particular recommending a social pact for Europe.
This Communication on strengthening the social dimension is a further contribution from the Commission to the debate on deepening EMU. It
should also be noted that employment and social policies fall very largely under the national competence of the Member States. What the
Commission proposes is a number of initiatives to strengthen the social dimension of EMU with a particular focus on the following issues:
1. Enhancing capacity to monitor employment and social developments in EMU to better coordinate a timely and adequate policy response:
The Commission proposes to create a scoreboard of key indicators to be used in its draft Joint Employment Report to follow
employment and social developments.
The following headline indicators could help detect negative trends at a reasonably early stage and help anticipate further
deterioration: i. unemployment level and changes; ii. NEET rate (young people not in education, employment or training) and youth
unemployment rate; iii. real gross disposable income of households; iv. at-risk-of-poverty rate of working age population; v.
inequalities.
The Commission also suggests strengthening the social dimension of EMU by improving the coordination and monitoring of policies
and developments in the social and employment concerns in the context of the European Semester process. The social dimension
should be integrated in the surveillance of macroeconomic imbalances.
2. Mobilising EU action and funding to tackle unemployment (including youth unemployment) and social distress in an effective and
sustainable way:
The Commission considers that the scope of the EU budget must be fully exploited to develop the social dimension of EMU. For the
period 2014-20, resources and programmes have been boosted. The European Structural and Investment Funds will continue to drive
Member States implementation of necessary reforms and modernisation of social policies.
The new Programme for Employment and Social Innovation can help spread innovative and cost-efficient employment and social
policy measures across Member States, and the Fund for European Aid to the Most Deprived will provide material assistance to
people in greatest need.
The June European Council decided that the EUR 3 billion budget line dedicated to the Youth Employment Initiative (YEI) should be
frontloaded in 2014-15, supported by matching contributions from ESF programmes of at least EUR 3 billion.
3. Combining the steps taken on responsibility and economic discipline with more solidarity and financial support:
In the short term, the Commission has proposed creating an instrument within the EU economic governance framework and the EU
budget, separate from the Multiannual Financial Framework, to support rebalancing, adjustment and thereby growth. It also proposed
that the existing framework should be strengthened by improving ex ante coordination of major reform projects and by creating a
Convergence and Competitiveness Instrument (CCI) to provide a framework for commitments to and support for the timely
implementation of structural reforms.
In the long term, based on progressive pooling of sovereignty and thus responsibility and solidarity competencies at European level, it
should become possible to establish an autonomous euro area budget providing the euro area with a fiscal capacity to support
Member States absorb shocks. A common instrument for macroeconomic stabilisation could provide an insurance system to pool the
risks of economic shocks across Member States, thereby reducing the fluctuations in national incomes.
4. Reducing existing barriers to cross-border labour mobility in the EU: cross-border mobility within the European Union is still low. Only 2.6 %
of the EU population has moved to live in a different Member State . In the euro area, less than 4 % of the working age population are nationals
of a different Member State. The EU has already addressed some of these persistent barriers. However, looking for a job in another EU
Member State is still complicated and administratively burdensome.
The Commission and the Member States need to do more to ensure transnational matching between labour supply and demand, in particular
by upgrading the EURES network into a pan-European recruitment, matching and placement service.
Moreover, it is crucial to tackle skills mismatches to better anticipate the skills needed in the labour market. This is the purpose of the recently
launched EU Skills Panorama.
5. Strengthening the role of social dialogue in developing euro-area-wide and national strategies, through appropriate involvement of the social
partners: the Commission considers that there is scope for improving the mechanisms to involve the social partners in the coordination of
economic and employment policies at EU level by making the best use of existing fora, such as:
the macroeconomic dialogue is a high level forum for exchanging views between the Council, the Commission, the European Central

Bank and the social partner representations at EU level;
the tripartite social summit for Growth and Employment is enshrined in Article 152 TFEU as an integral component of social dialogue
at EU level.
There is a broad consensus among the EU institutions on the need to better involve the social partners in European governance, in particular
in the European Semester process.

2013/2841(RSP) - 21/11/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 387 votes to 64 with 58 abstentions a resolution tabled by the Committee on Employment, welcoming
the Commission communication entitled Strengthening the social dimension of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU), and considered it to
be a first step towards building a social dimension of the EMU. It recognised explicitly that the implementation of the social dimension of the
EMU is subject to the subsidiarity principle and could be best achieved through the best practice method and the peer review method at
European level. Noting that unemployment in the EU has reached the alarming level of 26.6 million people, and 24.2 % of the EU population is
currently at risk of poverty or social exclusion, Members urged that social considerations be placed at the core of European integration and
mainstreamed into all EU policies and initiatives. They invited the December 2013 European Council to define the steps forward in terms of
strengthening the social aspect of the EMU. They rejected any harmonisation or alignment which results in the minimisation of social
standards in Member States.
Parliament supported the proposed establishment of a scoreboard of key employment and social indicators complementary to the
Macroeconomic Imbalance Procedure (MIP) with a view to making the social consequences of economic and other policies more transparent
through ex ante and ex post impact assessments or monitoring, and which could be used in the drafting of the Commissions Joint Employment
Report (JER).
It made the following comments on the indicators;
·

all relevant indicators should be gender-sensitive;

·

the proposed indicator on youth unemployment levels should include young people up to the age of 30 on a voluntary basis, as
provided for by the Youth Guarantee;

·

the scoreboard should include indicators relating to child poverty levels, access to healthcare, homelessness, and a decent work
index in order to allow proper assessment of the social situation in the EU;

·

Parliament and the social partners ought to be involved in defining the employment and social indicators;

·

there must be concrete benchmarks for the employment and social indicators in the form of an EU social protection floor, with a view
to promoting upward social convergence and social progress;

·

the proposed indicators were a possible way of ensuring comprehensive coverage of the Member States employment and social
situations.

The Commission and Commission are asked to:
·

take concrete action to make the social impact of policies and reforms more transparent, through the ex ante and ex post impact
assessment and monitoring of policy reforms;

·

monitor the compliance of all Member State reports with Europe 2020 targets, notably with regard to poverty reduction and
employment, and to look carefully at the interconnections and interdependence between policies.

Members welcomed the call for optimum use of the EU budget with a view to developing the social dimension of the EMU and further
supporting voluntary worker mobility in order to derive maximum benefit from the EUs employment potential.
Parliament also welcomed the proposed involvement of the social partners in the European Semester process, inter alia in the framework of
the Social Dialogue Committee prior to the adoption of the Annual Growth Survey (AGS) each year, although it called for even greater
involvement of the social partners in economic governance. It considered that good governance of the EMU and its impact can be effective
only if all stakeholders, were involved.
Lastly, Parliament called on the Commission better to integrate Parliaments resolution of 23 October 2013 European Semester for economic
policy coordination, the Commission communication of 2 October 2013 and this resolution in the drafting of the 2014 AGS.

