Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2052(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Negotiations for an EU/Malaysia partnership and cooperation agreement.
Recommendation to the Council, the Commission and the EEAS

Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.40.08 Relations with Asian countries
Geographical area
Malaysia

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

S&D MENÉNDEZ DEL VALLE 19/02/2013
Emilio

Committee for opinion
DEVE

INTA

European Commission

Appointed

Rapporteur for opinion

Development

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

International Trade

Commission DG

ALDE RINALDI Niccolò

20/03/2013

Commissioner

Communications Networks, Content and Technology KROES Neelie

Key events
18/04/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

18/06/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

25/06/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

11/09/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

11/09/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/09/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0235/2013

Summary

T7-0367/2013

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2052(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 108

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/7/12224

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE507.995

09/04/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE510.657

07/05/2013

EP

PE510.479

28/05/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0235/2013

25/06/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0367/2013

11/09/2013

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2013)816

19/12/2013

Committee opinion

INTA

2013/2052(INI) - 25/06/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Emilio MENÉNDEZ del VALLE (S&D, ES) with a motion for a resolution
on the recommendation to the Council, the Commission and the EEAS on the negotiations for an EU-Malaysia partnership and cooperation
agreement.
Members recall that Malaysia is an emerging economy and has established successive socioeconomic restructuring programmes over the
years. EU-Malaysia relations should be further developed through a broader partnership and cooperation agreement.
In this context, Members address the following recommendations to the Council, the Commission and the European External Action Service:
Partnership and cooperation agreement negotiations: Members emphasise that the EU-Malaysia partnership and cooperation agreement will
provide unique opportunities to establish a new level of strategic and political framework for the bilateral relations , expand the EUs
engagement in a number of areas of mutual interest among others in trade cooperation, energy, science & technology, migration,
counter-terrorism, human rights and fundamental freedoms, good governance, social standards and labour conditions, anti-corruption,
trafficking in persons and non-proliferation and strengthen the EU-Malaysia policy dialogue on environment, green technology and climate
change. They call for a consistent approach to the PCA and FTA negotiations (the two negotiations should be dependent on each other and be
carried out in parallel).
Political dialogue: Members commend the creation of the Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency (MMEA) combining all law enforcement
activities of federal laws at sea in one agency. They commend the results of Malaysias subregional cooperation with Singapore, Indonesia, the
Philippines, Thailand, the Asia Maritime Security Initiative (AMARSECTIVE) and the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating Piracy
and Armed Robbery Against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP). Members recall that Malaysia enjoyed an extraordinarily high degree of political stability
over a long period even if the country has been hit by ethnic and political tension. Malaysia should continue developing socio-economic
policies that ensure fair treatment of all ethnic and religious groups and that assure all citizens of Malaysia of their full rights.
Human rights and fundamental freedoms: Members consider it necessary to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout the
negotiations for an EU-Malaysia partnership and cooperation agreement, in particular the freedoms of expression, assembly and association,
and sexual orientation and gender identity, and the promotion of ILO social and labour standards. Progress must be made in the area of the
media.
Whilst welcoming the progress made as regards internal security Act (ISA), Members note shortcomings, for instance as regards the appeal
system.
Members note that tensions have emerged between the judiciary and legal professionals and to raise concerns that the institutional framework
has at the same time become more reserved as regards full respect for the independence of legal processes and the exclusivity of courts
judicial powers. They suggest that the government listen to and address the concerns over tensions caused by state-run sharia courts
operating in parallel with the national, common-law system.
In parallel, the report also calls on Malaysia to comply with internationally agreed social standards and to protect the constitutional rights of all
Malaysians to freedom of religion or belief. Members call for the Christians to be able to exercise fully their constitutional right to practise their
religion according to their traditions and without interference or fear of prosecution.
In addition, they encourage the government to promote womens rights.
Economic, scientific and cultural cooperation: Members welcome Malaysias drive to increase energy efficiency, the use of renewable energies
and investment in green technologies. They stress that renewable energies, such as palm oil and hydropower, must be produced in an
environmentally sustainable way, without reducing the size of tropical forests, reducing biodiversity or replacing food production by fuel
production. They recall the EUs internal debate about the dangers of allowing the production of biofuel to expand at the expense of food
production.
While Malaysia is undoubtedly one of the most successful Southeast Asian economies, Members consider that it needs to invest progressively
in the pursuit of academic and scientific knowledge if it is to reach the next level of standard of living and become a highly developed country.
They call for the support of increased academic exchanges and cooperation through the Erasmus Mundus programme and the MYEULINK
project.
Other provisions: lastly, Members encourage the EU negotiating team to continue its close cooperation with Parliament by providing up-to-date
information on the progress of the negotiations.

2013/2052(INI) - 11/09/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution with a recommendation to the Council, the Commission and the EEAS on the negotiations for
an EU-Malaysia partnership and cooperation agreement.
Parliament recalls that Malaysia is an emerging economy and has established successive socioeconomic restructuring programmes over the
years. EU-Malaysia relations should be further developed through a broader partnership and cooperation agreement.
In this context, Parliament addresses the following recommendations to the Council, the Commission and the European External Action
Service:
Partnership and cooperation agreement negotiations: Parliament emphasises that the EU-Malaysia partnership and cooperation agreement
will provide unique opportunities to establish a new level of strategic and political framework for the bilateral relations , expand the EUs
engagement in a number of areas of mutual interest among others in trade cooperation, energy, science & technology, migration,
counter-terrorism, human rights and fundamental freedoms, good governance, social standards and labour conditions, anti-corruption,
trafficking in persons and non-proliferation and strengthen the EU-Malaysia policy dialogue on environment, green technology and climate
change. It calls for a consistent approach to the PCA and FTA negotiations (the two negotiations should be dependent on each other and be
carried out in parallel).
Political dialogue: Parliament commends the creation of the Malaysian Maritime Enforcement Agency (MMEA) combining all law enforcement
activities of federal laws at sea in one agency. It also commends the results of Malaysias subregional cooperation with Singapore, Indonesia,
the Philippines, Thailand, the Asia Maritime Security Initiative (AMARSECTIVE) and the Regional Cooperation Agreement on Combating
Piracy and Armed Robbery Against Ships in Asia (ReCAAP).
Parliament expresses appreciation for the fact that the Malaysian Armed Forces have taken part in the anti-piracy operations off the Somali
coast. It also sees potential for closer EU-Malaysian cooperation in enhancing maritime security, in particular in coast guard capacity-building,
information sharing, naval interoperability and the development of legal aspects. It welcomes cooperation and takes positive note of Malaysia's
increased capability to combat terrorism, money laundering, drug and arms trafficking and the forgery of travel documents.
Parliament recalls that Malaysia enjoyed an extraordinarily high degree of political stability over a long period even if the country has been hit
by ethnic and political tension. Malaysia should continue developing socio-economic policies that ensure fair treatment of all ethnic and
religious groups and that assure all citizens of Malaysia of their full rights. Members reiterate the global importance of the South China Sea
and appeal to all the parties involved to settle their conflicting territorial claims, including those relating to the Spratly/Nansha Islands, by
means of international arbitration.
Human rights and fundamental freedoms: Parliament considers it necessary to promote human rights and fundamental freedoms throughout
the negotiations for an EU-Malaysia partnership and cooperation agreement, in particular the freedoms of expression, assembly and
association, and sexual orientation and gender identity, and the promotion of ILO social and labour standards. Progress must be made in the
area of the media.
Whilst welcoming the progress made as regards internal security Act (ISA), Parliament notes shortcomings, for instance as regards the appeal
system.
It also notes that tensions have emerged between the judiciary and legal professionals and to raise concerns that the institutional framework
has at the same time become more reserved as regards full respect for the independence of legal processes and the exclusivity of courts
judicial powers. It suggests that the government listen to and address the concerns over tensions caused by state-run sharia courts operating
in parallel with the national, common-law system.
In parallel, the resolution also calls on Malaysia to comply with internationally agreed social standards and to protect the constitutional rights of
all Malaysians to freedom of religion or belief. Parliament calls for the Christians to be able to exercise fully their constitutional right to practise
their religion according to their traditions and without interference or fear of prosecution. It calls for the speedy removal of the current
administrative and legal obstacles to Muslims who convert to Christianity or Hinduism, and calls for the state to offer such converts protection
from prosecution.
In addition, it encourages the government to promote womens rights and to stop the use of caning as a punishment.
Economic, scientific and cultural cooperation: Members welcome Malaysias drive to increase energy efficiency, the use of renewable energies
and investment in green technologies. They stress that renewable energies, such as palm oil and hydropower, must be produced in an
environmentally sustainable way.
As regards biofuels: Parliament recalls the EU's internal debate about the dangers of allowing the production of biofuel to expand at the
expense of food production. For the Parliament, palm oil cultivation for biofuels must be carried out in a sustainable manner, avoiding forest
conversion and loss of biodiversity, respecting the land rights of indigenous people and providing opportunities for the poorest communities to
raise their living standards.
While Malaysia is undoubtedly one of the most successful Southeast Asian economies, Parliament considers that it needs to invest
progressively in the pursuit of academic and scientific knowledge if it is to reach the next level of standard of living and become a highly
developed country. It calls for the support of increased academic exchanges and cooperation through the Erasmus Mundus programme and
the MYEULINK project.
Other provisions: lastly, Parliament encourages the EU negotiating team to continue its close cooperation with Parliament by providing
up-to-date information on the progress of the negotiations.

