Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2117(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU Justice Scoreboard - civil and administrative justice in the Member
States

Subject
2.80 Cooperation between administrations
7.40.02 Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters
8.50.01 Implementation of EU law

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Legal Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE ZWIEFKA Tadeusz

19/06/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D BERLINGUER Luigi
Committee for opinion

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

REDING Viviane

Appointed

Key events
27/03/2013

Non-legislative basic document published

13/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

26/11/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

05/12/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

03/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

04/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

04/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

04/02/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2117(INI)

COM(2013)0160

Summary

A7-0442/2013

Summary

T7-0064/2014

Summary

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Implementation

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/7/12942

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2013)0160

27/03/2013

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE521.455

03/10/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE522.806

25/10/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0442/2013

05/12/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0064/2014

04/02/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)414

18/06/2014

2013/2117(INI) - 27/03/2013 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Justice Scoreboard for 2013.
BACKGROUND: the objective of the EU Justice Scoreboard is to assist the EU and the Member States to achieve more effective justice by
providing objective, reliable and comparable data on the functioning of the justice systems of all Member States.
The main characteristics of the Scoreboard are:
a comparative tool: it covers all Member States and focuses on timeliness, independence, affordability, and easy access to the
Member States justice systems without presenting an overall single ranking;
a non-binding tool: it is to be operated as part of an open dialogue with the Member States which aims to help the Member States and
EU institutions in defining better justice policies and to identify issues that deserve particular attention;
an evolving tool: it will gradually expand in the areas covered, the indicators and the methodology, with the objective of identifying the
essential parameters of an effective justice system.
Coverage: the 2013 edition examines efficiency indicators for non-criminal cases, in particular for litigious civil and commercial cases which
are relevant for resolving commercial disputes, and for administrative cases.
CONTENT: the 2013 Scoreboard targets a certain number of difficulties such as:
1. Length of proceedings: at least one third of Member States have an average length of proceedings that is at least twice as long as in
the majority of Member States. The length of proceedings is linked to the rate at which the courts can resolve cases, the 'clearance
rate', and to the number of cases that are still waiting to be resolved (pending cases). If this situation persists over several years, this
could be indicative of a more systemic problem requiring corrective measures. The reduction of the excessive length of proceedings
should be a priority in order to improve the business environment and attractiveness for investment.
2. Evaluation of the quality of justice: effective time management of court cases requires that the courts, the judiciary and all justice
end-users can be informed on the functioning of courts through a regular monitoring system. The Scoreboard shows that (i) a large
majority of Member States has a comprehensive monitoring system, but several Member States are lagging behind or do not make
the data available; and (ii) that several Member States do not perform regular evaluations of court activities and that quality standards
are not defined in more than half of the Member States.
3. Justice and ICTs: ICT systems for the registration and management of cases are indispensable tools at the disposal of courts for an
effective time management of cases, as they help to improve the rate at which the court can treat cases and thereby to reduce the
overall length of proceedings. Most Member States have a well-developed system for the registration and management of cases;
however, in several Member States developments are lagging behind. The ICT systems also play an increasing role in cross-border
cooperation between judicial authorities and thereby facilitate the implementation of EU legislation.
4. Alternative Dispute Resolution: effective mediation and other alternative dispute resolution (ADR) methods provide an early settlement
between parties on voluntary basis, reduce the number of pending cases and can thus have an important positive impact on the
workload of courts, which are then more able to keep reasonable timeframes.
5. Training of judges: initial and continous training is important for maintaining or increasing the knowledge and the skills of justice
personnel. Training is particularly important considering the continuous development of national and EU legislation, the increased
pressure to meet the expectations of end-users and the trend towards the professional management within the judiciary.
6. Resources: investing in a well organised justice system can make an important contribution to sustainable growth.
7. Disparity in the perception of independence: as a general rule, justice must not only be done, it must be seen to be done. Even though
several Member States are among the top 10 worldwide leaders in terms of the perception of judicial independence, the Scoreboard
shows a rather low level of perception of judicial independence by business end-users of the justice system in certain Member States.
These findings merit special attention and a more detailed assessment into why a lack of trust exists for certain Member States.

Next steps: the key findings of the 2013 Scoreboard highlight the priority areas that need to be addressed. The Commission will translate
these priorities into the following actions:
the issues identified in the Scoreboard will be taken into account in preparing the forthcoming country specific analysis of the
2013 European Semester. They will also guide the work in the context of the Economic Adjustments Programmes.
the Commission has proposed that Regional Development and Social Funds will be available for reforms of the judicial systems in
the next multi-annual financial framework.
On the basis of this Scoreboard, the Commission invites the Member States, the European Parliament, and all stakeholders to an open
dialogue and constructive collaboration towards the continued improvement of the national justice systems in the EU in the context of the
European Semester, of Europe's growth strategy 'Europe 2020', the strengthening of the Single Market and the EU's Citizens' Agenda.
In the medium term, the Commission plans to launch a wider debate on the role of Justice in the EU and will organise, on 21 and 22
November 2013, the Assises de la justice, a high-level conference, which will bring together senior policy makers at European and national
level, judges from supreme courts and other courts, judicial authorities, legal professions and all stakeholders. Such a joint reflection is
indispensable for developing a true European area of justice.

2013/2117(INI) - 05/12/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Tadeusz ZWIEFKA (EPP, PL) on the EU Justice Scoreboard civil and
administrative justice in the Member States. It noted that the Commission has issued the EU Justice Scoreboard, which compared national
justice systems using particular indicators, but did not present an overall ranking of national justice systems, and it called on the Commission
to take this exercise forward. Members supported the aim of the exchange of best practices with a view to ensuring an efficient and
independent justice system and believed that any comparison of national justice systems must be based on objective criteria. They asked the
Commission to discuss the proposed method at an early date, in a transparent procedure involving the Member States.
Whilst praising the Commissions efforts to provide measurable data, the report pointed out that certain goals, such as the quality and the
impartiality of justice, were very difficult to measure objectively, nor could the effectiveness of the justice system be measured using
statistically quantifiable parameters alone, but should also take into account structural peculiarities and differing social traditions in the Member
States.
Member States were asked to examine the results of the 2013 Justice Scoreboard closely and to determine whether any consequences need
to be drawn therefrom for the organisation and progress of their respective civil, commercial and administrative justice systems. The report
also called for:
·

Member States to collect relevant data on issues such as the cost of proceedings, mediation cases and enforcement procedures;

·

encouraging mutual understanding and cooperation between national judicial systems, including by means of networks of contact
judges;

·

greater importance to be given to training programmes for judges, court staff and other legal practitioners, especially in the fields of
European and comparative law;

·

receiving data on cross-border cases, which often involved a greater degree of complexity than purely domestic cases and
demonstrated the obstacles that EU citizens face when exercising their rights deriving from the EU single market, particularly in the
application of EU law;

·

giving consideration to cross-border mediation procedures in its next exercise of this kind, and Member States to actively promote
mediation procedures with special regard to commercial matters and to family matters regulated at EU level (as in the cases of
Rome III and Brussels II).

Lastly, Members felt that the EU institutions should seek to cooperate with the Council of Europes Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
(CEPEJ) since it provided an excellent basis for the exchange of best practices, and duplication needed to be avoided.

2013/2117(INI) - 04/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on the EU Justice Scoreboard.
Parliament noted that the Commission has issued the EU Justice Scoreboard, which compared national justice systems using particular
indicators.
Members took note of the EU Justice Scoreboard with great interest and called on the Commission to take this exercise forward in accordance
with the Treaties and in consultation with the Member States, while bearing in mind the need to avoid unnecessary duplication of work with
other bodies.
It stated that the Scoreboard did not present an overall ranking of national justice systems, and it called on the Commission to take this
exercise forward.
Indicators: Parliament pointed out the importance of assessing the functioning of justice systems as a whole as well as the importance of
judicial benchmarking for cross-border mutual trust, for effective cooperation between justice institutions and for the creation of a common
judicial area and a European judicial culture. It considered that any comparison of national justice systems, especially in relation to their
previous situation, must be based on objective criteria and on evidence which is objectively compiled, compared and analysed. It stressed the
importance of treating Member States impartially, thus ensuring equality of treatment between all Member States when assessing their justice
systems. It pointed out that benchmarks must be set before information on national justice systems is gathered in order to develop a common
understanding of methodology and indicators. Members called on the Commission to discuss the proposed method at an early date, in a
transparent procedure involving the Member States.

Whilst praising the Commissions efforts to provide measurable data, Parliament pointed out that certain goals, such as the quality and the
impartiality of justice, were very difficult to measure objectively, nor could the effectiveness of the justice system be measured using
statistically quantifiable parameters alone, but should also take into account structural peculiarities and differing social traditions in the Member
States.
Member States were asked to examine the results of the 2013 Justice Scoreboard closely and to determine whether any consequences need
to be drawn therefrom for the organisation and progress of their respective civil, commercial and administrative justice systems.
Parliament called for:
Member States to collect relevant data on issues such as the cost of proceedings, mediation cases and enforcement procedures;
encouraging mutual understanding and cooperation between national judicial systems, including by means of networks of contact
judges;
greater importance to be given to training programmes for judges, court staff and other legal practitioners, especially in the fields of
European and comparative law;
receiving data on cross-border cases, which often involved a greater degree of complexity than purely domestic cases and
demonstrated the obstacles that EU citizens face when exercising their rights deriving from the EU single market, particularly in the
application of EU law;
giving consideration to cross-border mediation procedures in its next exercise of this kind, and Member States to actively promote
mediation procedures with special regard to commercial matters and to family matters regulated at EU level (as in the cases of Rome
III and Brussels II);
the Commission to consider cross-border mediation procedures and promote the use of new technologies to effectively contribute to
reducing costs and speeding up judicial procedures, in particular through the use of computerised applications and case management
and communication tools.
Lastly, Parliament felt that the EU institutions should seek to cooperate with the Council of Europes Commission for the Efficiency of Justice
(CEPEJ) since it provided an excellent basis for the exchange of best practices, and duplication needed to be avoided.

