Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Decision

2013/0128(COD)

Procedure completed

Macro-financial assistance to Jordan
See also 2016/0197(COD)
Subject
6.20.07 Macro-financial assistance to third countries
6.40.05.04 Relations with the countries of the Mashreq
Geographical area
Jordan

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
INTA

International Trade

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D MOREIRA Vital

18/06/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE SAÏFI Tokia
ALDE SCHAAKE Marietje
ECR ZAHRADIL Jan
GUE/NGL MURPHY Paul
Committee for opinion
AFET

BUDG

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

Foreign Affairs

ALDE
NEYTS-UYTTEBROECK
Annemie

30/05/2013

Budgets

PPE NEYNSKY Nadezhda

20/05/2013

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Economic and Financial Affairs

Commissioner
REHN Olli

Key events
29/04/2013

Legislative proposal published

23/05/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

14/10/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

17/10/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

20/11/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

20/11/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

05/12/2013

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

11/12/2013

Final act signed

COM(2013)0242

Summary

A7-0335/2013

Summary

T7-0478/2013

Summary

11/12/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

18/12/2013

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0128(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Decision
See also 2016/0197(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 212

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

INTA/7/12673

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0242

29/04/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0151

29/04/2013

EC

PE514.698

03/09/2013

EP

Committee draft report

Summary

Committee opinion

BUDG

PE514.876

02/10/2013

EP

Committee opinion

AFET

PE516.728

11/10/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0335/2013

17/10/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0478/2013

20/11/2013

EP

Summary

SP(2014)87

30/01/2014

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Decision 2013/1351
OJ L 341 18.12.2013, p. 0004 Summary

2013/0128(COD) - 29/04/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to provide EUR 180 million in macro-financial assistance (MFA) to Jordan.
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: since 2011, Jordan's economy has been significantly affected by the domestic events related to the Arab Spring and the

ongoing regional unrest. Combined with a weaker global environment, the political transition of Jordan has taken a heavy toll on external
receipts and has strained public finances.
Jordan has also been affected by the intensification of the Syria crisis, notably through the inflow of refugees and its fiscal implications (about
1000 Syrians crossing Jordanian borders every day). It has welcomed about 180 000 refugees since January 2013. While Jordan has so far
managed to date to maintain macroeconomic stability, including through substantial fiscal consolidation efforts and financial support from
foreign donors, there are significant balance of payments and financing needs.
Under the pressure of a sharp drop of international reserves in the first half of 2012, the Jordanian authorities have agreed on a USD 2 billion
(800% of quota), 36-month Stand-By Arrangement (SBA) with the International Monetary Fund, approved on August 2012.
In this context, the Jordanian government requested Macro-Financial Assistance (MFA) from the EU in the amount of EUR 200 million in
December 2012.
Consequently, the Commission presents this proposal for MFA to the benefit of Jordan amounting to a maximum of EUR 180 million in the
form of loans.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 212 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: it is proposed that the Union shall make available to Jordan macro-financial assistance of a maximum amount of EUR 180 million,
with a view to supporting Jordan's economic stabilisation and reforms. The assistance shall contribute to covering Jordan's balance of
payments needs as identified in the current IMF programme. The full amount of the macro-financial assistance shall be provided to Jordan in
the form of loans which shall have a maximum maturity of 15 years. The Commission shall be empowered on behalf of the Union to borrow the
necessary funds on the capital markets or from financial institutions in order to lend them to Jordan.
Objective of the loan: the EU's MFA would contribute towards covering Jordan's residual external financing needs in 2013 and 2014, in the
context of the IMF programme. It would help Jordan address the lingering economic consequences of the Arab Spring and the external shocks
of its energy sector. It would reduce the economy's short-term balance of payments and fiscal vulnerabilities, while supporting the adjustment
and reform programmes agreed with the IMF and the World Bank, as well as the reforms agreed under the EU's budgetary support operations.
The proposed assistance would:
promote policy measures to improve public financial management and tax reform while strengthening the social safety net (including
through a better targeting of the cash transfers system);
measures to improve the regulatory framework and climate for investment; and reforms to reduce unemployment and encourage
participation in the labour market, notably among women.
Release measures: the Commission:
shall manage the provision of the assistance in a manner consistent with the agreements or understandings reached between the IMF
and Jordan and with the key principles and objectives of economic reforms set out in the EU-Jordan Association Agreement and the
EU-Jordan Action Plan for 2010-2015agreed under the European Neighbourhood Policy;
shall regularly inform the European Parliament and the Economic and Financial Committee of developments in the management of the
Union macro-financial assistance and provide them with relevant documents.
The Union macro-financial assistance shall be made available for a period of two years from the first day after the entry into force of the
Memorandum of Understanding referred to the proposal.
Other implementing measures:
instalments: the assistance is planned to be disbursed in two loan instalments and to allow some frontloading given the urgency of the
financing needs. The disbursement of the first instalment is expected to take place in the second half of 2013. The second instalment,
conditional on a number of policy measures, could be disbursed in the first half of 2014;
disbursement: this assistance is of macroeconomic nature and its design is consistent with the IMF-supported economic programme.
The monitoring of the action by the Commission services will take place on the basis of progress in the implementation of the SBA and
specific reform measures to be agreed with the Jordanian authorities in a Memorandum of Understanding. The Commission will target
structural reforms aimed at improving the overall macroeconomic management and the conditions for sustainable growth (e.g.
targeting the transparency and efficiency of public finance management; fiscal reforms; reforms to strengthen the social safety net;
labour market reforms; and reforms to improve the regulatory framework for trade and investment);
management: the assistance will be managed by the Commission. Specific provisions on the prevention of fraud and other
irregularities, consistent with the Financial Regulation, are applicable.
Implementing powers: in order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Decision, implementing powers should be conferred
on the Commission in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 182/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council. The fact that the
assistance is of a substantial amount and, therefore, has a potentially important impact, justifies the use of the examination procedure.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the MFA would be provided in the form of a loan and should be financed through a borrowing operation that the
Commission will conduct on behalf of the EU. The budgetary costs of the assistance will correspond to the provisioning, at a rate of 9%, of the
amounts disbursed in the guarantee fund for external lending of the EU, from budget line 01 04 01 14. Assuming that the first loan
disbursement will be made in 2013 for the amount of EUR 100 million and the second loan disbursement in 2014 for the amount of EUR 80
million, and according to the rules governing the guarantee fund mechanism, the provisioning will take place in the 2015-16 budgets.

2013/0128(COD) - 17/10/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on International Trade adopted the report by Vital MOREIRA (S&D, PT) on the proposal for a decision of the European
Parliament and of the Council providing macro-financial assistance to the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
The committee recommends that Parliament adopt its position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure, and amend the

Commission proposal as follows:
Democratic mechanisms: a new clause stated that a pre-condition for granting the Union's macro financial assistance would be
that Jordan respected effective democratic mechanisms, including a multi-party parliamentary system and the rule of law, and guaranteed
respect for human rights. The Commission must monitor the fulfilment of this pre-condition throughout the life-cycle of the Union's
macro-financial assistance.
Conditions: the MoU must contain clearly defined economic policy and financial conditions, focusing on structural reforms and sound public
finances, to which the Union's macro-financial assistance is to be subject. Progress in mutual market opening, the development of rules-based
and fair trade and other priorities in the context of the Union's external policy shall also be duly taken into account when designing the policy
measures.
The Commission shall decide on the release of the instalments subject to the fulfilment of all of the following conditions:
·

the pre-condition set out above on effective democratic mechanisms;

·

a continuous satisfactory track record of implementing a policy programme that contains strong adjustment and structural reform
measures supported by a non-precautionary IMF credit arrangement; and

·

the implementation, within a specific time-frame, of the economic policy and financial conditions agreed in the Memorandum of
Understanding.

Where the conditions are not met, the Commission shall temporarily suspend or cancel the disbursement of the Union's macro-financial
assistance. In such cases, it shall inform the European Parliament and the Council of the reasons for that suspension or cancellation.
Memorandum of Understanding: the contents of this document were more strictly defined and, together with the Loan Agreement to be agreed
with the Jordanian authorities, shall contain provisions:
·

ensuring that Jordan regularly checks that financing provided from the budget of the Union has been properly used, takes
appropriate measures to prevent irregularities and fraud, and, if necessary, takes legal action to recover any funds that have been
misappropriated;

·

ensuring the protection of the Union's financial interests, in particular providing for specific measures in relation to the prevention of,
and fight against, fraud, corruption and any other irregularities affecting the Union's macro-financial assistance, in accordance
with EU legislation;

·

expressly authorising the Commission, including the European Anti-Fraud Office, or its representatives to carry out checks, including
on-the-spot checks and inspections;

·

expressly authorising the Commission and the Court of Auditors to perform audits during and after the availability period of
the Union's macro-financial assistance, including document audits and on-the-spot audits, such as operational assessments;

·

ensuring that the Union is entitled to early repayment of the loan where it has been established that, in relation to the management of
the Union's macro-financial assistance, Jordan has engaged in any act of fraud or corruption or any other illegal activity detrimental
to the financial interests of the Union.

During the implementation of the Union's macro-financial assistance, the Commission shall monitor, by means of operational assessments, the
soundness of Jordan's financial arrangements, the administrative procedures, and the internal and external control mechanisms which are
relevant to the assistance, as well as Jordan's adherence for the agreed timeframe.
Since the amount to be disbursed to Jordan is more than EUR 90 million, the examination procedure will apply to the adoption of the
Memorandum of Understanding, and to any reduction, suspension or cancellation of the assistance.
Decrease in financing needs: where the financing needs of Jordan decrease fundamentally during the period of the disbursement of the
Union's macro-financial assistance compared to the initial projections, the Commission, acting in accordance with the examination procedure
will reduce the amount of the assistance or suspend or cancel it.
Reports: by 30 June of each year, the Commission shall submit a report examining the progress made in implementing the Union's
macro-financial assistance, and assessing the economic situation and prospects of Jordan, as well as progress made in implementing the
policy measures referred to in the text.

2013/0128(COD) - 20/11/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 626 votes to 50, with 13 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council providing macro-financial assistance to Jordan.
Parliament adopted its position at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary were the
result of a compromise negotiated between the European Parliament and the Council. They amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Democratic mechanisms: a new clause stated that a pre-condition for granting the Union's macro financial assistance would be
that Jordan respected effective democratic mechanisms, including a multi-party parliamentary system and the rule of law, and guaranteed
respect for human rights. The Commission must monitor the fulfilment of this pre-condition throughout the life-cycle of the Union's
macro-financial assistance.
Conditions: the MoU must contain clearly defined economic policy and financial conditions, focusing on structural reforms and sound public
finances, to which the Union's macro-financial assistance is to be subject. Progress in mutual market opening, the development of rules-based
and fair trade and other priorities in the context of the Union's external policy shall also be duly taken into account when designing the policy
measures.
The Commission shall decide on the release of the instalments subject to the fulfilment of all of the following conditions:

·

the pre-condition set out above on effective democratic mechanisms;

·

a continuous satisfactory track record of implementing a policy programme that contains strong adjustment and structural reform
measures supported by a non-precautionary IMF credit arrangement; and

·

the implementation, within a specific time-frame, of the economic policy and financial conditions agreed in the Memorandum of
Understanding.

Where the conditions are not met, the Commission shall temporarily suspend or cancel the disbursement of the Union's macro-financial
assistance. In such cases, it shall inform the European Parliament and the Council of the reasons for that suspension or cancellation.
Application of the examination procedure for the adoption of the Memorandum of Understanding with Jordan: in line with the Joint Declaration
by the European Parliament and the Council set out in the Annex to the decision providing additional macro-financial assistance to Georgia,
and serving as a general framework for all EU microfinancial assistance, the Commission should be empowered to negotiate conditions with
the Jordanian authorities under the supervision of the committee of representatives of the Member States. Under that Regulation, the advisory
procedure should, as a general rule, apply in all cases other than as provided for in that Regulation. Considering the potentially important
impact of assistance of more than EUR 90 million, it is appropriate that the examination procedure be used for operations above that threshold
(below this threshold, the advisory procedure should apply). The examination procedure should apply to the adoption of the Memorandum of
Understanding, and to any reduction, suspension or cancellation of the assistance.
MoU: provisions have been added to define the content of the MoU to be concluded between the Parties.
During the implementation of the Union's macro-financial assistance, the Commission shall monitor, by means of operational assessments, the
soundness of Jordan's financial arrangements, the administrative procedures, and the internal and external control mechanisms which are
relevant to the assistance, as well as Jordan's adherence to the agreed time-frame.
Reports: by 30 June of each year, the Commission shall submit a report examining the progress made in implementing the Union's
macro-financial assistance, and assessing the economic situation and prospects of Jordan, as well as progress made in implementing the
policy measures referred to in the text.

2013/0128(COD) - 11/12/2013 Final act
PURPOSE: to provide EUR 180 million in macro-financial assistance (MFA) to Jordan.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision No 1351/2013/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on providing macro-financial assistance to the
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan.
CONTENT: under this Decision, the Union shall make available to Jordan macro-financial assistance of a maximum amount of EUR 180
million, with a view to supporting Jordan's economic stabilisation and reforms. The assistance shall contribute to covering Jordan's balance of
payments needs as identified in the current IMF programme.
The loan shall have a maximum maturity of 15 years.
Release measures: the Commission shall be empowered on behalf of the Union to borrow the necessary funds on the capital markets or from
financial institutions in order to lend them to Jordan.
The Commission shall manage the provision of the assistance in a manner consistent with the agreements or understandings reached
between the IMF and Jordan and with the key principles and objectives of economic reforms set out in the EU-Jordan Association Agreement
and the EU-Jordan Action Plan for 2010-2015 agreed under the European Neighbourhood Policy.
The Union macro-financial assistance shall be made available for a period of two years.
Where the financing needs of Jordan decrease fundamentally during the period of the disbursement of the Unions macro-financial assistance
compared to the initial projections, the Commission, acting in accordance with the examination procedure, shall reduce the amount of the
assistance or suspend or cancel it.
Specific measures are provided to define the different installements of aid.
Democratic clause: a precondition for granting the Unions macro-financial assistance should be that Jordan respects effective democratic
mechanisms, including a multi-party parliamentary system and the rule of law, and guarantees respect for human rights. Both fulfilment of the
precondition and the achievement of those objectives should be regularly monitored by the Commission.
Conditions relating to the granting of macrofinancial assistance : in accordance with the examination procedure and the joint EP/Council
declaration set out in the Annex to the Decision granting additional macrofinancial assistance to Georgia (used as an overall general
framework to grant Union macrofinancial assistance), the Commission shall agree with the Jordanian authorities on clearly defined economic
policy and financial conditions, focusing on structural reforms and sound public finances, to which the Unions macro-financial assistance is to
be subject.
The Memorandum of Understanding shall include a time-frame for the fulfilment of those conditions. The economic policy and financial
conditions set out in the Memorandum of Understanding shall be consistent with the agreements or understandings, including the
macroeconomic adjustment and structural reform programmes implemented by Jordan, with the support of the IMF.
Those conditions shall aim, in particular, to enhance the efficiency, transparency and accountability of the public finance management systems
in Jordan, including for the use of the Unions macro-financial assistance. Progress in mutual market opening, the development of rules-based
and fair trade and other priorities in the context of the Unions external policy shall also be duly taken into account when designing the policy
measures. Progress in attaining those objectives shall be regularly monitored by the Commission.
The Commission shall verify at regular intervals that the conditions continue to be met, including whether the economic policies of Jordan are
in accordance with the objectives of the Unions macro-financial assistance. In so doing, the Commission shall coordinate closely with the IMF
and the World Bank, and, where necessary, with the European Parliament and the Council.

Where the conditions are not met, the Commission shall temporarily suspend or cancel the disbursement of the Unions macro-financial
assistance. In such cases, it shall inform the European Parliament and the Council of the reasons for that suspension or cancellation.
Rules of procedure: considering the potentially important impact of assistance of more than EUR 90 million, it is appropriate that the
examination procedure be used for operations above that threshold. Considering the amount of the Unions macro-financial assistance to
Jordan, the examination procedure should apply to the adoption of the Memorandum of Understanding, and to any reduction, suspension or
cancellation of the assistance.
Early repayment: where the circumstances permit, and if Jordan so requests, the Commission may take the steps necessary to ensure that an
early repayment clause is included in the loan terms and conditions and that it is matched by a corresponding clause in the terms and
conditions of the borrowing operations. Moreover, if Jordan so requests, the Commission may decide to refinance all or part of its initial
borrowings or may restructure the corresponding financial conditions.
Report: by 30 June of each year, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report on the implementation
of this Decision in the preceding year, including an evaluation of that implementation. It shall examine the progress made in implementing the
Unions macro-financial assistance and assess the economic situation and prospects of Jordan, as well as progress made in implementing the
policy measures.
Not later than two years after the expiry of the availability period, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council
an ex post evaluation report on the implementation of the Decision.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 21.12.2013.

