Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0106(COD)

Procedure completed

Surveillance of the external sea borders in the context of operational
cooperation coordinated by the European Agency for the Management of
Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Members States

Subject
3.20.15.06 Maritime or inland transport agreements and cooperation
7.10.04 External borders crossing and controls, visas
7.10.06 Asylum, refugees, displaced persons; Asylum, Migration and
Integration Fund (AMIF)
8.40.08 Agencies and bodies of the EU

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE COELHO Carlos

29/05/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D WEIDENHOLZER Josef
ALDE WIKSTRÖM Cecilia
Verts/ALE KELLER Ska
ECR KIRKHOPE Timothy
GUE/NGL ERNST Cornelia
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed
30/05/2013

AFET

Foreign Affairs

ALDE NICOLAI Norica

DEVE

Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

ALDE GRIESBECK Nathalie

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Migration and Home Affairs

03/06/2013

Commissioner
MALMSTRÖM Cecilia

Key events
12/04/2013

Legislative proposal published

18/04/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

09/12/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

08/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

15/04/2014

Debate in Parliament

16/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

16/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st

COM(2013)0197

Summary

A7-0461/2013

Summary

T7-0418/2014

Summary

reading/single reading
13/05/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

15/05/2014

Final act signed

15/05/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

27/06/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0106(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 077-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/7/12489

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0197

12/04/2013

EC

PE513.286

18/09/2013

EP

PE516.895

04/10/2013

EP

PE516.826

11/10/2013

EP

PE522.849

31/10/2013

EP

A7-0461/2013

08/01/2014

EP

PE529.839

21/02/2014

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0418/2014

16/04/2014

EP

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Committee opinion

TRAN

Committee draft report
Committee opinion

AFET

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Amendments tabled in committee

Summary

Summary

Summary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2014/656
OJ L 189 27.06.2014, p. 0093 Summary

2013/0106(COD) - 12/04/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish rules for the surveillance of the external sea borders of the Union in the context of operational cooperation coordinated
by the FRONTEX agency.

PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: following the call by the European Council of October 2009, the Council adopted Decision 2010/252/EU to strengthen border
surveillance operations coordinated by the FRONTEX agency and to establish clear rules of engagement for joint patrolling and the
disembarkation of intercepted or rescued persons.
In the context of this proposal, the Commission had chosen to present its proposal under the comitology procedure based on Article 12(5) of
the Schengen Border Code4 considering the decision as being an additional measure governing border surveillance.
Problem of legal interpretation: the Decision incorporated, within a single legal instrument, existing provisions of EU and international law. The
aim was to overcome the different interpretations of international maritime law adopted by Member States and their diverging practices to
ensure the efficiency of sea operations coordinated by the Agency. There was a risk that, in a sea operation, different rules, sometimes even
conflicting ones, would apply to the same situation.
Amidst this legal uncertainty, Member States participation in sea operations coordinated by the Agency was low in terms of contributing craft,
vessels and human resources. This, in turn, hindered the effectiveness of the operations and undermined efforts of EU solidarity.
Some Member States, Members of the European Parliament, human rights organisations and academics had questioned whether
fundamental rights and the rights of refugees were being respected during sea operations coordinated by the Agency, particularly on the high
seas. The decision aimed to address these concerns by establishing a number of guarantees to ensure the respect of these rights.
Besides these various problems of legal interpretation, the European Parliament considered that the decision should have been adopted in
accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and not the comitology procedure. Therefore, it brought an action before the Court of
Justice of the European Union against the Council (mainly because it considered that the decision exceeded the implementing powers
conferred under Article 12(5) of the Schengen Borders Code) requesting the annulment of the decision.
At the end of the day, the Court annulled the Decision but decided to maintain its effects until it is replaced by new rules within a reasonable
time.
This is the purpose of this proposal.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: in view of the considerable preparatory work undertaken prior to the adoption of Council Decision 2010/252/EU, the
Commission considered that this proposal need not be accompanied by an impact assessment.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 77(2)(d) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: this proposal seeks to establish rules for the surveillance of the external sea borders of the Union in the context of operational
cooperation coordinated by the FRONTEX agency and to replace Decision 2010/252/EU for the above-mentioned reasons.
The text of the initial decision mainly sought to adopt additional common rules for the surveillance of sea borders by border guards and for the
coordination of the operations of the FRONTEX agency.
The main provisions were included in an annex setting out:
rules for sea border operations coordinated by the Agency, in particular in cases of the interception of persons at sea (including on the
high seas;
non-binding guidelines for search and rescue situations and for disembarkation in the context of sea operations coordinated by the
Agency.
The main changes to the initial text may be summarised as follows:
Scope: the scope of application of this proposal is the same as that of the decision, namely border surveillance operations at sea carried out
by Member States under the coordination of the Agency. Although in the decision, the concept of border surveillance was understood as
including interception measures and arrangements for rescue arising during border surveillance operations, there was still doubt as to whether
these measures did in fact fall under the concept of border surveillance as defined in the Schengen Borders Code. This proposal explicitly
covers this broader concept of border surveillance by indicating that border surveillance is not limited to the detection of attempts at irregular
border crossing but also extends to steps such as interception measures, and arrangements intended to address situations such as search
and rescue that may arise during a sea operation and arrangements intended to bring such an operation to a successful conclusion.
Case of search and rescue: given that FRONTEX is now also entrusted with assisting Member States in circumstances requiring increased
technical assistance at the external borders, taking into account that some situations may involve humanitarian emergencies and rescue at
sea for example rendering assistance to persons in distress, this proposal sets out rules on how to deal with these situations in a sea
operation coordinated by the Agency.
Operational plan: provisions are envisaged to ensure that this proposal is in line with the amendments made to Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004
establishing FRONTEX. The operational plan has now become a legally binding instrument with regard to all operations coordinated by the
Agency and not only as regards rapid interventions, i.e. including sea operations. The rules laid down in this proposal are intended to form part
of the operational plan drawn up in accordance with Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004.
Fundamental rights: the legal and judicial developments concerning the protection of fundamental rights are also taken into account in this
proposal in particular in regard to the principle of non-refoulement in sea operations. In this way, in the case of disembarkation in a third
country, the persons intercepted or rescued must be identified and their personal circumstances must be assessed to the extent possible
before disembarkation. They must also be informed of the place of disembarkation in an appropriate way and they must be given an
opportunity to express any reasons for believing that disembarkation in the proposed place would be in violation of the principle of
non-refoulement. This would guarantee that the migrants are informed about their situation and the proposed place of disembarkation thereby
allowing them to express any objections.
Detection, interception and rescue: the proposal clearly distinguishes between detection, interception and rescue.
as regards interception, this proposal while retaining the same set of measures as in the Decision, distinguishes between the

measures that may be taken in the territorial sea, on the high seas and in the contiguous zone, thus clarifying the conditions under
which these measures may be taken and the jurisdictional basis on which action may be taken particularly as regards stateless ships.
Based on the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, interception of ships on the high seas is now clearly
linked to the requirement of having a reasonable suspicion that the ship is engaged in the smuggling of migrants . As in the Decision,
the exercise of jurisdiction on the high seas must always be based on the authorisation of the flag State.
as regards search and rescue situations, the text in this proposal remains similar to the Decision. The wording is aligned to that used
in the 1979 International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue and the International Aeronautical and Maritime Search and
Rescue Manual (IAMSAR). Also, on the basis of these international instruments, the proposal includes criteria as to when a ship is
considered to be in a situation of uncertainty, alert and distress, as well as a definition of a rescue coordination centre.
Disembarkation: this proposal, unlike the Decision, addresses the issue of disembarkation in terms of interception and rescue . As regards
interception in the territorial sea or in the contiguous zone, disembarkation takes place in the coastal Member State. As regards interception on
the high seas, subject to guaranteeing the protection of fundamental rights and the principle of non-refoulement, disembarkation may take
place in the third country from which the ship departed. If this is not possible, then disembarkation takes place in the host Member State.
As regards disembarkation following a rescue operation, this proposal refers to the concept of place of safety as defined in the Guidelines on
the Treatment of Persons Rescued at Sea issued by the International Maritime Organisation, taking into account aspects of fundamental
rights, and requires Member States to cooperate with the responsible rescue coordination centre to provide a suitable port or place of safety
and to ensure rapid and effective disembarkation.
This proposal takes into account the fact that, at this stage, the maritime and aerial units would be acting under the coordination of the rescue
coordination centre, which determines the appropriate port or place of disembarkation.
However, it also recognises the possibility for the maritime units to disembark in the host Member State if they are not released of their
obligation to render assistance to persons in distress as soon as reasonably practicable, taking into account the safety of the rescued persons
and that of the maritime unit itself.
Territorial provisions: lastly, the proposal includes a series of classical provisions in regard to the participation (or otherwise) of Denmark,
Ireland and the United Kingdom in the current text, in accordance with the relevant provisions of the Treaties and protocols and on the
association of third countries in its enforcement.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the proposal has no implications for the EUs budget.

2013/0106(COD) - 08/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the report by Carlos COELHO (EPP, PT) on the proposal for a regulation
of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing rules for the surveillance of the external sea borders in the context of operational
cooperation coordinated by the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union.
The committee recommended that Parliaments position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission proposal as follows:
Protection of fundamental rights and the principle of non-refoulement: Members stressed that in line with the future Regulation no person shall
be disembarked in, conducted towards, otherwise handed over to the authorities of, or forced to enter, a country where there is a serious risk
that such person would be subjected to the death penalty, torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment or any serious
violations of their human rights, or where his or her life or freedom would be threatened on account of his or her race, religion, nationality,
sexual orientation, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, or from which there is a serious risk of expulsion, removal or
extradition to another country in contravention of the principle of non-refoulement.
Intercepted or rescued persons should not be disembarked in, conducted towards, otherwise handed over to the authorities of, or forced to
enter, a third country when the host Member State, the participating Member States or the Agency are aware or ought to be aware that this
third country is engaged in inhumane practices. Those Member States should provide that information to the participating units. For that
purpose, they should use information from a range of sources, including in particular other Member States, the EEAS, the European Asylum
Support Office, Frontex, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, etc.
Members recalled that the future Regulation should be applied in full compliance with the principle of non-refoulement, according to which no
one may be expelled, removed or extradited to, or forced to enter, a country where there is a real risk that he or she would be subjected to the
death penalty, torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. The possible existence of an arrangement between a Member
State and a third country cannot absolve Member States from their international obligations under international and Union law under the
principle of non-refoulement.
Protection of fundamental rights: Members also called for the participating units to treat all persons on board in a humane way. All border
guards and other personnel of the Member States shall receive, prior to their participation in a sea operation, training in relevant Union and
international law, including fundamental rights, children's rights and access to international protection and guidelines for the purpose of
identifying persons seeking protection and redirecting them towards the appropriate facilities.
Protection of persons intercepted in case of disembarkation in a third country: if disembarkation is considered, the participating units should
identify the intercepted or rescued persons and assess their personal circumstances, including their medical conditions and other
circumstances that might make them vulnerable or subject to international protection needs, before a decision is made.
If there are grounds to believe that disembarkation of persons intercepted or rescued at sea in the proposed place would be in violation of the
principle of non-refoulement, the participating units should not share personal information regarding the persons with the authorities of the
country of origin or with the authorities of other third countries.
Moreover, the decision on the place of disembarkation after a search and rescue situation should be made also taking into account the
principle of non-refoulement.

Solidarity mechanism: Members stressed that solidarity between Member States should be strengthened. It is for this reason that Member
State faced with a situation of urgent and exceptional pressure at its external border should be able to request:
the deployment of European Border Guard Teams in accordance with Frontex to provide rapid operational assistance to the Member
State;
the Agency for technical and operational assistance in order to obtain assistance on matters of coordination between Members States
and/or the deployment of experts to support the competent national authorities;
emergency assistance under ISF borders to address urgent and specific needs in the event of an emergency situation.
Other measures are also envisaged, such as: (i) the possibility of involving the European Asylum Support Office as necessary; (ii) using the
future "Asylum and migration" Funds to meet specific needs in a emergency; (iii) the Commission to check the willingness of the Member
States to accommodate asylum seekers.
In this context, the Commission should continuously monitor the facilities used for the reception of asylum seekers in the Member States and,
in the cases described in this article, once it has verified how many places are actually available in such facilities, should propose a fair
redistribution of asylum seekers between Member States, in accordance with Article 80 of the TFEU.
Mobilisation of EUROSUR: when coordinating border surveillance operations, the Agency should provide Member States with information and
analysis concerning these operations. Member States and the Agency should introduce in EUROSUR all relevant information collected during
these operations.
Respect of European asylum measures: Member States and the Agency are bound by the provisions of the asylum acquis, and in particular of
Directive 2013/32/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on common procedures for granting and withdrawing international
protection with regard to applications for international protection made in the territory, including at the border, in the territorial waters or in the
transit zones of Member States.
Smuggling of migrants: Members strengthened the provisions as regards actions to be taken in case of suspicions that a ship is engaged in
the smuggling of migrants by sea prove to be founded. Measures taken should be subject to the authorisation of the flag State in accordance
with the Protocol against the Smuggling of Migrants. The participating unit may seize the ship and apprehending persons on board. The
measures may only be taken if the participating unit has ascertained that the ship is not forced to enter a third country in violation of their
human rights.
Assistance to victims: when there are reasonable grounds to suspect that a ship is engaged in trafficking of human beings and illegal
immigration, assistance shall be given to victims.
Search and rescue situations: provisions have been included to enhance the framework action as regards sea operations:
before a sea operation, Member States should ensure that their participating units will comply with the obligation to render assistance
to any ship or person in distress at sea, in accordance with applicable provisions of international Conventions governing search and
rescue and fundamental rights. They should do so regardless of the nationality or status of such a person or the circumstances in
which that person is found;
before disembarkation, the persons intercepted or rescued in the sea operation shall receive clear information, in a language which
they understand or may reasonably be presumed to understand, on where disembarkation will take place. Particular attention shall be
given to unaccompanied minors.
Emergency situation: each Member State requires the master of a ship flying its flag to proceed with all possible speed to the rescue of
persons in distress at sea and to render all possible assistance to them regardless of their nationality or state or of the circumstances in which
these persons are found, provided that he can do so without serious danger to the ship, the crew or the passengers. Members States should
not take any measures, including criminal procedures and sanctions, against ship masters who have rescued persons in distress and brought
them to a harbour on their territory.
Coastal states: under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, it is necessary for a contiguous zone to be formally proclaimed,
thereby entitling the coastal State to monitor vessels in transit with a view to preventing or punishing infringements of its customs, fiscal,
immigration or sanitary laws and regulations.
Mediterranean Office: Members stressed the need to set up specialised branches, for all aspects relating to the surveillance of maritime
borders, as operational offices in areas subject to significant migration flows, including irregular migration and in particular in the
Mediterranean, to improve coordination between Member States and ensure solidarity and responsibility-sharing between them, thereby
strengthening the operational capacity of the Agency.
Report: lastly, Members called on Frontex to submit a report to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on the
implementation of this Regulation every two years. The report should include a description of the procedures put in place by the Agency to
implement this Regulation during sea operations and an assessment of the practical application of this
Regulation, including any incidents which may have taken place. It shall provide detailed information on compliance with fundamental rights of
intercepted persons.

2013/0106(COD) - 16/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 528 votes to 46 with 88 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council establishing rules for the surveillance of the external sea borders in the context of operational
cooperation coordinated by the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union.
Parliament adopted its position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary were the result
of a compromise between Parliament and Council. They amended the proposal as follows:
Safety at sea: it was specified that measures taken for the purpose of a sea operation should be conducted in a way that, in all instances,

ensured the safety of the persons intercepted or rescued, the safety of the participating units or that of third parties . It was also recalled that
the objective of Union policy in the field of the Union external borders was to ensure the efficient monitoring of the crossing of external borders
including through border surveillance, while contributing to ensuring the protection and saving of lives. A recital stated that the shipmaster and
crew should not face criminal penalties for the sole reason of having rescued persons in distress at sea and brought them to a place of safety.
Principle of non-refoulement: the Regulation should be applied in full compliance with the principle of non-refoulement as defined in the
Charter and as interpreted by the case-law of the Court and of the European Court of Human Rights. In accordance with that principle, no
person should be disembarked in, forced to enter, conducted to or otherwise handed over to the authorities of a country where, inter alia, there
is a serious risk that he or she would be subjected to the death penalty, torture, persecution or other inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, or where his or her life or freedom would be threatened on account of his or her race, religion, nationality, sexual orientation,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion, or from which there is a serious risk of an expulsion, removal or extradition to
another country in contravention of the principle of non-refoulement.
Take into account the general situation in the third countries where persons intercepted would be disembarked: when considering the
possibility of disembarkation in a third country, in the context of planning a sea operation, the host Member State, in coordination with
participating Member States and FRONTEX, should take into account the general situation in that third country. Intercepted persons should
not be disembarked, forced to enter, conducted to or otherwise handed over to the authorities of a third country which might be dangerous for
that person.
The host Member States assessment of the general situation in a third country should be based on information derived from a broad range of
sources, and it may take into account the existence of agreements and projects on migration and asylum carried out in accordance with Union
law.
Other principles should be respected in cases of interception of persons at sea:
information for persons intercepted: during a sea operation, before the intercepted persons were disembarked in a third country, the
participating units should use all means to inform the intercepted or rescued persons of their destination give them an opportunity to
express any reasons for believing that disembarkation in the proposed place would be in violation of the principle of non-refoulement;
trained personnel: further details should be provided for in the operational plan including the availability of shore-based medical staff,
interpreters, legal advisers and other relevant experts. Each participating unit should include at least one person with basic first aid
training;
needs of vulnerable people: throughout a sea operation, the participating units should address the special needs of children, including
unaccompanied minors, victims of trafficking in human beings, persons in need of urgent medical assistance, disabled persons etc;
data protection: the exchange with third countries of personal data regarding intercepted or rescued persons obtained during a sea
operation should be prohibited where there is a serious risk of contravention of the principle of non-refoulement;
human dignity: participating units should, in the performance of their duties, fully respect human dignity.
FRONTEXs operational plan: pursuant to Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004, border surveillance operations coordinated by the Agency are
conducted in accordance with an operational plan. The latter should include specific information on the application of the relevant jurisdiction
and legislation in the geographical area where the joint operation, pilot project or rapid intervention takes place, including references to Union
and international law regarding interception, rescue at sea and disembarkation. The operational plan should be established in accordance with
the provisions governing interception, rescue at sea and disembarkation in the context of border surveillance operations at sea coordinated by
the Agency.
It should include procedures ensuring that persons with international protection needs, victims of trafficking in human beings, unaccompanied
minors and other vulnerable persons are identified and provided with appropriate assistance, including access to international protection.
Special rules: a series of new provisions were inserted into the text, regarding:
detection: participating units should collect and immediately report information about that vessel to the International Coordination
Centre, including, where possible, information about the situation of persons on board, in particular whether there is an imminent risk
to their lives or whether there are persons in urgent need of medical assistance;
interception in the territorial sea: in the territorial sea of the host Member State or a neighbouring participating Member State, that
State should authorise the participating units to take certain measures where there were reasonable grounds to suspect that a vessel
may be carrying persons intending to circumvent checks at border crossing points or is engaged in the smuggling of migrants by sea.
If evidence confirming that suspicion were found, that State may authorise the participating units to (a) seize the vessel and
apprehending persons on board; (b) order the vessel to alter its course outside of the territorial sea or the contiguous zone; (c)
conduct the vessel or persons on boar to the coastal Member State.
interception on the high seas: if evidence confirming suspicion were found in these cases, the participating units may : (i) seize the
vessel and apprehend persons on board; (ii) warn and order the vessel not to enter the territorial sea or the contiguous zone, and,
where necessary, request the vessel to alter its course; (iii) conduct the vessel or persons on board to a third country; (iv) conduct the
vessel or persons on board to the host Member State or to a neighbouring participating Member State.
interception in the contiguous zone: in the contiguous zone of the host Member State or of a neighbouring participating Member State,
the measures regarding interception of ships would apply so long as they were proportionate. Any authorisation may only be given for
measures that were necessary to prevent the infringement of relevant laws and regulations within that Member States territory or
territorial sea;
search and rescue situations: Member States should observe their obligation to render assistance to any vessel or person in distress
at sea and, during a sea operation, their participating units must comply with that obligation, in accordance with international law and
respect for fundamental rights. They should do so regardless of the nationality or status of such a person or the circumstances in
which that person was found;
disembarkation: in the case of search and rescue situations, the host Member State and the participating Member States shall
cooperate to identify a place of safety and, when the responsible Rescue Coordination Centre designates such a place of safety, they
should ensure that disembarkation of the rescued persons is carried out rapidly and effectively.
Solidarity mechanisms: recalling the fact that the policies of the Union in border management, asylum and immigration and their
implementation should be governed by the principle of solidarity and fair sharing of responsibility between the Member States, the text
promoted burden-sharing including through the transfer, on a voluntary basis, of beneficiaries of international protection.

A Member State faced with a situation of urgent and exceptional pressure at its external border should be able to request:
the deployment of European Border Guard Teams to provide rapid operational assistance to that Member State;
the Agency for technical and operational assistance in order to obtain assistance on matters of coordination between Members States
and/or the deployment of experts to support the competent national authorities;
emergency assistance to address urgent and specific needs.
A Member State subject to strong migratory pressure which placed urgent demands on its reception facilities and asylum systems should be
able to request:
the European Asylum Support Office for the deployment of an asylum support team to provide expertise, in relation to interpreting
services, information on countries of origin and knowledge of the handling and management of asylum cases;
emergency assistance to address urgent and specific needs.
Report: lastly, FRONTEX should submit an annual report on the practical application of the Regulation. The report should include a description
of the procedures put in place by FRONTEX to apply this Regulation during sea operations and detailed information on compliance with
fundamental rights and the impact on those rights, and any incidents which may have taken place.

2013/0106(COD) - 15/05/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish the rules for the surveillance of the external sea borders in the context of operational cooperation coordinated by
FRONTEX.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) N° 656/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing rules for the surveillance of the
external sea borders in the context of operational cooperation coordinated by the European Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union.
CONTENT: the Regulation applies to border surveillance operations carried out by Member States with respect to their external sea borders in
the context of operational cooperation coordinated by FRONTEX.
Safety at sea: the Regulation recalls that the objective of Union policy in the field of the Union external borders is to ensure the efficient
monitoring of the crossing of these borders including through border surveillance, while contributing to ensuring the protection and saving of
lives. This policy extends to steps such as intercepting vessels suspected of trying to gain entry to the Union without submitting to border
checks, as well as arrangements on search and rescue.
Principle of non-refoulement: the Regulation should be applied in full compliance with the principle of non-refoulement meaning that no person
should be disembarked in, forced to enter, conducted to or otherwise handed over to the authorities of a country where, inter alia, there is a
serious risk that he or she would be subjected to the death penalty, torture, persecution or other inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, or where his or her life or freedom would be threatened on account of his or her race, religion, nationality, sexual orientation,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion, or from which there is a serious risk of an expulsion, removal or extradition to
another country in contravention of the principle of non-refoulement.
Safety at sea: as a general principle, measures taken for the purpose of a sea operation shall be conducted in a way that, in all instances,
ensures the safety of the persons intercepted or rescued, the safety of the participating units or that of third parties.
Take into account the general situation in the third countries where persons intercepted would be disembarked: when considering the
possibility of disembarkation in a third country, in the context of planning a sea operation, the host Member State, in coordination with
participating Member States and FRONTEX, should take into account the general situation in that third country. Intercepted persons should
not be disembarked, forced to enter, conducted to or otherwise handed over to the authorities of a third country which might be dangerous for
that person.
The assessment of the general situation in a third country shall be based on information derived from a broad range of sources, which may
include other Member States, Union bodies, offices and agencies, and relevant international organisations.
Other principles should be respected in cases of interception of persons at sea:
information for persons intercepted: during a sea operation, before the intercepted persons were disembarked in a third country, the
participating units should use all means to inform the intercepted or rescued persons of their destination give them an opportunity to
express any reasons for believing that disembarkation in the proposed place would be in violation of the principle of non-refoulement;
trained personnel: further details should be provided for in the operational plan including the availability of shore-based medical staff,
interpreters, legal advisers and other relevant experts. Each participating unit should include at least one person with basic first aid
training;
needs of vulnerable people: throughout a sea operation, the participating units should address the special needs of children, including
unaccompanied minors, victims of trafficking in human beings, persons in need of urgent medical assistance, disabled persons etc;
data protection: the exchange with third countries of personal data regarding intercepted or rescued persons obtained during a sea
operation should be prohibited where there is a serious risk of contravention of the principle of non-refoulement;
human dignity: participating units should, in the performance of their duties, fully respect human dignity.
Special rules: the Regulation sets out a framework for sea operations including:
·

detection: participating units should collect and immediately report information about that vessel to the International Coordination
Centre, including, where possible, information about the situation of persons on board, in particular whether there is an imminent risk
to their lives or whether there are persons in urgent need of medical assistance;

·

interception in the territorial sea: in the territorial sea of the host Member State or a neighbouring participating Member State, that
State should authorise the participating units to take certain measures where there were reasonable grounds to suspect that a
vessel may be carrying persons intending to circumvent checks at border crossing points or is engaged in the smuggling of migrants
by sea. If evidence confirming that suspicion were found, that State may authorise the participating units to (a) seize the vessel and

apprehending persons on board; (b) order the vessel to alter its course outside of the territorial sea or the contiguous zone; (c)
conduct the vessel or persons on boar to the coastal Member State.
·

interception on the high seas: if evidence confirming suspicion were found in these cases, the participating units may : (i) seize the
vessel and apprehend persons on board; (ii) warn and order the vessel not to enter the territorial sea or the contiguous zone, and,
where necessary, request the vessel to alter its course; (iii) conduct the vessel or persons on board to a third country; (iv) conduct
the vessel or persons on board to the host Member State or to a neighbouring participating Member State.

·

interception in the contiguous zone: in the contiguous zone of the host Member State or of a neighbouring participating Member
State, the measures regarding interception of ships would apply so long as they were proportionate. Any authorisation may only be
given for measures that were necessary to prevent the infringement of relevant laws and regulations within that Member States
territory or territorial sea;

Any measure shall be proportionate and shall not exceed what is necessary to achieve the objectives of the Regulation.
Rescue situations: Member States should observe their obligation to render assistance to any vessel or person in distress at sea and, during a
sea operation, their participating units must comply with that obligation, in accordance with international law and respect for fundamental
rights. They should do so regardless of the nationality or status of such a person or the circumstances in which that person was found. The
Regulation contains a series of provisions regarding rescue at sea with the support of the Rescue Coordination Centre. The latter will also
assist with persons or vessels missing at sea.
Rescue operations will particularly take place if there are doubts as to the seaworthiness of the vessel and the likelihood that the vessel will
reach its final destination, or if units detect the presence of persons on board in urgent need of medical assistance, or pregnant women or
children.
Disembarkation: the operational plan will contain a series of measures regarding the disembarkation of intercepted persons, particularly in the
case of search and rescue situations. The host Member State and the participating Member States shall cooperate to identify a place of safety
and, when the responsible Rescue Coordination Centre designates such a place of safety, they should ensure that disembarkation of the
rescued persons is carried out rapidly and effectively.
The modalities for disembarkation shall not have the effect of imposing obligations on Member States not participating in the sea operation.
Solidarity mechanisms: recalling the fact that the policies of the Union in border management, asylum and immigration and their
implementation should be governed by the principle of solidarity and fair sharing of responsibility between the Member States, the Regulation
promotes burden-sharing including through the transfer, on a voluntary basis, of beneficiaries of international protection. A Member State
faced with a situation of urgent and exceptional pressure at its external border should be able to request:
·

the deployment of European Border Guard Teams within FRONTEX to provide rapid operational assistance to that Member State;

·

the Agency for technical and operational assistance in order to obtain assistance on matters of coordination between Members
States and/or the deployment of experts to support the competent national authorities;

·

emergency assistance to address urgent and specific needs.

A Member State subject to strong migratory pressure which placed urgent demands on its reception facilities and asylum systems should be
able to request assistance from the European Asylum Support Office and emergency assistance.
FRONTEX operational plan: by virtue of Regulation (EC) n° 2007/2004 establishing FRONTEX, border surveillance operations coordinated by
the Agency are conducted in accordance with an operational plan. The latter should include specific information on the application of the
relevant jurisdiction and legislation in the geographical area where the joint operation, pilot project or rapid intervention takes place, including
references to Union and international law regarding interception, rescue at sea and disembarkation. The operational plan should be
established in accordance with the provisions of this Regulation governing:
·

interception,

·

rescue at sea, and

·

disembarkation in the context of border surveillance operations at sea coordinated by the Agency.

Lastly, the plan should include procedures ensuring that persons with international protection needs, unaccompanied minors and other
vulnerable persons are identified and provided with appropriate assistance.
Report: FRONTEX shall submit an annual report to the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on the practical application of
the Regulation, including a description of the procedures put in place by the Agency regarding sea operations and detailed information on
compliance with fundamental rights and the impact on those rights, and any incidents which may have taken place.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 17.07.2014. From that date, Decision 2010/252/EU will cease to have effect.

