Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0187(COD)

Awaiting Council 1st reading position / budgetary conciliation
convocation

Aerodromes, air traffic management and air navigation services: simplifying
and clarifying the legal framework
Amending Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 2005/0228(COD)
Subject
3.20.01 Air transport and air freight
3.20.01.01 Air safety
3.20.15 Transport agreements and cooperation
8.40.08 Agencies and bodies of the EU

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
TRAN

Transport and Tourism

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D SASSOLI David-Maria

10/07/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE MARINESCU
Marian-Jean
ALDE MEISSNER Gesine
Verts/ALE LICHTENBERGER
Eva
ECR FOSTER Jacqueline
GUE/NGL KOHLÍČEK Jaromír

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Mobility and Transport

Commissioner
KALLAS Siim

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the
Regions

Key events
11/06/2013

Legislative proposal published

01/07/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

30/01/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

10/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

11/03/2014

Debate in Parliament

12/03/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

12/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

COM(2013)0409

Summary

A7-0098/2014

Summary

T7-0221/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0187(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 2005/0228(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 100-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Awaiting Council 1st reading position / budgetary conciliation convocation

Committee dossier

TRAN/7/13006

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0409

11/06/2013

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE521.780

04/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE522.854

06/12/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0098/2014

10/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T7-0221/2014

12/03/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)455

10/06/2014

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

2013/0187(COD) - 11/06/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to harmonise the content of Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 of the European Parliament and of the Council on common rules in the
area of civil aviation and establishing a European Agency for Aviation Safety with that of four regulations in regard to the Single European Sky.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the development of the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) framework, set out in particular in Regulation EC No
216/2008, is intertwined with the development of the Single European Sky (SES) initiative the recast of which is currently the subject of a
proposal.
In 2009, Regulation (EC) No 1108/2009 extended the competences of EASA to include air traffic management and air navigation services
(ATM/ANS). Whilst this also implied the incorporation of various ATM/ANS technical regulation elements into the scope of EASA, the
corresponding changes to the four SES Regulations were not completed simultaneously.
The legislators addressed this overlap in the Regulations by inserting a new Article 65a into Regulation (EC) No 216/2008. This article requires
the Commission to propose amendments to the four SES Regulations to take into account the requirements of Regulation (EC) No 216/2008.
Secondly, there is a more general mismatch between the approach used for all other sectors of aviation (airworthiness, crew licensing, air
operations etc.) in the EASA framework and air traffic management (ATM/ANS).
In the area of ATM/ANS (as far as the SES is concerned), the technical regulations stem from various sources. The Commission recommends
introducing a harmonised approach towards this important regulatory area, so that all consultations are conducted with the same

thoroughness, all rules fit in the same structure and serve the same objectives, making life easier for those responsible for applying the rules
and finally to ensure that the impending wave of technological innovations stemming from the SESAR initiative can be implemented in a
co-ordinated manner in both airborne and ground equipage and procedures.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the Commission undertook an impact assessment to support legislative proposals for improving the efficiency, safety
and competitiveness of the Single European Sky. The amendments to Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 in this package intend to address issues
that were left over from a previous amendment through Regulation (EC) No 1108/2009, notably Article 65a. Those amendments were covered
by the 2008 impact assessment leading up to the approval of Regulation (EC) No 1108/2009.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 100(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: this proposed Regulation aims to fulfil the requirement of article 65a, by deleting the overlaps between the SES and EASA
Regulations and simplifying and clarifying the border line between EASA and SES legal frameworks.
The amendment also supports the political objective of ensuring clarity of tasks between the Commission, EASA and the Eurocontrol
organisation: (i) the Commission would focus on economic and technical regulation; (ii) EASA would act as its agent on technical regulation
drafting and oversight; and (iii) Eurocontrol would focus on operational tasks, in particular built around the Network Manager concept 5
As well as deleting SES provisions as part of the SES recast, some minor adaptations are also required to Regulation (EC) No 216/2008,
because previously the text of this Regulation relied on the terminology of some SES provisions, in particular in the area of interoperability.
Hence the same terminology needs to be introduced in Regulation (EC) No 216/2008, now that it is being repealed from the four SES
Regulations.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the proposal has no budgetary implication.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2013/0187(COD) - 10/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Transport and Tourism adopted the report by David-Maria SASSOLI (EPP, IT) on the proposal for a Regulation of the
European Parliament and Council modifying Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 on aerodromes, air traffic management and air navigation services.
The parliamentary committee recommended that the position of the European Parliament adopted at first reading under the ordinary legislative
procedure modify the Commission proposal as follows.
Role of the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA): Members underlined that safety should remain the priority mission of the Agency. The
Regulation should also promote sustainable development, performance, interoperability, climate protection, environmental friendliness and
energy saving.
They also proposed reinforcing the international role of the Agency: this last should promote Union aviation standards and rules at the
international level and the movement worldwide of the Union's aeronautical products, professionals and services with a view to facilitating their
access to new growing markets.
Delegation of powers: the decision to suspend the delegation of the appointing authority powers to the Executive Director and the
sub-delegation of these powers must be taken by an absolute majority of the Management Board.
Executive Board: the Members wished to ensure openness and transparency for every Member State when decisions are taken at the EASA
Management Board.
The Executive Board shall be composed of the Chairperson of the Management Board, one representative of the Commission to the
Management Board, and five other members appointed by the Management Board for a term of two years, among its members with the right
to vote. The term of the five appointees of the Management Board may be renewed on an unlimited number of occasions.
The term of office of the Chairperson of the Executive Board shall be the same as his/ her term of office as the Chairperson of the
Management Board. The term of office of the representative of the Commission shall be the same as his/her term of office on the Management
Board.
Executive Director: before appointment, the candidate selected by the Management Boardshall make a statement before the competent
committee of the European Parliament and answer questions put by its members.
Mid-term, the Commission shall draw up a report evaluating the Executive Director's performance and the Agency's future tasks and
challenges. This evaluation report shall be presented to the competent committee of the European Parliament.
The Executive Director shall be assisted by one Deputy Executive.
Revenues of the Agency: these may be provided for by grants. These grants constitute an indispensable part of the Agency's budget, allowing
it to perform various aviation safety related projects, mainly with third countries.
Conflicts of interest: the Members introduced an amendment proposing the legal ground for the Agency to implement a complete set of rules
for managing and avoiding conflicts of interest. The governing bodies of the Agency shall be responsible of developing and implementing this
policy taking into consideration the particularities of the Agency to get the best technical knowledge as well as sensitive, classified and
commercial information that might be involved.
Finally, the Agency must maintain a real flexibility regarding the management of staff dedicated to activities strongly linked to market demands.

2013/0187(COD) - 12/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

The European Parliament adopted by 614 votes to 56 with 8 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a Regulation of the
European Parliament and Council modifying Regulation (EC) No 216/2008 on aerodromes, air traffic management and air navigation services.
Parliaments position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Scope: the regulation should promote safety, sustainable development, performance, interoperability, climate protection, environmental
friendliness and energy saving, in a manner proportionate to the nature of each particular activity.
Role of the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA): in order to ensure the proper functioning and development of civil aviation, and
particularly safety, the EASA must promote Union aviation standards and rules at international level by establishing the appropriate
cooperation with third countries and international organisations, and thereby promote the movement of the Union's aeronautical products,
professionals and services with a view to facilitating their access to new growing markets worldwide.
The EASA must also perform the accreditation of the national aviation authorities.
Pilots: when adopting delegated acts, the Commission shall take specific care that they reflect the state of the art, including best practices and
scientific and technical progress in the field of pilot training, an enhanced culture of safety and fatigue management systems.
Delegation of powers: the decision to suspend the delegation of the appointing authority powers to the Executive Director and the
sub-delegation of these powers must be taken by an absolute majority of the Management Board.
Executive Board: Parliament wished to ensure openness and transparency for every Member State when decisions are taken at the EASA
Management Board.
The Executive Board shall be composed of the Chairperson of the Management Board, one representative of the Commission to the
Management Board, and five other members appointed by the Management Board for a term of two years, among its members with the right
to vote. The term of the five appointees of the Management Board may be renewed on an unlimited number of occasions.
The term of office of the Chairperson of the Executive Board shall be the same as his/ her term of office as the Chairperson of the
Management Board. The term of office of the representative of the Commission shall be the same as his/her term of office on the Management
Board.
Executive Director: before appointment, the candidate selected by the Management Board shall make a statement before the competent
committee of the European Parliament and answer questions put by its members.
Mid-term, the Commission shall draw up a report evaluating the Executive Director's performance and the Agency's future tasks and
challenges. This evaluation report shall be presented to the competent committee of the European Parliament.
The Executive Director shall be assisted by one Deputy Executive.
Revenues of the Agency: these may be provided for by grants. These grants constitute an indispensable part of the Agency's budget, allowing
it to perform various aviation safety related projects, mainly with third countries.
Conflicts of interest: Parliament introduced an amendment proposing the legal ground for the Agency to implement a complete set of rules for
managing and avoiding conflicts of interest. The Executive Director and officials seconded by Member States and the Commission on a
temporary basis shall make a declaration of commitments and a declaration of interests indicating the absence of any direct or indirect
interests, which might be considered prejudicial to their independence. Those declarations shall be made in writing on their entry into service
and shall be renewed in the event of a change in their personal circumstances. The Management Board shall implement a policy to manage
and avoid conflicts of interest.
Lastly, the Agency must maintain a real flexibility regarding the management of staff dedicated to activities strongly linked to market demands.

