Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0309(COD)

Procedure completed

Open internet access
Amending Directive 2002/22/EC 2000/0183(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 2011/0187(COD)
Subject
2.40 Free movement of services, freedom to provide
3.30.03.04 Telecommunication networks
3.30.05 Electronic and mobile communications, personal communications
3.30.06 Information and communication technologies
3.30.20 Trans-European communications networks
3.30.25 International information networks and society, internet
4.60.06 Consumers' economic and legal interests

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Rapporteur

Industry, Research and Energy

Appointed
22/07/2014

DEL CASTILLO VERA
Pilar
Shadow rapporteur

TOIA Patrizia

FORD Vicky

ROHDE Jens

MATIAS Marisa

REIMON Michel

TAMBURRANO Dario
Former committee responsible
ITRE Industry, Research and Energy
(Associated committee)

PPE DEL CASTILLO VERA
Pilar

10/10/2013

ECR HARBOUR Malcolm

25/09/2013

Former committee for opinion
IMCO Internal Market and Consumer Protection
(Associated committee)
REGI

Regional Development

Verts/ALE ALFONSI François 24/09/2013

CULT

Culture and Education

S&D KAMMEREVERT Petra

09/10/2013

JURI

Legal Affairs

PPE BOULLIER GALLO
Marielle

04/11/2013

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

PPE SEDÓ I ALABART
Salvador

14/11/2013

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Commissioner

Communications Networks, Content and Technology KROES Neelie

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
11/09/2013

Legislative proposal published

12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

21/11/2013

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

05/12/2013

Debate in Council

18/03/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

20/03/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

02/04/2014

Debate in Parliament

03/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

05/06/2014

Debate in Council

02/09/2014

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations after 1st
reading in Parliament

27/11/2014

Debate in Council

15/07/2015

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at early 2nd reading interinstitutional
negotiations

02/10/2015

Council position published

08/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 2nd reading

13/10/2015

Vote in committee, 2nd reading

16/10/2015

Committee recommendation tabled for
plenary, 2nd reading

27/10/2015

Debate in Parliament

27/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 2nd reading

25/11/2015

Final act signed

25/11/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

26/11/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

COM(2013)0627

Summary

Summary

A7-0190/2014

Summary

T7-0281/2014

Summary

Summary

Summary

10788/2/2015

Summary

A8-0300/2015

Summary

T8-0367/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0309(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation

Amending Directive 2002/22/EC 2000/0183(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 2011/0187(COD)
Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ITRE/8/00566

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0627

11/09/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0331

11/09/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0332

11/09/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

N7-0066/2014
OJ C 038 08.02.2014, p. 0012

14/11/2013

EDPS

Committee draft report

PE522.762

14/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE524.835

19/12/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE526.176

19/12/2013

EP

Summary

Summary

Committee opinion

JURI

PE524.714

22/01/2014

EP

Committee opinion

CULT

PE522.810

23/01/2014

EP

Committee opinion

REGI

PE524.757

23/01/2014

EP

Committee opinion

IMCO

PE522.939

29/01/2014

EP

CDR5960/2013

30/01/2014

CofR

PE523.069

19/02/2014

EP

PE529.852

25/02/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0190/2014

20/03/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0281/2014

03/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Council statement on its position

12279/2015

28/09/2015

CSL

Committee draft report

PE567.840

29/09/2015

EP

10788/2/2015

02/10/2015

CSL

Summary

COM(2015)0489

02/10/2015

EC

Summary

Committee recommendation tabled for
plenary, 2nd reading

A8-0300/2015

16/10/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 2nd reading

T8-0367/2015

27/10/2015

EP

Summary

Committee of the Regions: opinion
Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

Council position
Commission communication on Council's
position

Additional information

LIBE

National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2015/2120
OJ L 310 26.11.2015, p. 0001 Summary

2013/0309(COD) - 11/09/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to lay down measures concerning the European single market for electronic communications.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: connected technologies account for 50% of productivity gains in recent years across all sectors. The Commission considers
that they are the key for Europe to emerge stronger from the crisis, if impediments to growth arising from ongoing fragmentation are
addressed.
After over a decade of Union legislative interventions to liberalise and integrate the telecommunications market, Europe is fragmented into 28
separate national communications markets, each with a limited number of players. This patchy scenario raises barriers to entry and increases
the costs for operators wanting to provide cross-border services thereby impeding their expansion. EU rules on, for example, authorisations,
regulatory conditions, spectrum assignment and consumer protection are implemented in diverging ways.
As a consequence, while no operator is present in more than half of the Member States, most in far fewer, overall more than 200 operators
serve a market of 510 million of customers.
This stands in stark contrast with the US or China who have one single market of 330 and 1400 million customers respectively, served by four
to five large operators, with one legislation, one licensing system, and one spectrum policy.
The untapped potential of an EU single market in electronic communications is estimated at up to 0.9% GDP, or EUR 110 billion per year. The
benefits from a single market for business communication services alone amount to almost EUR 90 billion per year.
In the wider economy, increasing ICT investment, improving e-skills in the labour force and reforming the conditions for the Internet economy
could boost GDP by an additional 5% up to 2020, and create 3.8 million jobs.
The Digital Agenda for Europe (DAE), one of the flagship initiatives of Europe 2020 Strategy, has already recognised the role of ICT and
network connectivity as an indispensable basis for the development of our economy and society. The 2013 Spring European Council stressed
the importance of the digital single market for growth and called for concrete measures, in order to establish a single market in information and
communications technology (ICT) as early as possible.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: in order to tackle these sources of fragmentation, three policy options were selected for further analysis:
option 1 was based on the regulatory framework for electronic communications as it stands;
option 2 considered a single legislative instrument (a Regulation) adjusting the regulatory framework only where necessary for a single
EU market for electronic communications, based on enhanced EU coordination;
option 3 included the substance of the second option, but replaced the current governance structure by a single EU regulator in order
to achieve full regulatory coordination.
The impact assessment report concludes that the second option is the best available.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
CONTENT: the general objective of the proposal is to move towards a single market for electronic communications in which:
citizens and businesses can access electronic communications services wherever they are provided in the Union, without
cross-border restrictions or unjustified additional costs;
companies providing electronic communications networks and services can operate and provide them wherever they are established
or their customers are situated in the EU.
The proposal builds upon and advances the main directives of 2002 governing the provision of electronic communications, as amended in
2009, by introducing directly applicable legislative provisions which shall operate in conjunction with the provisions of the directives on subjects
such as authorisation, spectrum assignment and access to networks.
The main elements of this proposal are as follows:
A single EU authorisation mechanism: operators wanting to provide services in several Member States must currently be authorised in each of
them. The proposed Regulation introduces a single EU authorisation based on a single notification system in the Member State of main
establishment of the European electronic communication provider (the home country) and sets out the conditions applicable to it.
European inputs: mobile providers in Europe today lack the necessary predictability regarding spectrum availability across the EU and must
deal with diverging assignment conditions. It is thus more difficult to plan long-term, to invest across borders and eventually to gain scale. Such
a patchy situation means that device manufacturers design their products for other markets with greater scale and growth prospects. To put an
end to this unsustainable situation, harmonisation of spectrum inputs must be ensured by:

guaranteeing mobile operators predictable assignment conditions and coordinated timeframes to access spectrum for wireless
broadband across the EU;
harmonising ways to access European fixed networks so that providers can more easily offer their services across the single market.
The proposal also ensures harmonised, high-quality virtual access to fixed networks would facilitate market entry and the provision of
cross-border services both to end-users and businesses, and would help drive competition and investment.
Rights of end-users: to guarantee an appropriate level of consumer protection across the EU, rules defining the rights of end-users are
harmonised, including:
non-discrimination between certain domestic and intra-EU (international) communications (unless differences are objectively justified);
mandatory pre-contractual and contractual information;
increased transparency and facilities to avoid "bill shocks";
the right to terminate the contract after six months without costs (excluding the residual value of any subsidised equipment or other
promotions);
the obligation on providers to provide unhindered connection to all content, applications or services being accessed by end-users also
referred to as Net Neutrality - while regulating the use of traffic management measures by operators in respect of general internet
access. At the same time, the legal framework for specialised services with enhanced quality is clarified.
Facilitating change of provider: the proposal provides for harmonised principles applicable to switching procedures are provided, such as
cost-orientation, receiving provider-led process, automatic termination of contract with the transferring provider.
This proposal, together with the Commission Recommendation on consistent non-discrimination obligations and costing methodologies to
promote competition and enhance the broadband investment environment, forms a set of balanced measures aimed at moving towards a
Single Market in Telecommunications and fostering investment.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the proposal has no implication for the EU budget.
DELEGATED ACTS: this proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2013/0309(COD) - 14/11/2013 Document attached to the procedure
Opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor on the Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying
down measures concerning the European single market for electronic communications and to achieve a Connected Continent, and amending
Directives 2002/20/EC, 2002/21/EC and 2002/22/EC and Regulations (EC) No 1211/2009 and (EU) No 531/2012.
The EDPS recalls that respect for the rights to privacy and the protection of personal data, and for the confidentiality of communications, is
crucial to building consumer trust and confidence in the European single market for electronic communications.
In that regard, the EDPS provides the following key recommendations:
traffic management measures constitute a restriction to net neutrality. Using traffic management for the purposes of implementing a
legislative provision or preventing and impeding serious crimes may entail a wide-scale, preventive and systematic monitoring of
communications content which would be contrary to the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, as well as Directive 2002/58/EC and
Directive 95/46/EC. Reference to these grounds should be removed from the proposal;
the proposal should provide clear information on communications inspection techniques that are allowed within the context of traffic
management measures;
whenever sufficient for the achievement of one of the aims set out in that provision, traffic management measures will involve
communications inspection techniques based on the sole analysis of the IP-headers, as opposed to those involving Deep Packet
Inspection;
the proposal should require the providers to indicate the communications inspection techniques underlying such traffic management
measures, as well as explain the effect of such techniques on end-users privacy and data protection rights;
as regards the powers of national regulatory authorities to, inter alia, supervise the application of traffic management measures, the
proposal should include the possibility for the latter to cooperate with national data protection authorities;
the proposal should be amended to include the requirement for the European virtual broadband access product and the European
ASQ connectivity product, respectively, to comply with the principle of data protection by design.

2013/0309(COD) - 05/12/2013 Debate in Council
The Council held a policy debate on a proposal aimed at amending the EU telecommunications regulatory framework.
Ministers welcomed the proposal's objectives of incentivising investment, enhancing consumer rights and addressing net neutrality.
However, many of them expressed their concerns about the process followed for the preparation of the proposal, the timeline envisaged for its
adoption, the legal form of the act proposed and its substance. Some delegations have even called into question the whole proposal.
Process and timeline: delegations pointed in particular to the lack of substantive public consultation and to what they see as a defective impact
assessment. Several also noted the premature nature of the proposal given the very recent implementation of the current telecommunications
framework as well as the recent adoption of some of its constituents (Roaming III, the RSPP).
Given the complexity and ambition of the proposal, amending five existing acts, it also appears unrealistic to complete its examination and
negotiation with the EP in a few months.
Legal form of the act: concerns were expressed about the choice of a Regulation as it will amend not only Regulations but also Directives, as
the harmonisation a Regulation implies does not appear to be justified in all the areas covered by the proposal, e.g. if this would lead to

reduced consumers protection, or because the same outcome, e.g. better coordination of spectrum allocation -- largely acknowledged as a
worthwhile objective -- or international calls, could be achieved using means under the existing framework (spectrum) or by letting the market
play as it is fairly competitive (international calls).
Many delegations underlined the need for stability and predictability for investors and considered that the same objectives could be furthered
by making better use of current instruments.
Regarding the substance: concerns have been expressed inter alia about:
the approach envisaged for the single EU authorisation given the uncertainty it entails regarding the powers of the regulatory
authorities involved in different Member States, other important aspects for operators (e.g. consumer and tax legislation) which are not
differing across Member States, and the limited interest expressed by operators for such provisions;
the consequences that several of the provisions could have on the investment climate (e.g. roaming, extensive harmonisation of
end-users protection), stressing the need to strike an appropriate balance between consumers and operators;
the choice of approach for improved spectrum management, which should in any event preserve the value of spectrum and
acknowledge national circumstances and competences and for which some would prefer the focus to be on common end dates for
allocation rather than on a one-size-fits-all harmonisation process at EU level;
the imposition of one specific means (European virtual broadband access products) to improve access to network;
the legal uncertainty that could result e.g. from provisions on roaming while Roaming III is about to be implemented as well as possible
impact on domestic tariffs;
the net neutrality provisions where the envisaged extensive requirements on service quality might impair the further development of
service providers, disproportionately affects small providers and relies on means (monitoring of speed access) affected by factors
beyond the control of the providers;
disproportionate administrative burden, e.g. for regulators and operators involved in the single authorisation procedure;
smaller operators and markets as several provisions are seen as conducive to market consolidation and more beneficial to larger
incumbents, which also puts into question the underlying approach of the proposal which instead of promoting efficient competition, as
under the existing framework, seems to rely on market consolidation;
the shift of decision-making power to the Commission away from the national level, e.g. with respect to spectrum or market remedies,
which appears unwarranted.
While protecting consumers was considered an important issue, several ministers pointed out that the level of consumer protection in their
country was higher than that put forward by the Commission.
As regards spectrum allocation, Ministers recognised the importance of promoting cloud computing and big data, but they did not see any
need to create an EU regulatory framework in this area.

2013/0309(COD) - 20/03/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted the report by Pilar del CASTILLO VERA (EPP, ES) on the proposal for a regulation
of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down measures concerning the European single market for electronic communications
and to achieve a Connected Continent, and amending Directives 2002/20/EC, 2002/21/EC, 2002/22/EC, and Regulations (EC) No 1211/2009
and (EU) No 531/2012.
The committee recommended that the position of the European Parliament adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Objectives: the Regulation should establish rules necessary to:
·

facilitate the practical exercise of the right of providers of electronic communications services and networks to provide services
through a harmonised and simplified notification system based on a harmonised template;

·

facilitate the practical exercise of the right of citizens and businesses to access competitive, secure and reliable electronic
communications services, with common rules to guarantee high standards of protection, privacy and security of their personal data,

·

achieve a more coordinated Union framework for harmonised radio spectrum for wireless broadband communications services;

·

address the phasing out of unjustified surcharges for roaming communications within the Union.

Ending roaming charges in 2015: the date of 15 December 2015 should be set for the final phasing out of retail roaming surcharges for voice,
SMS and data, which began with Regulation (EC) No 717/2007. In addition, the Commission should by 30 June 2015, in advance of that final
abolition of retail surcharges, report on any necessary changes to the wholesale rates or wholesale market mechanisms, taking into account
also mobile termination rates (MTR) applicable to roaming throughout the Union.
However, to prevent anomalous or abusive usage of retail roaming services, roaming providers may apply a "fair use clause" to the
consumption of regulated retail roaming services provided at the applicable domestic price level, by reference to fair use criteria. These criteria
should be applied in such a way that consumers were in a position to confidently replicate the typical domestic consumption pattern associated
with their respective domestic retail packages while periodically travelling within the Union.
The maximum eurotariff price caps should continue to serve as a safeguard limit for charges for consumption in excess of fair use limits until
the expiry of the Regulation (EU) No 531/2012.
Unlike the Commission, the committee saw no need regulate prices for international phone calls made from the callers home country, stating
that fixed and mobile international calls were currently deregulated competitive markets that did not require regulation through EU intervention.
Net neutrality: the amended text stated that the principle of net neutrality means that equivalent traffic should be treated equally, without
discrimination, restriction or interference, independent of the sender, receiver, type, content, device, service or application. Members stressed

that in an open internet, providers of internet access services should, within contractually agreed limits on data volumes and speeds for
internet access services and the general characteristics of the service, not block, slow down, degrade or discriminate against specific content,
applications or services or specific classes thereof except for a limited number of traffic management measures.
Specialised services: this was defined as an electronic communications service optimized for specific content, applications or services, or a
combination thereof, provided over logically distinct capacity with a view to ensuring enhanced quality and that is not marketed or usable as a
substitute for internet access service.
The committee specified that providers of internet access, of electronic communications to the public and providers of content, applications
and services should be free to offer specialised services to end-users.
Such services should only be offered if the network capacity were sufficient to provide them in addition to internet access services and they
were not to the material detriment of the availability or quality of internet access services. Providers of internet access to end-users should not
discriminate against services from other sources that were competing with their own specialised services.
Freedom to provide and avail of open internet access, and reasonable traffic management: end-users should be free to access and distribute
content, run and provide applications and services and use terminals of their choice, irrespective of the end-users or providers location or the
location, origin or destination of the service, information or content, via their internet access service.
Traffic management: it was specified that within the limits of any contractually agreed data volumes or speeds for internet access services, and
subject to the general quality characteristics of the service, providers of internet access services should not restrict these freedoms by
blocking, slowing down, altering or degrading specific content, applications or services, except in cases where it is necessary to apply traffic
management measures. The latter should not be applied in such a way as to discriminate for commercial reasons against services competing
with those offered by the provider of internet access.
BEREC: within six months of adoption of this regulation, BEREC shall lay down general guidelines defining uniform conditions for the
implementation of the obligations of national competent authorities regarding provisions on safeguards for quality of service, including with
respect to the application of traffic management measures and for monitoring of compliance.
Harmonisation of certain aspects relating to transfer or lease of individual rights to use radio frequencies and their duration: the committee felt
that trading and leasing of spectrum harmonised for wireless broadband communications increased flexibility and lead to more efficient
allocation of spectrum resources and consequently proposed measures to further facilitate and stimulate the dynamism of spectrum use.
Members introduced a new clause, stating that Member States:
·

may not refuse to allow a transfer or lease to an existing holder of such rights of use;

·

may refuse a transfer only where it is found that there is a clear risk that the new holder would be unable to meet the existing
conditions for the right of use;

·

may not refuse a lease where the transferor undertakes to remain liable for meeting the existing conditions for the right of use.

All rights of use of spectrum should be granted with a minimum duration of 25 years, and in any case for a duration appropriate to incentivise
investment and competition and discourage the under-use or "hoarding" of spectrum. Member States may grant rights of use of indefinite
duration.
Supervision and enforcement: national regulatory authorities should:
·

have the necessary resources to monitor and supervise compliance with the Regulation within their territories;

·

make up-to-date information on the application of the Regulation publicly available in a manner that enabled interested parties to
have easy access to it;

·

have the power to require undertakings subject to obligations under the Regulation to supply all information relevant to the
implementation and enforcement of the Regulation;

·

put in place appropriate, clear, open and efficient procedures to address complaints alleging breaches of provisions on the freedom
to provide and avail of open internet access, and reasonable traffic management.

Review of regulatory framework: the Commission should perform a comprehensive evaluation and review of the entire regulatory framework
for electronic communications, and submit a report with appropriate proposals by 30 June 2016.

2013/0309(COD) - 03/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 534 votes to 25, with 58 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council laying down measures concerning the European single market for electronic communications and to
achieve a Connected Continent, and amending Directives 2002/20/EC, 2002/21/EC, 2002/22/EC, and Regulations (EC) No 1211/2009 and
(EU) No 531/2012.
Parliament adopted its position at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure which amends the proposal as follows:
Objectives: according to Parliament, the Regulation should establish rules necessary to:
·

facilitate the practical exercise of the right of providers of electronic communications services and networks to operate their
networks and to provide services irrespective of where the provider is established or its customers are situated in the Union through
a harmonised and simplified notification system based on a harmonised template ,

·

facilitate the practical exercise of the right of citizens and businesses to access competitive, secure and reliable electronic
communications services, with common rules to guarantee high standards of protection, privacy and security of their personal
data, without being hampered by cross-border restrictions or unjustified additional costs and penalties;

·

achieve a more coordinated Union framework for harmonised radio spectrum for wireless broadband communications services;

·

address the phasing out of unjustified surcharges for roaming communications within the Union.

Ending roaming charges in 2015: Parliament recommended that the date of 15 December 2015 be set for the final phasing out of retail
roaming surcharges for voice, SMS and data.
In addition, the Commission should by 30 June 2015, in advance of that final abolition of retail surcharges, report on any necessary changes to
the wholesale rates or wholesale market mechanisms.
However, to prevent anomalous or abusive usage of retail roaming services, roaming providers may apply a "fair use clause" to the
consumption of regulated retail roaming services provided at the applicable domestic price level, by reference to fair use criteria.
The maximum eurotariff price caps should continue to serve as a safeguard limit for charges for consumption in excess of fair use limits until
the expiry of the Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 on roaming on public mobile communications networks within the Union.
Unlike the Commission, Parliament saw no need regulate prices for international phone calls made from the caller?s home country, stating that
fixed and mobile international calls were currently deregulated competitive markets that did not require regulation through EU intervention.
Net neutrality: Members stipulated that the principle of ?net neutrality? in the open internet means that traffic should be treated equally, without
discrimination, restriction or interference, independent of the sender, receiver, type, content, device, service or application. As stated by the
European Parliament resolution of 17 November 2011 on the open internet and net neutrality in Europe, the internet's open character has
been a key driver of competitiveness, economic growth, social development and innovation.
In an open internet, providers of internet access services should, within contractually agreed limits on data volumes and speeds for internet
access services and the general characteristics of the service, not block, slow down, degrade or discriminate against specific content,
applications or services or specific classes thereof except for a limited number of traffic management measures.
Freedom to provide and avail of open internet access: end-users should be free to access and distribute content, run and provide applications
and services and use terminals of their choice, irrespective of the end-user?s or provider?s location or the location, origin or destination of the
service, information or content, via their internet access service.
According to the amended text, providers of internet access services should be free to offer specialised services to users . Such services shall
only be offered if the network capacity is sufficient to provide them in addition to internet access services and they are not to the detriment of
the availability or quality of internet access services. Providers of internet access to end-users shall not discriminate between functionally
equivalent services and applications.
Traffic management: end-users should be provided with complete information on any traffic management measures applied that might affect
access to and distribution of information, content, applications and services.
Providers of internet access services and end-users may agree to set limits on data volumes or speeds for internet access services . Traffic
management measures should be transparent, non-discriminatory, proportionate and necessary, in particular to prevent or mitigate the effects
of temporary and exceptional network congestion provided that equivalent types of traffic are treated equally.
Traffic management measures should not be maintained longer than necessary and should only entail such processing of personal data that is
necessary in particular with respect to confidentiality of communications. In this context, providers of internet access services should put in
place appropriate, clear, open and efficient procedures aimed at addressing complaints alleging breaches.
BEREC (Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications): no later than six months of adoption of this regulation, BEREC shall,
after consulting stakeholders and in close cooperation with the Commission, lay down general guidelines defining uniform conditions for the
implementation of the obligations of national competent authorities, as regards quality of service, in particular with respect to the application of
traffic management measures and for monitoring of compliance.
Harmonisation of certain aspects relating to transfer or lease of individual rights to use radio frequencies and their duration: Parliament
considered that trading and leasing of spectrum harmonised for wireless broadband communications increased flexibility and lead to more
efficient allocation of spectrum resources. That is why it proposed measures to facilitate the transfer and leasing of rights with the aim of using
certain radio frequencies.
Thus, the amended text provides that Member States may not refuse to allow a transfer or lease to an existing holder of such rights of use.
Member States may refuse a transfer only where it is found that there is a clear risk that the new holder would be unable to meet the existing
conditions for the right of use. They may not refuse a lease where the transferor undertakes to remain liable for meeting the existing conditions
for the right of use.
All rights of use of spectrum should be granted with a minimum duration of 25 years, and in any case for a duration appropriate to incentivise
investment and competition and discourage the under-use or ?hoarding? of spectrum. Member States may grant rights of use of indefinite
duration.
Transparent contracts for end-users: providers should allow end-users access to comparable information on the coverage of the mobile
networks, including different technologies in their Member State, prior to the conclusion of the contract. Contracts should also specify the types
of after-sales services, maintenance services and customer support services provided.
In order to avoid bill shocks, for all post-paid services, users should be able to set a predefined maximum financial limit for the charges related
to their usage of calls and internet access services. This facility should include an appropriate notification when the limit is being approached.
Supervision and enforcement: national regulatory authorities should:
·

have the necessary resources to monitor and supervise compliance with the Regulation within their territories;

·

make up-to-date information on the application of the Regulation publicly available in a manner that enabled interested parties to
have easy access to it;

·

have the power to require undertakings subject to obligations under the Regulation to supply all information relevant to the
implementation and enforcement of the Regulation;

·

put in place appropriate, clear, open and efficient procedures to address complaints alleging breaches of provisions on the freedom
to provide and avail of open internet access, and reasonable traffic management.

Review of regulatory framework: the Commission should perform a comprehensive evaluation and review of the entire regulatory framework
for electronic communications, and submit a report with appropriate proposals by 30 June 2016.

2013/0309(COD) - 05/06/2014 Debate in Council
The Council took note of the state of play regarding a proposal aimed at amending the EU telecommunications regulatory framework. The
draft Regulation is part of the Connected Continent package.
During the December 2013 policy debate, ministers generally welcomed the proposal's aims, such as providing incentives for investment,
enhancing consumer rights and addressing net neutrality, but expressed concerns and doubts about a large number of issues.
A report drawn up by the Greek Presidency sets out the progress made on the proposal since the policy debate and draws attention to issues
that require further work.
Many concerns mentioned in the December 2013 report for example, that the same objectives could be achieved by making better use of
current instruments remain valid.
Objective and scope: the main concern was the unclear link to and possible inconsistencies with the current telecom framework and its
objectives as well as the risk of inconsistency between the two.
Clarifications were sought regarding some unclear wording, such as 'global competitiveness', 'sustainable competition' or 'highly efficient use
of radio spectrum' (which would add to the complexity of regulatory principles to be taken into account by national competent bodies). Some
delegations still have doubts about the legal instrument.
Single EU authorisation: in general, it seems that delegations support the deletion of the whole Chapter. They questioned its added value and
feared that it would increase complexity, administrative burden and related costs. They also warned against the risk of unequal treatment of
EU and national providers, risk of racing at most offering (forum-shopping) and the impact on competences of host/home National Regulatory
Authorities (NRAs).
Delegations raised also a number of specific issues, such as:
the thresholds for the European electronic communications provider to be subject to administrative charges or contributions in the host
Member State;
the involvement of the home NRA in the case of disputes involving European electronic communications providers in the host Member
State;
the one-way provision of information on measures adopted for European electronic communication providers between the host and
home NRAs.
There was basically no support for Article 6 (suspension and withdrawal) and Article 7 (coordination of enforcement measures).
Coordination of use of radio spectrum: several delegations found many of the new provisions too prescriptive and often overlapping or even
conflicting with provisions of EU or national legislation.
Delegations' concerns included a possible conflict between the proposal and the Authorisation Directive, reference to compensation and
doubts whether establishing minimum technology performance levels was technology neutral.
Most Member States consider that the provisions aimed at harmonising radio frequencies for broadband synchronisation delays and
introducing a European mechanism for coordination of rights of use of radio frequencies go too far, in particular with regard to the proposed
competences and the veto right of the Commission.
European virtual broadband access products: delegations found the provisions too detailed and unclear at the same time and stressed the
need for a thorough market analysis before any such regulation is introduced.
With regard to assured service quality connectivity products, most Member States believed that there was no proven market failure that would
justify a new regulatory burden and that regulation of business models should be avoided. The development of such products should be left for
the industry without unnecessary regulatory intervention.
Harmonised rights of end-users: on the consumer provisions Member States prefer minimum harmonisation to the proposed full-scale
harmonisation, as this would allow them to keep or adopt more stringent national measures.
Open Internet: several delegations underlined the need for the text to be future-proof and to be clear. For example, definitions of 'internet
access service' and 'specialised service' should be clarified. In addition, the list of allowed traffic management measures was not considered
satisfactory.
While delegations agreed that the right balance needs to be struck between net neutrality and reasonable traffic management, they had
different views on how to achieve it. The common underlying principles relating to net neutrality have yet to be agreed on.
The draft articles on roaming, which are to be found towards the end of the Commission proposal, have not yet been examined in detail.
The Presidency advocated that to continue the work, future efforts should focus on those provisions of the proposal that gathered at least
some support among Member States and where solid progress is achievable.

2013/0309(COD) - 27/11/2014 Debate in Council
The Council discussed the state of play regarding a proposal to amend the EU telecommunications regulatory framework ("Connected

continent").
The discussions focused in particular on roaming charges and net neutrality without introducing obstacles to innovation and investment.
Roaming: most delegations expressed the need to have more time to analyse what would be the best approach to avoid unintended
side-effects.
The presidency proposed a new revised text on roaming. Many delegations pointed out that any "roam like at home" provision needed further
examination, including as regards:
the level of regulated wholesale prices;
the definition of any "fair use" criterion, including whether any such criterion should apply at both retail and wholesale levels and
whether it should be based on domestic or EU-wide usage; the definition of any "roam like at home" provision;
the implications on national markets, including the risk of a "water bed" effect (i.e increased domestic prices to compensate for any
losses on roaming services incurred by the visited or home operator), and on investment;
the impact on flat-rate offerings;
the relationship to the structural remedies, intended to promote competition, in the Roaming Regulation.
Open internet/net neutrality: issues relating to open internet/net neutrality are highly complex, involving fundamental rights, economic and
technical aspects, content of communications, and also questions relating to appropriate scope (providers of electronic communications
services/networks/other types of providers etc) and effectiveness.
The Presidency proposed a new text setting out an approach in principle to open internet/net neutrality.
Discussions on open internet/net neutrality appear to be converging around the following core elements:
a simplified principles-based approach, in order not to inhibit innovation and to avoid technological developments making the
regulation obsolete;
not regulating "specialised services" (while not prohibiting them);
allowing necessary flexibility regarding traffic management measures (while not including measures relating to content lawfulness);
allowing scope for national NRAs, coordinated by BEREC, to provide guidance.
The presidency will continue to work on the proposal until the end of the year, based on the guidance given by ministers. Talks with the
European Parliament would only start when the time is ripe.

2013/0309(COD) - 02/10/2015 Council position
The Council's position at first reading first reading concerning the European single market for electronic communications focused on two core
issues: roaming and net neutrality, including the consumer rights related to each of these issues.
The Regulation aims at establishing common rules to safeguard equal and non-discriminatory treatment of traffic in the provision of internet
access services and safeguarding end-users' rights.
In the field of roaming, the Regulation sets up a new retail pricing mechanism for Union-wide regulated roaming services in order to abolish
retail roaming surcharges without distorting domestic and visited markets.
The main elements of the compromise reached with the European Parliament are outlined below:
Roaming: under the compromise, retail roaming surcharges in the European Union will be abolished as of 15 June 2017 . However, the
compromise defines two situations when the application of surcharges is still authorised, subject to specific criteria:
1. roaming providers will be able to apply a 'fair use policy' to prevent abusive or anomalous usage of regulated retail roaming services. Once
the fair use policy has been exceeded, a surcharge may be applied. The surcharge cannot be higher than the maximum wholesale charges.
The detailed rules on the application of the fair use policy will be defined by the Commission in an implementing act by 15 December 2016.
2. with a view to ensuring the sustainability of the domestic charging model, in specific and exceptional circumstances, where roaming
providers will not be able to recover overall costs of providing regulated roaming services from overall revenues of providing such services,
they, subject to the authorisation by the national regulatory authority, may apply a surcharge, but only to the extent necessary to recover those
costs.
The abolition of the roaming surcharges of 15 June 2017 is subjected to the adoption by that date of a legislative proposal amending the
maximum wholesale charges currently regulated under Regulation 531/2012 or providing for another solution to address issues identified at
wholesale level. The Commission, before submitting such a legislative proposal, is required to conduct a review of the wholesale roaming
market with a view to assessing measures necessary to enable abolition of retail roaming surcharges.
In order to ensure a smooth transition to the abolition of roaming surcharges, the compromise provides for a transitional period, which will start
as of 30 April 2016. From this date roaming surcharges will be significantly reduced. The maximum surcharge will then be limited to the current
maximum wholesale charges laid down in Regulation 531/2012. For calls received, the maximum surcharge will be the weighted average of
maximum mobile termination rates across the EU, to be set out by the Commission by means of an implementing act by the end of 2015.
Network Neutrality: providers will be required to treat all traffic equally when providing internet access services, without discrimination,
restriction or interference, and irrespective of the sender and receiver, the content accessed or distributed, the applications or services used.
They may use reasonable traffic management measures, but such measures must be transparent, non-discriminatory, proportionate and not
be based on commercial considerations. Traffic management measures must not monitor specific content and must not be maintained longer
than necessary. Measures going beyond such reasonable traffic management (for example, blocking or throttling) will be prohibited, except for
a limited number of cases defined in the Regulation.
Agreements on services requiring a specific level of quality will be allowed, provided that those services are not usable or offered as a
replacement for internet access service and they are not to the detriment of the availability or general quality of internet access services for

end users.
End-users' rights: the provisions on safeguarding of open internet access and roaming are complemented by end-users' provisions which, in
particular, enable end-users to make informed choices. For example:
in relation to network neutrality, providers of internet access services should: (i) inform end-users in a clear manner about how traffic
management practices and any services other than internet access services may impact on the quality of the internet access service;
(ii) inform end- users of the speed normally available and the remedies in case of non-compliance;
in the area of roaming, the compromise stipulates that customers will need to be notified about the applicable fair use policy or when
consumption volumes are reached.

2013/0309(COD) - 02/10/2015 Commission communication on Council's position
As all amendments to the Commission proposal were discussed during the informal tripartite discussions, the Commission can accept the
amendments that the Council adopted in its first reading position.
The Commission supported the Council position which limits the scope of the proposal to net neutrality and roaming, and this was confirmed in
the negotiations with the European Parliament. The Commission recalled that the Digital Single Market strategy announced by the
Commission on 6 May 2015 makes clear that spectrum will be part of the telecom review to be presented in 2016.
Overall the Councils position endorses the core objectives of the Commission proposal, namely to abolish retail roaming surcharges and
ensure open internet access while allowing innovative services. However, the Council makes some changes regarding how to achieve these
goals. Its amendments involve:
defining a clear end-date for roaming surcharges while ensuring the sustainability of such abolition, in particular by appropriately
timing the review of wholesale roaming markets and establishing an appropriate mechanism to address exceptional and specific cases
where domestic charging models would be unsustainable even after the review of wholesale roaming markets;
clarifying that equal treatment of traffic allows for reasonable day-to-day traffic management based on justified objective technical
requirements and independently of the traffic's origin or destination;
a ban on blocking, throttling and discrimination against specific content, services or applications, or categories thereof, with three
narrowly circumscribed necessary exceptions, namely for compliance with EU or national laws or measures giving effect to such laws,
for network security purposes, and for management of temporary or exceptional network congestion;
establishing that services other than internet access services, which are optimised for specific content, applications or services, may
be provided under certain conditions: (i) that optimisation is necessary to meet the quality requirements of these content, applications
or services; (ii) that they are not marketed or usable as a substitute to internet access services; (iii) that sufficient capacity is available;
and (iv) that their provision is not detrimental to the quality of internet access services for end-users;
obliging the competent regulatory authorities to ensure, through monitoring and enforcement action, compliance with the rules of the
Regulation and that the rights of end-users, including providers of content, services and applications, are not impaired;
establishing certain end-users rights which are necessary to apply the provisions on roaming and net neutrality effectively.

2013/0309(COD) - 16/10/2015 Committee recommendation tabled for plenary, 2nd reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted a recommendation for second reading contained in the report by Pilar del
CASTILLO VERA (EPP, ES) on the Council position at first reading with a view to the adoption of a regulation of the European Parliament and
of the Council laying down measures concerning open internet access and amending Directive 2002/22/EC on universal service and users
rights relating to electronic communications networks and services and Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 on roaming on public mobile
communications networks within the Union.
The committee recommended the European Parliament to approve, without amendment, the Council position at first reading.
The proposed Regulation will introduce harmonised rules to safeguard open internet access, to protect users' rights and to end roaming
surcharges.
The Parliament adopted its first reading position on 3 April 2014. The Council's first reading position is in conformity with the agreement
reached in the inter-institutional negotiations (trilogues).

2013/0309(COD) - 27/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, 2nd reading
The European Parliament adopted a legislative resolution on the Council position at first reading with a view to the adoption of a regulation of
the European Parliament and of the Council laying down measures concerning open internet access and amending Directive 2002/22/EC on
universal service and users? rights relating to electronic communications networks and services and Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 on roaming
on public mobile communications networks within the Union.
In line with the recommendation for second reading by the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy, Parliament approved, without
amendment, the Council position at first reading.

2013/0309(COD) - 25/11/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish common rules necessary for safeguarding open internet access and abolishing retail roaming surcharges.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2015/2120 of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down measures concerning open

internet access and amending Directive 2002/22/EC on universal service and users rights relating to electronic communications networks and
services and Regulation (EU) No 531/2012 on roaming on public mobile communications networks within the Union.
CONTENT: the Regulation:
establishes common rules to safeguard equal and non-discriminatory treatment of traffic in the provision of internet access services
and related end-users rights;
sets up a new retail pricing mechanism for Union-wide regulated roaming services in order to abolish retail roaming surcharges
without distorting domestic and visited markets.
Abolition of retail roaming surcharges (amendments to Regulation (EU) No 531/2012): this Regulation sets out that retail roaming surcharges
in the EU will be abolished as of 15 June 2017. However, the compromise defines two situations when the application of surcharges is still
authorised, subject to specific criteria:
First of all, roaming providers will be able to apply a 'fair use policy' to prevent abusive or anomalous usage of regulated retail roaming
services. Once the fair use policy has been exceeded, a surcharge may be applied. The surcharge cannot be higher than the
maximum wholesale charges. The detailed rules on the application of the fair use policy will be defined by the Commission in an
implementing act by 15 December 2016.
Secondly, with a view to ensuring the sustainability of the domestic charging model, in specific and exceptional circumstances, where
roaming providers will not be able to recover overall costs of providing regulated roaming services from overall revenues of providing
such services, they, subject to the authorisation by the national regulatory authority, may apply a surcharge, but only to the extent
necessary to recover those costs.
The abolition of the roaming surcharges of 15 June 2017 is subjected to the adoption by that date of a legislative proposal amending the
maximum wholesale charges currently regulated under Regulation 531/2012 or providing for another solution to address issues identified at
wholesale level. By 29 November 2015, the Commission shall initiate a review of the wholesale roaming market with a view to assessing
measures necessary to enable abolition of retail roaming surcharges by 15 June 2017 and shall propose new legislation by 15 June 2016.
Additional cost of the transitional period: in order to ensure a smooth transition to the abolition of roaming surcharges, the Regulation provides
for a transitional period, which will start as of 30 April 2016. From this date:
roaming surcharges will be significantly reduced. The maximum surcharge will then be limited to the current maximum wholesale
charges laid down in Regulation 531/2012;
the sum of the domestic retail price and any surcharge applied for regulated roaming calls made, regulated roaming SMS messages
sent or regulated data roaming services shall not exceed EUR 0,19 per minute, EUR 0,06 per SMS message and EUR 0,20 per
megabyte used, respectively.
For calls received, the maximum surcharge will be the weighted average of maximum mobile termination rates across the EU, to be set out by
the Commission by means of an implementing act by the end of 2015.
Network Neutrality: under the new EU-wide rules to safeguard equal and non-discriminatory treatment of traffic in the provision of internet
access services, providers will be required to treat all traffic equally when providing internet access services, without discrimination, restriction
or interference, and irrespective of the sender and receiver, the content accessed or distributed, the applications or services used.
They may use reasonable traffic management measures, but such measures must be transparent, non-discriminatory, proportionate and not
be based on commercial considerations.
Traffic management measures must not monitor specific content and must not be maintained longer than necessary . Measures going beyond
such reasonable traffic management (for example, blocking or throttling) will be prohibited, except for a limited number of cases defined in the
Regulation.
Agreements on services requiring a specific level of quality will be allowed, provided that those services are not usable or offered as a
replacement for internet access service and they are not to the detriment of the availability or general quality of internet access services for
end users.
End-users' rights: in relation to network neutrality, providers of internet access services should:
inform end-users in a clear manner about how traffic management practices and any services other than internet access services may
impact on the quality of the internet access service;
inform end- users of the speed normally available and the remedies in case of non-compliance.
In the area of roaming, the Regulation lays down transparency requirements on the specific tariff and volume conditions that will apply once
roaming surcharges are abolished. In particular, provision should be made for roaming customers to be notified, in a timely manner and free of
charge, of the applicable fair use policy, when the applicable fair use volume of regulated voice, SMS or data roaming services is fully
consumed, of any surcharge, and of accumulated consumption of regulated data roaming services.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 29.11.2015. It shall apply from 30 April 2016 with the exception of certain provisions.

