Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0239(COD)

Procedure completed

Shipments of waste: legality of shipments
Amending Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 2003/0139(COD)
Subject
3.70.12 Waste management, domestic waste, packaging, light industrial
waste
3.70.13 Dangerous substances, toxic and radioactive wastes (storage,
transport)
3.70.18 International and regional environment protection measures and
agreements

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Rapporteur

Appointed

Verts/ALE STAES Bart

30/09/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE FLORENZ Karl-Heinz
S&D LYUBCHEVA Marusya
ALDE GERBRANDY
Gerben-Jan
ECR ROSBACH Anna
GUE/NGL WILS Sabine
Committee for opinion
JURI

Legal Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Environment

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
POTOČNIK Janez

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the
Regions

Key events
11/07/2013

Legislative proposal published

08/10/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

14/10/2013

Debate in Council

22/01/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

17/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

COM(2013)0516

Summary

Summary

A7-0069/2014

Summary

17/04/2014

Debate in Parliament

17/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

06/05/2014

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

15/05/2014

Final act signed

15/05/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

27/06/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T7-0452/2014

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0239(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 2003/0139(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 192-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ENVI/7/13327

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0516

11/07/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0267

11/07/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0268

11/07/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE522.903

14/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE524.732

11/12/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE526.414

20/01/2014

EP

A7-0069/2014

30/01/2014

EP

CDR5880/2013

30/01/2014

CofR

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T7-0452/2014

17/04/2014

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Committee of the Regions: opinion

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Summary

Summary

Summary

Final act
Regulation 2014/660
OJ L 189 27.06.2014, p. 0135 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2013/0239(COD) - 11/07/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to combat illegal waste shipments which threaten human health and the environment.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council on shipments of waste (WSR) lays down
requirements for shipments of waste both within the Union and between the Member States and third countries, in order to protect the
environment. However, gaps have been identified in the enforcement and inspections carried out by the competent authorities in Member
States due to, inter alia, a lack of clear provisions in the Regulation on these matters.
Illegal waste shipments are a serious and frequent problem. In 2011 a study estimated the tonnage of illegal shipments within and out of the
EU to be 2.8 million tonnes per year. The most problematic illegal waste shipments are those concerning hazardous waste and waste which is
illegally sent for dumping or sub-standard treatment.
The export bans for hazardous waste and waste for disposal under the WSR are often circumvented. The joint inspections carried out by the
"network for the implementation and enforcement of environmental law, trans-frontier shipments of waste-cluster" (IMPEL-tfs) revealed very
high rates of non-compliance with the WSR due to illegal waste shipments. During the period October 2008-November 2010, the overall
non-compliance rate can be estimated to be 25%.
Council conclusions of 3 June 2010 invited the Commission, inter alia, to consider strengthening EU requirements on inspections and spot
checks carried out under the WSR.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the Commissions impact assessment examined several options to strengthen inspections and enforcement of the
WSR. The assessment concluded that a combination of EU legislative requirements and guidance would be the most effective option to
address the problems related to illegal waste shipments. This option would also have the lowest net costs and the most positive economic,
social and environmental impacts.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 192(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: this proposal to amend Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 aims to help ensure more uniform implementation of the WSR through
establishing minimum inspection requirements throughout the EU with a focus on problematic waste streams.
More specifically, the proposal seeks to:
strengthen the provisions regarding the enforcement of rules and inspections covered by Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 with a view to
ensuring regular and consistent planning of inspections. Planning should include a number of key elements, including risk
assessments, strategies, objectives, priorities, numbers and types of planned inspections, assignment of tasks, means of cooperation
between authorities and provisions on training of inspectors;
introduce the possibility for competent authorities in Member States to require evidence from waste exporters in order to check the
legality of shipments. Such evidence may concern whether the substance or object is "waste" or not, whether the shipment is destined
for recovery or disposal, or the nature of the specific waste treatment methods and standards applied by the facility in the country of
destination.
The Commission may adopt guidelines for the enforcement of the Regulation.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the proposal has no incidence on the EUs budget.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2013/0239(COD) - 14/10/2013 Debate in Council
The Council held an exchange of views on the proposal for the amendment of the waste shipment regulation in order to give political guidance
for further examination of the proposal in the Council preparatory bodies.
The ministers' discussion was based on two questions prepared by the presidency:
1. to consider the appropriateness of the scope of the proposal;
2. to consider whether the proposal strikes the right balance between ensuring a minimum level playing field and allowing the necessary
flexibility.
Ministers welcomed the proposal and recognised the need to improve measures to address illegal shipments of waste.
While they broadly supported inspection planning, they also underlined the need to consider further the level of detail to be included in the
plans in order to strike the right balance between the aim of the legislation, the national situations and the costs of implementation. They also

expressed doubts about the publication of inspection plans.

2013/0239(COD) - 30/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted the report by Bart STAES (Greens/EFA, BE) on the proposal for a
regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 on shipment of waste
The committee recommended that Parliaments position in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission proposal as follows:
Need for changes: in order to highlight the need for action, Members referred to the very high degree of illegal shipments that had been found
consistently over the last few years. They recalled that Co-ordinated inspections in Member States between 2003 and 2010 found between
20 % and 51 % of inspected waste shipments to be illegal.
Data exchange, transmission of information: Members felt that electronic data interchange would greatly facilitate the work of administrations.
As soon as the technical and organisational requirements had been adopted, electronic submission of the relevant documents should become
compulsory. Members inserted a clear deadline of 18 months after entry into force of the regulation, for the technical and organisational
requirements for the practical implementation of electronic data interchange. The Commission should also be empowered to update these
requirements.
Plans for inspections and results of inspections: brokers and dealers must be included, as well as establishments and undertakings. The plans
shall include a minimum number of physical checks of facilities and waste shipments in line with the strategy and objectives adopted and the
risk assessment conducted.
The outcome of the inspections carried out, any remedial actions taken by the relevant authorities as a follow up to those inspections, the
names of the operators involved in illegal shipments, and the penalties imposed should permanently available to the public, including
electronically. The Aarhus Convention that inter alia seeks to promote access to environmental information was recalled in this regard.
The possibility of checks as collection, storage and sorting facilities should be explicitly added to the list where inspections on shipments may
take place.
Strengthening the powers of the relevant authorities: the relevant authorities should be entitled to (i) check any shipment whether it constitutes
waste or not and not just suspected illegal shipments, as that could undermine the very purpose of inspections; (ii) check the nature of the
waste so as to make sure that the export ban of hazardous and other waste was complied with.
In order to ascertain that a shipment complies with this regulation, the relevant authorities may require in particular the holder, the notifier or
the legal representative of the consignee to submit any relevant documentary proof. In the absence of proof the relevant authorities should
presume that the load is an illegal shipment. In such circumstances, the relevant authorities should without delay inform the competent
authority located in their country.
Strengthen cooperation between Member States: Members stressed the fact that only cooperation between Member States could provide
effective remedies against illegal trans boundary shipments. The Commission should create a common platform that includes all Member
States for these purposes.
Penalties: based on reports by Member States, the Commission should, every three years, submit a report on the implementation of the
regulation by the Union and its Member States, including penalties inflicted.
Delegated acts: the committee suggested aligning all current comitology provisions to Article 290 TFEU in this amending act so as to ensure
coherence, rather than doing part here and part through the 'omnibus' proposal.

2013/0239(COD) - 17/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 524 votes to 12 with 41 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 on shipment of waste.
Parliament adopted its position at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure. The amendments adopted in plenary were the result of
a compromise between Parliament and Council. They amend the Commissions proposal as follows:
Definition of inspection: the amended text stressed that divergences and gaps had been identified in the enforcement and inspections carried
out by the authorities involved in inspections in Member States.
The definition of inspection was introduced and meant actions undertaken by the involved authorities to ascertain whether an establishment,
an undertaking, a broker, a dealer, a shipment of waste or the related recovery or disposal complies with the relevant requirements set out in
the Regulation.
Format for documents and information exchange: subject to the agreement of the competent authorities concerned and of the notifier,
information and documents may be submitted and exchanged by means of electronic data interchange with electronic signature or electronic
authentication, or a comparable electronic authentication system which provides the same level of security.
Inspection plans: by 1 January 2017, Member States should ensure that, in respect of their entire geographical territory, one or more plans are
established, either separately or as a clearly defined part of other plans, for inspections. Inspection plans should be based on a risk
assessment and include the following elements:
·

the objectives and priorities of the inspections, including a description of how those priorities have been identified;

·

the geographical area covered by that inspection plan;

·

information on planned inspections, including on physical checks ;

·

the tasks assigned to each authority involved in inspections;

·

arrangements for cooperation between authorities involved in inspections;

·

information on the training of inspectors on matters relating to inspections; and

·

information on the human, financial and other resources for the implementation of that inspection plan.

An inspection plan should be reviewed at least every three years.
Inspection of shipments: these may take place in particular: (a) at the point of origin, carried out with the producer, holder or notifier; (b) at the
point of destination, including interim and non-interim recovery or disposal, carried out with the consignee or the facility; (c) at the frontiers of
the Union; and/or (d) during the shipment within the Union.
Inspections of shipments should include the verification of documents, the confirmation of identity and, where appropriate, physical checking of
the waste.
Verification and proof: in order to ascertain whether a substance or object being carried by road, rail, air, sea or inland waterway is not waste,
the authorities involved in inspections may require the natural or legal person who is in possession of the substance or object concerned, or
who arranges the carriage thereof, to submit documentary evidence:
·

as to the origin and destination of the substance or object concerned; and

·

that it is not waste, including, where appropriate, evidence of functionality.

The protection of the substance or object concerned against damage during transportation, loading and unloading, such as adequate
packaging and appropriate stacking, shall also be ascertained.
Evidence regarding the legality of shipments may be requested on the basis of general provisions or on a case-by-case basis. Where such
evidence is not made available or is considered to be insufficient, the carriage of the substance or object concerned, or the shipment of waste
concerned should be considered as an illegal shipment and should be dealt with in accordance with the relevant provisions of Regulation (EC)
No 1013/2006.
The outcome of inspections and the measures taken, including any penalties imposed, should be made available to the public, including
electronically via the internet.

2013/0239(COD) - 15/05/2014 Final act
PURPOSE: to combat illegal waste shipments which threaten human health and the environment.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) No 660/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006
on shipments of waste.
CONTENT: this Regulation amends Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006 on shipments of waste both within the Union and between the Member
States and third countries. However, divergences and gaps have been identified in the enforcement and inspections carried out by the
authorities involved in inspections in Member States.
The new Regulation contains enhanced measures to ensure more uniform implementation of the waste shipment Regulation through
establishing minimum inspection requirements throughout the EU with a focus on problematic waste streams.
Inspection plans: by 1 January 2017, Member States should ensure that inspection plans should include the following elements:
the objectives and priorities of the inspections;
the geographical area covered by that inspection plan;
information on planned inspections, including on physical checks;
the tasks assigned to each authority involved in inspections;
arrangements for cooperation between authorities involved in inspections;
information on the training of inspectors on matters relating to inspections;
information on the human, financial and other resources for the implementation of that inspection plan.
Inspection plans shall be based on a risk assessment covering specific waste streams and sources of illegal shipments and considering, if
available and where appropriate, intelligence-based data such as data on investigations by police and customs authorities and analyses of
criminal activities.
An inspection plan shall be reviewed at least every three years and, where appropriate, updated.
Verification and proof: diverging rules exist throughout the Union as regards the power of, and possibility for, authorities involved in inspections
in Member States to require evidence to ascertain the legality of shipments. Such evidence could concern, inter alia, whether the substance or
object is waste, whether the waste has been correctly classified, and whether the waste will be shipped to environmentally sound facilities.
Where such evidence is not made available or is considered to be insufficient, the carriage of the substance or object concerned, or the
shipment of waste concerned should be considered as an illegal shipment .
Transparency: Member States are shall be obliged to publish, on a yearly basis, including in electronic form, the information concerning the
inspections, in particular the penalties imposed.
Review: by 31 December 2020, the Commission shall carry out a review of this Regulation and submit a report on the results thereof to the
European Parliament and to the Council, accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 17.07.2014. It shall apply from 1 January 2016.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in order to amend certain non-essential elements of

Regulation (EC) No 1013/2006. The power to adopt delegated acts shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 17
July 2014. The European Parliament or the Council may raise objections to a delegated act within a period of two months from the date of
notification (this may be extended by two months). If the European Parliament or Council express objections, the delegated act will not enter
into force.

