Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2076(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

European Central Bank. Annual report for 2012

Subject
5.20.03 European Central Bank (ECB), ESCB

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D PITTELLA Gianni

14/01/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE GÁLL-PELCZ Ildikó
ALDE TORVALDS Nils
Verts/ALE JOLY Eva
ECR EPPINK Derk Jan
GUE/NGL MATIAS Marisa

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Economic and Financial Affairs

REHN Olli

Key events
10/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

05/11/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

13/11/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

12/12/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

12/12/2013

Debate in Parliament

12/12/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/12/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0382/2013

Summary

T7-0601/2013

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2076(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 132-p1

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/7/12316

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE513.252

11/06/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE516.605

12/07/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0382/2013

13/11/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0601/2013

12/12/2013

EP

Summary

2013/2076(INI) - 13/11/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Gianni PITTELLA (S&D, IT) on the European Central
Bank Annual report for 2012.
Monetary policy: Members welcomed the bold measures taken by the ECB in 2012, which have contributed in a decisive manner to stabilising
the banking sector and helping to sever the link between the banks and the sovereign. However, they were deeply concerned at the fact that
persistently weak economic conditions are becoming the norm in parts of the EU, creating instability for the eurozone as a whole and
threatening the popular and political support for the whole European project.
They believed that the positive effects of the decisions of July 2012 to reduce the key ECB interest rates were limited , and noted with concern
that the banking systems demand for liquidity from the Eurosystem increased in 2012. The report considered that the monetary policy tools
that the ECB has used since the beginning of the crisis, while providing a welcome relief in distressed financial markets, had revealed their
limits as regards stimulating growth and improving the situation on the labour market. The ECB could explore further measures.
Pointing out that at present similar SMEs from across the eurozone do not have similar access to loans, Members asked that the ECB take
very seriously into account the possibility of launching a specific programme to help SMEs access credit. The report also encouraged the ECB
to (i) send clear signals to the market with regard to the estimated period of activation of its quantitative easing policy measures; (ii) start
phasing such measures out as soon as the tension in the banking sector is diminished, as soon as the link between the banks and the
sovereign can be severed, and as soon as the economic indicators related to growth and inflation justify such a decision.
Members recalled that the conduct of monetary policy should be democratic and should result from deliberation between different viewpoints in
order that transparency may be strengthened. They recalled, in this respect, the importance of the monetary dialogue and of the written
questions submitted by MEPs.
Banking union: the report noted that the European Banking System was still fragile and needed to be reformed in structural terms and
consolidated through the development of a true banking union. Members welcomed the progress achieved on the Single Supervisory
Mechanism (SSM) which should contribute to restoring confidence in the banking sector and to reviving interbank lending and cross-border
credit flows through independent integrated supervision for all participating Member States. They also suggested that the ECB should
welcome the possibility of involving non-eurozone Member States in the SSM to ensure a greater harmonisation of supervisory practices within
the EU.
The report drew attention to the need for:
·

a fruitful cooperation between the ECB and the competent national authorities within the framework of the SSM, in order to ensure an
effective and smooth supervision;

·

the strengthening of the ECB resulting from the establishment of the SSM needs to be balanced by greater accountability vis-à-vis
national parliaments and the European Parliament;

·

ensuring transparency in the supervision of banks, as provided in the interinstitutional arrangements between the European
Parliament and the ECB;

·

operational separation of the ECBs core units preparing the draft decisions in the field of monetary policy and supervisory policy;

·

the establishment of a Single Resolution Mechanism in order to protect taxpayers and prevent further banking crises;

In order to reduce risk and strengthen the stability of the banking system and avoid the development of the too big to fail institutions, Members
felt that consideration could be given to introducing a full separation between deposit and investment banks.
The report went on to state that the troika should be replaced by a system whereby the Commission, accountable to Parliament, was put at the
heart of the mechanism with programme countries, the Eurogroup was included in the decision-making process, the ECB provided expertise
and the IMF gives advice where appropriate.
With regard to institiutional questions, Members pointed out that the regulation on the SSM provides for interinstitutional arrangements
between the European Parliament and the ECB on democratic accountability. They urged the ECB to meet the new requirements, in particular
in terms of democratic accountability and transparency in its supervisory activities.
Lastly, concerned at the contempt shown by the Council towards Parliaments resolution of 25 October 2012 on the appointment of a new
Member of the executive board of the ECB, Members felt that the EU institutions, including the ECB, should lead by example in the field of
gender balance and that it was essential that the gender representation among leading positions within the ECB be improved.

2013/2076(INI) - 12/12/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 265 votes to 79, with 37 abstentions, a resolution on the European central Bank Annual Report for 2012.

Monetary policy: Parliament welcomed the bold measures taken by the ECB in 2012, which have contributed in a decisive manner to
stabilising the banking sector and helping to sever the link between the banks and the sovereign. However, it was deeply concerned at the fact
that persistently weak economic conditions are becoming the norm in parts of the EU, creating instability for the eurozone as a whole and
threatening the popular and political support for the whole European project.
It believed that the positive effects of the decisions of July 2012 to reduce the key ECB interest rates were limited , and recalled that, in the long
term, very low interest rates may cause distortions in the business sector and harm private savings and pension plans.
Parliament considers that the three-year long-term refinancing operations (LTRO) undertaken in March 2012 contributed to stabilising the
banking system, but that this should be a temporary measure. It is deeply concerned about the transfer of risks from struggling banks and
governments onto the ECBs balance sheet as a result of the ECBs decision to buy unlimited amounts of short-term government debt.
The resolution considered that the monetary policy tools that the ECB had used since the beginning of the crisis, while providing a welcome
relief in distressed financial markets, had revealed their limits as regards stimulating growth and improving the situation on the labour market.
The ECB should explore further measures.
Pointing out that at present similar SMEs from across the eurozone do not have similar access to loans, Members asked that the ECB take
very seriously into account the possibility of launching a specific programme to help SMEs access credit.
Parliament recalled that the non-standard monetary policy measures of the ECB were intended to be of transitory nature and should, therefore,
in no way be regarded by the banking sector as a permanent instrument. It was concerned about the significantly high levels of Emergency
Liquidity Assistance (ELA) lines provided by national central banks in the course of 2011.
Parliament encouraged the ECB to (i) send clear signals to the market with regard to the estimated period of activation of its quantitative
easing policy measures; (ii) start phasing out such measures as soon as the tension in the banking sector is diminished, as soon as the link
between the banks and the sovereign can be severed, and as soon as the economic indicators related to growth and inflation justify such a
decision.
Members recalled that the conduct of monetary policy should be democratic and should result from deliberation between different viewpoints in
order that transparency may be strengthened. They recalled, in this respect, the importance of the monetary dialogue and of the written
questions submitted by MEPs.
Banking union: Parliament noted that the European banking system was still fragile and needed to be reformed in structural terms and
consolidated through the development of a true banking union. It welcomed the progress achieved on the Single Supervisory Mechanism
(SSM) which should contribute to restoring confidence in the banking sector and to reviving interbank lending and cross-border credit flows
through independent integrated supervision for all participating Member States. It also suggested that the ECB should welcome the possibility
of involving non-eurozone Member States in the SSM to ensure a greater harmonisation of supervisory practices within the EU.
The resolution drew attention to the need for:
a fruitful cooperation between the ECB and the competent national authorities within the framework of the SSM, in order to ensure an
effective and smooth supervision;
the strengthening of the ECB resulting from the establishment of the SSM needs to be balanced by greater accountability vis-à-vis
national parliaments and the European Parliament;
ensuring transparency in the supervision of banks, as provided in the interinstitutional arrangements between the European
Parliament and the ECB;
operational separation of the ECBs core units preparing the draft decisions in the field of monetary policy and supervisory policy;
the establishment of a Single Resolution Mechanism in order to protect taxpayers and prevent further banking crises.
Institutional questions: Members pointed out that the Regulation on the SSM provides for interinstitutional arrangements between the
European Parliament and the ECB on democratic accountability. They urged the ECB to meet the new requirements, in particular in terms of
democratic accountability and transparency in its supervisory activities. The ECB was invited to publish
the summary minutes of the Governing Council meetings, including arguments and voting records;
Lastly, concerned at the contempt shown by the Council towards Parliaments resolution of 25 October 2012 on the appointment of a new
Member of the executive board of the ECB, Parliament felt that the EU institutions, including the ECB, should lead by example in the field of
gender balance and that it was essential that the gender representation among leading positions within the ECB be improved.

