Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0314(COD)

Procedure completed

Indices used as benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts
Amending Directive 2008/48/EC 2002/0222(COD)
Amending Directive 2014/17/EU 2011/0062(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 596/2014 2011/0295(COD)
Amended by 2017/0230(COD)
Subject
2.50.03 Securities and financial markets, stock exchange, CIUTS,
investments
2.50.04 Banks and credit
2.50.08 Financial services, financial reporting and auditing
2.50.10 Financial supervision
2.80 Cooperation between administrations
4.60.06 Consumers' economic and legal interests

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
22/07/2014

VAN NIEUWENHUIZEN
Cora
Shadow rapporteur

NIEDERMAYER Luděk

FERNÁNDEZ Jonás

SWINBURNE Kay

MATIAS Marisa

LAMBERTS Philippe
Former committee responsible
ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Committee for opinion
BUDG

ITRE

Budgets

ALDE BOWLES Sharon

08/10/2013

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Industry, Research and Energy

24/09/2014
MATIAS Marisa

IMCO

JURI

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Legal Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Former committee for opinion
BUDG
ITRE

Budgets
Industry, Research and Energy

GUE/NGL MATIAS Marisa

23/10/2013

IMCO
JURI

Internal Market and Consumer Protection
Legal Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Commissioner

Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

HILL Jonathan

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
18/09/2013

Legislative proposal published

10/10/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

31/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

10/04/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

18/05/2015

Debate in Parliament

19/05/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

19/05/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

19/05/2015

Matter referred back to the committee
responsible

07/04/2016

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

28/04/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

17/05/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

08/06/2016

Final act signed

08/06/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

29/06/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

COM(2013)0641

Summary

A8-0131/2015

Summary

T8-0195/2015

Summary

PE604.731

T8-0146/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0314(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Directive 2008/48/EC 2002/0222(COD)
Amending Directive 2014/17/EU 2011/0062(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 596/2014 2011/0295(COD)
Amended by 2017/0230(COD)

Summary

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/00239

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0641

18/09/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0336

18/09/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0337

18/09/2013

EC

European Central Bank: opinion, guideline,
report

CON/2014/0002
OJ C 113 15.04.2014, p. 0001

07/01/2014

ECB

Economic and Social Committee: opinion,
report

CES6390/2013

21/01/2014

ESC

PE524.509

24/01/2014

EP

Committee draft report

PE544.150

11/12/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE546.741

23/01/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE546.742

23/01/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0131/2015

10/04/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at
1st reading/single reading

T8-0195/2015

19/05/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0146/2016

28/04/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)372

31/05/2016

Committee opinion

ITRE

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2016/1011
OJ L 171 29.06.2016, p. 0001 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

Delegated acts
2017/2883(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2017/2884(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2017/2885(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2017/2889(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

Summary

Summary

2013/0314(COD) - 18/09/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish a regulatory framework at Union level for indices used as benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts
whilst ensuring a high level of consumer and investor protection.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the pricing of many financial instruments and financial contracts - such as interest rate swaps, and commercial and
non-commercial contracts, such as mortgages - depends on the accuracy and integrity of benchmarks. An index is calculated using a formula
or some other methodology on the basis of underlying values. When an index is used as a reference price for a financial instrument or contract
it becomes a benchmark. Therefore, it is important to target all benchmarks that price a financial instrument or consumer contract or that
measure the performance of investment funds.
Cases of manipulation of interest rate benchmarks such as LIBOR (London Interbank Offered Rate) and EURIBOR (Euro Interbank Offered
Rate), as well as allegations that energy, oil and foreign exchange benchmarks have been manipulated, have demonstrated that benchmarks
whose setting processes share certain characteristics, such as being subject to conflicts of interest, the use of discretion and weak
governance, may be vulnerable to manipulation.
Failures in, or doubts about, the accuracy and integrity of indices used as benchmarks may undermine market confidence, cause losses to
consumers and investors and distort the real economy. It is therefore necessary to ensure the accuracy, robustness and integrity of
benchmarks and the benchmark setting process.
In most Member States there is currently no regulation at national level on the production of benchmarks. The International Organisation
Securities Commissions (IOSCO) recently agreed principles on benchmarks which are to be implemented by its members. However these
principles provide flexibility as to the scope and means of their implementation and in relation to certain terms. An EU initiative will help
enhance the single market by creating a common framework for reliable and correctly used benchmarks across different Member States.
This proposal supplements the proposed Regulation on Market Abuse (MAR) and the proposed Directive for a Criminal Sanctions for Market
Abuse (CSMAD) (MAR has been the subject of a political agreement by the European Parliament and the Council in June 2013) clarify that
any manipulation of benchmarks is clearly and unequivocally illegal and subject to administrative or criminal sanctions.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the Commission conducted an impact assessment of policy alternatives. The policy options encompassed options
to: (i) limit incentives for manipulation, (ii) minimise discretion and ensure benchmarks are based on sufficient, reliable and representative
data, (iii) ensure internal governance and controls address risks, (iv) ensure effective supervision of benchmarks and, (v) enhance
transparency and investor protection.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 114 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
CONTENT: the proposed Regulation seeks to introduce a common framework to ensure the accuracy and integrity of indices used as
benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts in the Union.
The proposal has four main objectives that aim to improve the framework under which benchmarks are provided, contributed to and used:
1. to improve the governance and controls over the benchmark process and in particular ensure that administrators avoid conflicts of
interest, or at least manage them adequately;
2. to improve the quality of the input data and methodologies used by benchmark administrators and in particular ensure that sufficient
and accurate data is used in the determination of benchmarks. The administrator shall obtain the input data from a reliable and
representative panel or sample of contributors so as to ensure that the resultant benchmark is reliable and representative of the
market or economic reality that the benchmark is intended to measure (Representative contributors);
3. to ensure that contributors to benchmarks are subject to adequate controls, in particular to avoid conflicts of interest and that their
contributions to benchmarks are subject to adequate controls. The integrity and accuracy of benchmarks depends on the integrity and
accuracy of the input data provided by contributors. It is essential that the obligations of the contributors in respect of this input data
are clearly specified, can be relied on and are consistent with the benchmark administrators controls and methodology. It is therefore
necessary that the benchmark administrator produces a code of conduct to specify these requirements and that the contributors are
bound by that code of conduct;
4. to ensure adequate protection for consumers and investors using benchmarks by enhancing transparency, ensuring adequate rights
of redress and ensuring suitability is assessed where necessary. In order for users of benchmarks to make appropriate choices of, and
understand the risks of, benchmarks, they need to know what the benchmark measures and their vulnerabilities. Therefore the
benchmark administrator should publish a statement specifying these elements as well as publish the input data used to determine the
benchmark.
The proposed Regulation applies to all published benchmarks that are used to reference a financial instrument traded or admitted to trading on
a regulated venue, or a financial contract (such as mortgages) and benchmarks that measure the performance of an investment fund. The
proposal exempts from its scope central banks that are members of the European System of Central Banks.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the specific budget implications of the proposal relate to task allocated to ESMA. The new tasks will be carried
out with the human resources available within the annual budgetary allocation procedure, in the light of budgetary constraints which are
applicable to all EU bodies and in line with the financial programming for agencies.
In summary, the main budgetary implications of the proposal are:
DG MARKT staff: 1 AD staff member (full-time): the total estimated costs are 0.141 M yearly.
ESMA:
Staff costs (two temporary agents): the total yearly costs of these 2 temporary agents would be of 0.326 M, towards which the
Commission would contribute 40% ( 0.130 M) and Member States 60% ( 0.196 M) yearly.

Operational and infrastructure costs: an initial expense of 0.25 M is also estimated for ESMA, towards which the Commission would
contribute 40% ( 0.1 M) and Member States 60% ( 0.15 M) in 2015.
ESMA will also need to produce a report on the application of this Regulation by 1 January 2018 with a total cost of 0.3 M towards which the
Commission would contribute 40% ( 0.12 M) and Member States 60% ( 0.18 M) in 2017.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2013/0314(COD) - 07/01/2014 European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report
Opinion of the European Central Bank on a proposal for a regulation on indices used as benchmarks in financial instruments and financial
contracts.
The ECB, consulted by the European Council and the European Parliament, supports the proposed regulations objective of establishing a
common set of rules at Union level for the benchmark-setting process for financial instruments and financial contracts in the interest of integrity
and reliability of the financial benchmarks and the wider concern of protection of investors and consumers.
The restoring of integrity and public confidence in financial benchmarks is all the more important in the wake of recent alleged manipulation of
the key interbank interest rate benchmarks Libor and Euribor, which have led in a number of instances to significant fines and allegations of
misuse of other indices.
The ECB stressed the systemic importance of the Euribor benchmark for financial stability and made specific recommendations on both short
and medium to longer term measures for improving the integrity and reliability of Euribor and other such benchmarks.
The ECB also makes a few forward looking remarks on the reform of critical interest rate benchmarks. The ECB:
supports market initiatives that aim at identifying transaction-based reference rates that could constitute viable complements or
substitutes to Euribor and support facilitating market choices in a changing financial system so that users can choose reference rates
which better match their needs;
encourages market participants to be actively involved in the rate design process, in order to ensure that the resulting rate meets the
markets needs;
stresses that this transitional phase to new reference rates that any Union framework is workable for market participants.
Lastly, the ECB also makes specific remarks on the reform of critical interest rate benchmarks. These remarks concern the following issues:
Scope, exclusion of indices and benchmarks provided by central banks and definition: the ECB supports the wide scope of application of the
proposed regulation. It welcomes the express exclusion from the scope of the proposed regulation of central banks that are members of the
European System of Central Banks (ESCB). However, it suggests extending the exemption to all central banks as the benchmarks and indices
provided by them are already subject to control by public authorities.
Furthermore, as regards the definition of interbank interest rate benchmark, the ECB notes that the special regime laid down in Annex II covers
only such benchmarks which are based on interest rates at which banks may lend to or borrow from each other. In the ECBs view the regime
should be less restrictive and also include benchmarks where the underlying asset is the rate at which a bank may lend to or borrow from the
wholesale market.
Benchmark integrity and reliability and the authorisation and supervision of administrators: the Union legislative bodies should take particular
care to ensure that, in pursuing the justified goals of the proposal, the toughening of the regulatory requirements on administrators does not
inadvertently dissuade new entrants to such a critical function nor discourage too strongly current administrators from this function, especially
during the current period of transition to possible new reference rates. Given the systemic importance of Euribor for the Union financial
markets and its role in monetary policy transmission, the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) should be involved in the supervision of the
Euribor rate-setting process. The ECB also welcomes the fact that competent authorities may dele gate some of their tasks under the
proposed regulation to ESMA, subject to the latters agreement.
Sectoral requirements, critical benchmarks and mandatory contribution: the ECB is concerned that the current definition of a critical benchmark
may not provide a secure enough basis for the emergence of new critical benchmarks, such as for interbank interest rates. For this reason, the
ECB sees merit in retaining a more flexible definition based on financial stability considerations.
The ECB has serious concerns about the proposed wording of the threshold for triggering the power to require mandatory contribution. It
strongly recommends not to rely on a numerical test, which may be easily circumvented and whose trigger may never be reached, but to
replace it with qualitative criteria related to financial stability considerations. The ECB also recommends that the administrator be required to
evaluate at regular intervals and whenever the panel size decreases whether the panel remains representative.
Supervisory cooperation: in relation to each critical benchmark, the proposed regulation provides for the establishment of a college of
competent authorities. The ECB has concerns however about the workability of such a procedure in the case of critical financial benchmarks,
particularly in the case of an emergency such as a market failure.
To remove any possible doubt that the responsibility for the supervision of the financial conduct of institutions which come under the single
supervisory mechanism (SSM) remains with the national competent authorities, the regulation should specify that the competent authority to
be designated by Member States must be a national competent authority.
Transparency and consumer protection: the proposed regulation should ensure instead that users can be confident about the reliability of the
data by the proper oversight, supervision, archiving and auditing thereof.
In addition, in relation to transaction-based benchmarks, situations may arise where the input data to be published includes data which is
commercially sensitive or subject to business confidentiality, for example, if volume data for transactions is included in the input data.
Therefore, the administrator should not be required to publish the data even with a delay, unless the relevant contributor has given its prior
approval, but it would be sufficient for the administrator to be required to store the data for a certain period during which the competent
authority would upon request have access thereto.

The ECB recommends, therefore, that the proposed regulation includes a requirement for the benchmark administrator to develop its own
contingency procedures, with full transparency towards the end users of the indices.
Use of benchmarks provided by third country administrators: the ECB is concerned about the workability of the proposed equivalence regime,
particularly if it were to be introduced concurrently with the other provisions of the proposed regulation. For these reasons, rather than leaving
the use of non-Union benchmarks in limbo, the ECB invites the Union legislative bodies to consider introducing as a minimum a longer
implementation period for the equivalence regime under which selected widely-used benchmarks administered in third countries, in particular
G20 countries, could continue to be used in the Union until the end of a longer transitional period of three years.
For such benchmarks, the third country administrator would be required to demonstrate compliance with the IOSCO Principles in the context of
its domestic legal framework. As a result, the benchmark would be temporarily exempted from the equivalence requirements provided for in
the proposed regulation.

2013/0314(COD) - 10/04/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the report by Cora van NIEUWENHUIZEN (ADLE, NL) on the proposal for a
regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on indices used as benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts.
The Regulation introduced a common framework to ensure the accuracy and integrity of indices (such as LIBOR and EURIBOR) used as
benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts in the Union.
The committee recommended that Parliaments position adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend the
Commission proposal as follows:
Requirements regarding governance and conflicts of interests: the administrator, meaning a natural or legal person that had control over the
provision of a benchmark, should have robust governance arrangements and:
publish all existing or potential conflicts of interest;
establish adequate policies and procedures for the identification, disclosure, management, and avoidance of conflicts of interest in
order to protect the integrity and independence of benchmark determinations;
ensure that employees and any other natural persons whose services were placed at its disposal and who were directly involved in the
provision of a benchmark had the necessary experience for the duties assigned to them and were subject to effective supervision, and
were not subject to undue influence or conflicts of interest;
establish specific control procedures to ensure the integrity and reliability of the employee.
Oversight function requirements: the administrator should establish a permanent and effective oversight function to ensure oversight of all
aspects of the provision of its benchmarks. Robust procedures regarding its oversight function must be made available to the relevant
competent authorities.
The oversight function should operate independently and include certain responsibilities, which should be adjusted for the complexity, use and
vulnerability of the benchmark.
Oversight should be carried out by a separate committee or by another appropriate governance arrangement.
The administrator must also:
have a control framework that ensures that the benchmark is provided and published or made available in accordance with this
Regulation;
have an accountability framework covering record keeping, auditing and review, and complaints process that provides evidence of
compliance with the requirements of this Regulation;
keep records of all input data;
publish written procedures for receiving, investigating and retaining records concerning complaints made about an administrator's
calculation process, the handling of complaints and keeping records regarding the complaint.
Input data: input data must be verifiable. In order to determine the benchmark, the administrator must: (i) use a method that was solid and
reliable, traceable and verifiable; (ii) transparently develop, operate and administer the benchmark data and methodology; (iii) have procedures
in place to report internally infringements of the Regulation.
Code of conduct: where a benchmark is based on input data from contributors, the administrator shall draw up, a code of conduct for each
benchmark clearly specifying the contributors responsibilities with respect to the contribution of input data.
Critical benchmarks: it was specified that a benchmark, that was not based on regulated data, should be deemed to be a critical benchmark if
the benchmark was used as a reference for financial instruments and financial contracts having an average value of at least EUR 500 000 000
000, as measured over an appropriate period of time.
Benchmarks provided by administrators from third countries: the amended regulation:
introduced a recognition regime allowing administrators of benchmarks located in a third country to provide their benchmarks in the
Union provided they fully comply with the requirements set out in this Regulation or with the provisions in the relevant IOSCO
principles;
introduced an endorsement regime allowing administrators located in the Union and authorised or registered in accordance with its
provisions to endorse benchmarks provided in third countries, under certain conditions.
Authorisation and monitoring: the administrator of a critical benchmark should be authorised and supervised by the competent authority of the
Member State where that administrator is located. An administrator that provided only noncritical benchmarks should be registered with, and
supervised by, the competent authority. ESMA should maintain a register of administrators at Union level.
Withdrawal or suspension of authorisation or registration: where an existing benchmark did not comply with the requirements of the Regulation

but changing the benchmark to bring it into compliance with the Regulation would result in a force majeure event or breach the terms of a
financial contract or financial instrument, the relevant competent authority might permit the continued use of the benchmark until such a time
as it was possible for the benchmark to cease being used or to be substituted by another benchmark .
Freedom of expression in the media: in order to respect the freedoms set out in the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the Regulation should not
apply to the press, other media and journalists where they merely published or referred to a benchmark as part of their journalistic activities
with no control over the provision of that benchmark.

2013/0314(COD) - 19/05/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st reading/single
reading
The European Parliament adopted amendments to the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on indices
used as benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts.
The question was referred back to the competent committee for re-consideration and the vote was deferred to a later session.
The purpose of the Regulation was to establish a common framework to ensure the accuracy and integrity of indices used as benchmarks in
financial instruments and financial contracts in the Union. Serious cases of manipulation of interest rate benchmarks such as
LIBOR, EURIBOR, had caused considerable losses to consumers and investors and further shattering the confidence of citizens in the
financial sector.
The main amendments adopted in plenary amended the Commission proposal as follows :
Scope: the Regulation would apply, in particular, to the provision of critical benchmarks, these being benchmarks that were not based on
regulated data, the reference value of which exceeded EUR 500 billion and benchmarks the cessation of which would have a significant
adverse impact on financial stability, on the orderly functioning of the markets and on the real economy in one or more Member States.
Certain provisions would not apply to administrators with regard to the provision of non-critical benchmarks.
Requirements regarding governance and conflicts of interests: the administrator, meaning a natural or legal person that had control over the
provision of a benchmark, should have robust governance arrangements and:
publish all existing or potential conflicts of interest;
establish adequate policies and procedures for the identification, disclosure, management, and avoidance of conflicts of interest in
order to protect the integrity and independence of benchmark determinations;
ensure that employees and any other natural persons whose services were placed at its disposal and who were directly involved in the
provision of a benchmark had the necessary experience for the duties assigned to them and were subject to effective supervision, and
were not subject to undue influence or conflicts of interest;
establish specific control procedures to ensure the integrity and reliability of the employee.
Oversight function requirements: the administrator should establish a permanent and effective oversight function to ensure oversight of all
aspects of the provision of its benchmarks. Robust procedures regarding its oversight function must be made available to the relevant
competent authorities.
The oversight function should operate independently and include certain responsibilities, which should be adjusted for the complexity, use and
vulnerability of the benchmark.
Oversight should be carried out by a separate committee or by another appropriate governance arrangement.
The administrator must also:
have a control framework that ensured that the benchmark was provided and published or made available in accordance with the
Regulation;
have an accountability framework covering record keeping, auditing and review, and complaints process that provided evidence of
compliance with the requirements of the Regulation;
keep records of all input data;
publish written procedures for receiving, investigating and retaining records concerning complaints made about an administrator's
calculation process, the handling of complaints and keeping records regarding the complaint.
The European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) would develop draft regulatory technical standards concerning governance and
control requirements.
Input data: input data must be verifiable and the resulting benchmark must be representative of the market or economic reality that the
benchmark is intended to measure. Members introduced detailed provisions regarding the controls that the administrator must put in place for
input data. In order to determine the benchmark, the administrator must: (i) use a method that was solid and reliable, traceable and verifiable;
(ii) transparently develop, operate and administer the benchmark data and methodology; (iii) have procedures in place to report internally
infringements of the Regulation.
Code of conduct: where a benchmark was based on input data from contributors, the administrator should draw up, a code of conduct for each
benchmark clearly specifying the contributors responsibilities with respect to the contribution of input data.
Critical benchmarks: once a benchmark had been defined as critical, the college of competent authorities would be formed. ESMA would
preside over the college.
Benchmarks provided by administrators from third countries: the amended regulation:
introduced a recognition regime allowing administrators of benchmarks located in a third country to provide their benchmarks in the
Union provided they fully comply with the requirements set out in this Regulation or with the provisions in the relevant IOSCO
principles;

introduced an endorsement regime allowing administrators located in the Union and authorised or registered in accordance with its
provisions to endorse benchmarks provided in third countries, under certain conditions.
Authorisation and monitoring: the administrator of a critical benchmark should be authorised and supervised by the competent authority of the
Member State where that administrator is located. An administrator that provided only noncritical benchmarks should be registered with, and
supervised by, the competent authority. ESMA should maintain a register of administrators at Union level.
Withdrawal or suspension of authorisation or registration: where an existing benchmark did not comply with the requirements of the Regulation
but changing the benchmark to bring it into compliance with the Regulation would result in a force majeure event or breach the terms of a
financial contract or financial instrument, the relevant competent authority might permit the continued use of the benchmark until such a time
as it was possible for the benchmark to cease being used or to be substituted by another benchmark .
Freedom of expression in the media: in order to respect the freedoms set out in the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the Regulation should not
apply to the press, other media and journalists where they merely published or referred to a benchmark as part of their journalistic activities
with no control over the provision of that benchmark.

2013/0314(COD) - 28/04/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 505 votes to 113 with 31 abstentions a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on indices used as benchmarks in financial instruments and financial contracts. The vote had been
put back at the plenary sitting of 19 May 2015.
The amended text stressed that serious cases of manipulation of interest rate benchmarks such as LIBOR and EURIBOR, as well as
allegations that energy, oil and foreign exchange benchmarks have been manipulated, demonstrate that benchmarks can be subject to
conflicts of interest. The use of discretion, and weak governance regimes, increase the vulnerability of benchmarks to manipulation.
Parliaments position adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Subject matter: the Regulation introduces a common framework to ensure the accuracy and integrity of indices used as benchmarks in
financial instruments and financial contracts, or to measure the performance of investment funds in the Union.
Governance and conflict of interest requirements: an administrator, being the natural or legal person that has control over the provision of a
benchmark, shall have in place robust governance arrangements and:
publish or disclose all existing or potential conflicts of interest to users of a benchmark, to the relevant competent authority and, where
relevant, to contributors;
establish and operate adequate policies and procedures, as well as effective organisational arrangements, for the identification,
disclosure, prevention, management and mitigation of conflicts of interest in order to protect the integrity and independence of
benchmark determinations;
ensure that: (a) their employees and any other natural persons whose services are placed at their disposal or under their control and
who are directly involved in the provision of a benchmark have the necessary skills, knowledge and experience for the duties assigned
to them and are subject to effective management and supervision; (b) the compensation and performance evaluation of those persons
do not create conflicts of interest.
establish specific internal control procedures to ensure the integrity and reliability of personnel.
Oversight, methodology and transparency: administrators shall maintain a permanent and effective oversight function and robust procedures
to ensure oversight of all aspects of the provision of their benchmarks.
The oversight function shall operate with integrity and shall have certain responsibilities, which include reviewing the benchmarks definition
and methodology at least annually, overseeing any changes to the benchmark methodology and being able to request the administrator to
consult on such changes.
The administrator shall adjust these responsibilities based on the complexity, use and vulnerability of the benchmark. The oversight function
shall be carried out by a separate committee or by means of another appropriate governance arrangement.
The administrator shall also:
have in place a control framework covering particularly: (i) management of operational risk;(ii) adequate and effective business
continuity and disaster recovery plans;(iii) contingency procedures that are in place in the event of a disruption to the process of the
provision of the benchmark;
have in place an accountability framework, covering record-keeping, auditing and review, and a complaints process, that provides
evidence of compliance with the requirements of the Regulation; an internal function with the necessary capability to review and report
on the administrators compliance with the benchmark methodology and the Regulation;
ensure record-keeping, including inter alia, all input data, any exercise of judgement or discretion by the administrator and, where
applicable, by assessors, in the determination of a benchmark, and telephone conversations or electronic communications between
any person employed by the administrator and contributors or submitters in respect of a benchmark. These shall be kept for at least
five years (three years for telephone conversations or electronic communication);
have in place and publish procedures for receiving, investigating and retaining records concerning complaints made, including about
the administrator's benchmark determination process.
ensure that certain conditions are fulfilled when outsourcing takes place;
publish the key elements of the methodology that the administrator uses for each benchmark provided and published or, when
applicable, for each family of benchmarks provided and published;
establish adequate systems and effective controls to ensure the integrity of input data in order to be able to identify and report to the
competent authority any conduct that may involve manipulation or attempted manipulation of a benchmark,
Input data: the input data shall be verifiable. Controls in respect of input data shall include: (a) criteria that determine who may contribute input
data to the administrator and a process for selecting contributors; (b) a process for evaluating a contributors input data and for stopping the

contributor from providing further input data, or applying other penalties for non-compliance against the contributor, where appropriate; and
(c) a process for validating input data.
Code of conduct: where a benchmark is based on input data from contributors, its administrator shall develop a code of conduct for each
benchmark clearly specifying contributors responsibilities with respect to the contribution of input data. Members set out the main elements
that must be included in the code of conduct. Administrators must ensure that supervisors adhere to the code of conduct.
Types and size of benchmarks: the text introduces proportionality in the Regulation to avoid putting an excessive administrative burden on
administrators of benchmarks the cessation of which poses less threat to the wider financial system. Thus, in addition to the regime for critical
benchmarks (used for financial instruments or contracts having a total average value of at least EUR 50 billion), two distinct regimes should be
introduced: one for significant benchmarks and one for non-significant benchmarks (which do not fulfil the conditions for significant
benchmark).
Administrators of non-significant benchmarks are subject to a less detailed regime, whereby administrators should be able to choose not to
apply some requirements of the Regulation. In such a case, the administrator in question should explain why it is appropriate not to do so in a
compliance statement, which should be published and provided to the administrator's competent authority.
Authorisation and supervision: certain administrators should be authorised and supervised by the competent authority of the Member State
where the administrator in question is located. Entities that provide only indices that qualify as non-significant benchmarks should be
registered and supervised by the relevant competent authority.
Benchmarks provided by administrators in third countries: the amended Regulation:
introduces a process for the recognition of administrators located in a third country on condition that they comply with the requirements
of the Regulation, and the apply the principles of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO);
introduces an endorsement regime allowing, under certain conditions, administrators or supervised entities located in the Union to
endorse benchmarks provided from a third country in order for such benchmarks to be used in the Union.
Commodity benchmarks: certain commodity benchmarks are exempt from the Regulation but would need to nevertheless respect the relevant
IOSCO principles.
Freedom of expression: the Regulation does not apply to the press, other media and journalists where they merely publish or refer to a
benchmark as part of their journalistic activities with no control over the provision of that benchmark.

2013/0314(COD) - 08/06/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish an effective and coherent regulatory framework in response to the vulnerability of benchmarks in the context of
financial instruments.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/1011 of the European Parliament and of the Council on indices used as benchmarks in financial
instruments and financial contracts or to measure the performance of investment funds and amending Directives 2008/48/EC and 2014/17/EU
and Regulation (EU) No 596/2014
CONTENT: the Regulation introduces a common framework to ensure the accuracy and integrity of indices used as benchmarks in financial
instruments and financial contracts, or to measure the performance of investment funds in the Union. Serious cases of manipulation of interest
rate benchmarks such as LIBOR and EURIBOR, as well as allegations that energy, oil and foreign exchange benchmarks have been
manipulated, demonstrate that benchmarks can be subject to conflicts of interest.
The aim is to enhance the robustness and reliability of benchmarks, thereby strengthening confidence in financial markets and ensuring a high
level of consumer and investor protection.
Scope: the Regulation applies to the provision of benchmarks, the contribution of input data to a benchmark and the use of a benchmark within
the Union. It does not apply to a central bank, or in certain circumstances to a public authority nor a central counterparty.
Governance of and control by administrators: the Regulation aims to improve governance and controls over the benchmark process, in
particular to ensure that administrators:
·

put in place adequate policies and procedures and efficient organisational measures to identify and to prevent or manage conflicts of
interest. These policies and procedures will be regularly reviewed and brought up to date;

·

publish or disclose all existing or potential conflicts of interest to users of a benchmark, to the relevant competent authority and,
where relevant, to contributors;

·

ensure that their staff who are directly involved in the provision of a benchmark have the necessary skills, knowledge and experience
for the duties assigned to them and are subject to effective management and supervision;

·

maintain a permanent and effective oversight function to ensure oversight of all aspects of the provision of their benchmarks.

The administrator must also:
·

have in place a control framework covering, particularly, management of operational risk and contingency procedures that are in
place in the event of a disruption to the process of the provision of the benchmark;

·

ensure record-keeping, including inter alia, all input data, and telephone conversations or electronic communications between any
person employed by the administrator and contributors in respect of a benchmark. These shall be kept for at least five years (three
years for telephone conversations or electronic communication);

·

have in place and publish procedures for receiving complaints made;

·

ensure that certain conditions are fulfilled when outsourcing takes place;

·

publish the key elements of the methodology that the administrator uses for each benchmark provided and published.

The European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) will coordinate the supervision of administrators of benchmarks by the competent
authority of the country in which they are located.
In the case of critical benchmarks, colleges, comprising competent authorities and ESMA, will be formed and take key decisions.
Authorisation: administrators of benchmarks will have to apply for authorisation and will be subject to supervision by the competent authority of
the country in which they are located. If an administrator does not comply with the provisions of the regulation, the competent authority may
withdraw or suspend its authorisation.
Input data: this is the data in respect of the value of one or more underlying assets, or prices, including estimated prices, quotes, committed
quotes or other values, used by an administrator to determine a benchmark. Such data shall be sufficient to represent accurately and reliably
the market or economic reality that the benchmark is intended to measure. It must be verifiable.
The Regulation states that the input data shall be transaction data, if available and appropriate. If transaction data is not sufficient, other input
data may be used.
Administrators controls in respect of input data must include a process for evaluating a contributor's input data and for stopping the contributor
from providing further input data, or applying other penalties for non-compliance against the contributor, where appropriate.
Code of conduct: where a benchmark was based on input data from contributors, the administrator should draw up, a code of conduct for each
benchmark clearly specifying the contributors responsibilities with respect to the contribution of input data. The administrator should be
satisfied that contributors adhere to the code of conduct.
Classification of benchmarks: benchmarks must satisfy adequate requirements regarding their scale and nature, and also the minimum
requirements corresponding to the principles published by the International Organisation of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) and accepted at
international level.
The Regulation puts in place three separate regimes:
·

a regime applicable to critical benchmarks (used as a reference for financial instruments or financial contracts or for the
determination of the performance of investment funds having a total value of at least EUR 500 billion);

·

a regime for significant benchmarks (used as a reference for financial instruments or financial contracts or for the determination of
the performance of investments funds having a total average value of at least EUR 50 billion);

·

a regime applicable to non-significant benchmarks (which do not fulfil the conditions set for becoming significant benchmarks).
These benchmarks are subject to a light regulatory regime.

Specific regimes will be applicable for commodity benchmarks, interest rate benchmarks, and regulated data benchmarks.
Commodity benchmarks of more than EUR 100 million are subject to the principles for oil price reporting agencies (PRA) issued by the IOSCO
on 5 October 2012.
Third country regime: benchmarks provided by non-EU countries will be used by supervised entities in the EU through recognition of
administrators located in a third country or endorsement of administrators located in a third country regimes, based on compliance with the
IOSCO principles.
Penalties: Member States shall adopt rules on administrative sanctions and other administrative measures, including pecuniary sanctions,
applicable to infringements of the provisions of the Regulation and ensure that they are implemented. Those administrative sanctions and
other administrative measures shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 30.6.2016.
APPLICATION: from 1.1.2018.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission may adopt delegated acts in order to specify further technical elements of the Regulation. The power to
adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission for an indeterminate period from 30 June 2013. Parliament or Council may raise
objections to a delegated act within three months of the date of notification (which may be extended by three months). If Parliament or Council
raise objections, the delegated act may not enter into force.

