Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2148(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Future of EU-ASEAN relations

Subject
6.20.05 Multilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.40.08 Relations with Asian countries

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

Verts/ALE BÜTIKOFER
Reinhard

16/01/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE JEGGLE Elisabeth
S&D LEICHTFRIED Jörg
ALDE NICOLAI Norica
ECR DE MARTINI Susy
GUE/NGL SCHOLZ Helmut
Committee for opinion
DEVE

INTA

Development

International Trade

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

S&D CORTÉS LASTRA
Ricardo

22/04/2013

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Key events
12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

21/11/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

05/12/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

15/01/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

15/01/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/01/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0441/2013

Summary

T7-0022/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2148(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/7/13296

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE516.612

11/07/2013

EP

PE514.618

30/08/2013

EP

PE516.611

11/09/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0441/2013

05/12/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0022/2014

15/01/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)320

26/05/2014

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

DEVE

2013/2148(INI) - 05/12/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Reinhard BÜTIKOFER (Greens/EFA, DE) on the future of EU-ASEAN
relations.
Members considered that ASEAN is at present one of the most important emerging regional organisations in the world, in terms of both
economic development and geopolitical dynamics. The ASEAN Economic Community aims to create an internal market for 600 million people
by 2015 which would allow it to rise to the level of its economic competitors (the EU, the United States, China, Japan and India).
For an economic integration respecting social norms: Members encouraged ASEAN to continue its political and economic integration path and
to pursue the liberalisation of its internal labour market.
They underlined the great economic potential of the ASEAN region and encouraged the ASEAN states and national and foreign enterprises
operating in ASEAN countries to act in accordance with the principles of corporate social responsibility, to actively respect ILO core labour
standards. They considered that in particular that the ASEAN countries should advance towards a new phase of inclusive economic and social
development, with particular emphasis on promoting their peoples human, social, labour and economic rights.
Towards a common EU approach to the ASEAN region: Members emphasised that the EU and ASEAN have shared values as well as
common political and economic interests, and that, in recognition of the importance of this relationship, the EEAS is actively considering the
appointment of an EU Head of Delegation for relations with the ASEAN countries. They believed that the EU and its Member States should
work on a common and coherent approach for the ASEAN region, supporting and complementing each other and, thus, enabling the EU to
develop a stronger economic and political presence in the region.
Members warmly welcomed the negotiation of seven Partnership and Cooperation Agreements between the EU and seven individual ASEAN
member states, which will be the cornerstones for deepening mutual relations. They supported the strengthening of the parliamentary
dimension of the relationship with the establishment a formal Euro-ASEAN inter parliamentary assembly. At the same time, they stressed the
need to upgrade and extend the role of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) and the Asia-Europe Parliamentary Partnership (ASEP), as the
existing channels for dialogue between the parties.
Security and geopolitical challenges: Members supported ASEAN in developing its own space within the conflicting economic and security
interests of China, Japan and the United States. They would like the EU to be an active political partner for ASEAN in its pursuit of non-military
solutions to important security and geostrategic challenges by sharing the EUs experience of conflict prevention, resolution and dispute
settlement in managing border and territorial disputes, in order to enhance peace and regional stability. In this regard, Members are concerned
at the recent developments in the South China Sea and called for a peaceful and mutually beneficial solution to the maritime border dispute in
the area.
Cultural and educational dimension of EU-ASEAN relations: Members urged broader coverage of the ASEAN region in state-run media and
education by increasing their presence in the region through cultural institutes or other means. They called for the promotion of a mutual
cultural dialogue and the organisation of a cultural year with a changing topic every year, whereby an EU country could be featured in ASEAN
member states, and vice versa.
Members highlighted the important role of exchange programmes to facilitate the mobility of young people, such as Erasmus, for intercultural
students and research cooperation. They believed that the EU needs to expand university programmes in English to better facilitate access for
Asian students to European universities, while EU researchers should be helped to join research programmes in Asia.
Furthermore, Members proposed that the Union strengthens its relations with the ASEAN countries to improve the rights of minorities, women
and children. They called for the launching of a city-twinning initiative in order to link up regions in Europe and Asia as well as other
inter-regional cooperation initiatives with ASEAN on disaster and crisis prevention and management, sustainable development, food security,
support for small farmers, climate change, renewable energy, tourism and research.
The struggle against poverty and inequality: Members noted that poverty continues to be a problem in the ASEAN countries and that it mainly
affects women, the poorly-skilled, rural areas and minority ethnic or religious groups. They considered that there is still a need for a new EU

strategy to promote development and combat inequality in these countries, including by providing access to financing via microcredits. Such a
strategy should be based in the principles of policy coherence for development, long-term aid effectiveness, priority for basic social needs and
the participation of national and local stakeholders as well as development NGOs in the region.
Members also called for enhanced cooperation and mutual rapprochement on human rights issues such as freedom of expression and of the
media, freedom of assembly and association. They suggested that mechanisms for dispute settlement and sanctions in case of human rights
violations should be developed, along the same lines as those existing in other regions.
They urged the Commission to carry on helping ASEAN countries to continue to reduce disparities between countries and to accompany them
along the path of political, economic and institutional integration at regional level, paying special attention to Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar.
Protection of biodiversity and over-exploited areas: Members expressed concern regarding environmental policy, in particular over the rate of
illegal logging, burning and resulting smog that has a significant negative impact also across ASEAN borders. They particularly regretted the
fact that the EU biofuel policy contributes to the rapid expansion of oil palm production, leading to dispossession and/or adverse incorporation
of the rural poor into oil palm plantation. They deemed it therefore essential to support, within the context of development aid, the right to land
resources of poor people in developing countries. They also encouraged stronger efforts for the protection of the environment and biodiversity.
Other sectoral questions: Members raised many other questions, such as the question of migratory flows within the ASEAN countries or the
situation of ethnic minorities such as the Rohingyas. In this regard, they urged the Burmese Government and its neighbours to make every
possible effort to improve their living conditions and rights as citizens.
Finally the Members called for:
strengthening the dialogue between European and Asian companies and public-private cooperation on financial, investment,
economic and trade issues with the view to improving access to the Asian markets;
respect for social standards by the countries concerned so that they can benefit from the GSP and GSP +;
strengthening of the peace process and the democratic reforms in Myanmar/Burma;
the ratification by ASEAN member states of statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and the UN Convention Against
Corruption.

2013/2148(INI) - 15/01/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on the future of EU-ASEAN relations.
Parliament recalled that ASEAN is at present one of the most important emerging regional organisations in the world, in terms of both
economic development and geopolitical dynamics. The ASEAN Economic Community aims to create an internal market for 600 million people
by 2015 which would allow it to rise to the level of its economic competitors (the EU, the United States, China, Japan and India).
For an economic integration respecting social norms: Parliament encouraged ASEAN to continue its political and economic integration path
and to pursue the liberalisation of its internal labour market. It underlined the great economic potential of the ASEAN region and encouraged
the ASEAN states and national and foreign enterprises operating in ASEAN countries to act in accordance with the principles of corporate
social responsibility, to actively respect ILO core labour standards. It considered that in particular that the ASEAN countries should advance
towards a new phase of inclusive economic and social development, with particular emphasis on promoting their peoples human, social,
labour and economic rights.
Towards a common EU approach to the ASEAN region: Parliament emphasised that the EU and ASEAN have shared values as well as
common political and economic interests, and that, in recognition of the importance of this relationship, the EEAS is actively considering the
appointment of an EU Head of Delegation for relations with the ASEAN countries. It believed that the EU and its Member States should work
on a common and coherent approach for the ASEAN region, supporting and complementing each other and, thus, enabling the EU to develop
a stronger economic and political presence in the region.
Members warmly welcomed the negotiation of seven Partnership and Cooperation Agreements between the EU and seven individual ASEAN
member states, which will be the cornerstones for deepening mutual relations. They supported the strengthening of the parliamentary
dimension of the relationship with the establishment a formal Euro-ASEAN inter parliamentary assembly. At the same time, they stressed the
need to upgrade and extend the role of the Asia-Europe Meeting (ASEM) and the Asia-Europe Parliamentary Partnership (ASEP), as the
existing channels for dialogue between the parties.
Geopolitical dimension and relations with China: Parliament would like the EU to be an active political partner for ASEAN in its pursuit of
non-military solutions to important security and geostrategic challenges by sharing the EUs experience of conflict prevention, resolution and
dispute settlement in managing border and territorial disputes, in order to enhance peace and regional stability. It recalled that China has been
increasing its economic ties with Southeast Asian countries and that some ASEAN member states have strengthened cooperation with the US
on maritime security. ASEAN countries continue to play an important role in preserving peace and stability in the region and the EU and
ASEAN share a common concern about the unresolved territorial disputes in the South China Sea and have significant interest in maintaining
peace, stability, respect for international law and, especially, the UN Charter and the 1982 United Nations Law of the Sea. Parliament supports
the Six-Point Principles on the South China Sea of July 2012 and the Guidelines for the Implementation of the Declaration on the Conduct of
Parties in the South China Sea of 2011, encouraging a settlement through peaceful means. It called for a peaceful and mutually beneficial
solution to the maritime border dispute in the area to be found. It urged the Union to help alleviate geopolitical regional tensions by means of a
close relationship with ASEAN, which will mean stepping up conflict resolution mechanisms.
It also noted the efforts made on counter-piracy measures by ASEAN states and welcomes the positive reports so far.
Cultural and educational dimension of EU-ASEAN relations: Parliament urged broader coverage of the ASEAN region in state-run media and
education by increasing their presence in the region through cultural institutes or other means. It called for the promotion of a mutual cultural
dialogue and the organisation of a cultural year with a changing topic every year, whereby an EU country could be featured in ASEAN member
states, and vice versa.
Members highlighted the important role of exchange programmes to facilitate the mobility of young people, such as Erasmus, for intercultural
students and research cooperation. They believed that the EU needs to expand university programmes in English to better facilitate access for

Asian students to European universities, while EU researchers should be helped to join research programmes in Asia.
Furthermore, Parliament proposed that the Union strengthens its relations with the ASEAN countries to improve the rights of minorities,
women and children. It called for the launching of a city-twinning initiative in order to link up regions in Europe and Asia as well as other
inter-regional cooperation initiatives with ASEAN on disaster and crisis prevention and management, sustainable development, food security,
support for small farmers, climate change, renewable energy, tourism and research.
The struggle against poverty and inequality: Members noted that poverty continues to be a problem in the ASEAN countries and that it mainly
affects women, the poorly-skilled, rural areas and minority ethnic or religious groups. They considered that there is still a need for a new EU
strategy to promote development and combat inequality in these countries, including by providing access to financing via microcredits. Such a
strategy should be based in the principles of policy coherence for development, long-term aid effectiveness, priority for basic social needs and
the participation of national and local stakeholders as well as development NGOs in the region.
Parliament also called for enhanced cooperation and mutual rapprochement on human rights issues such as freedom of expression and of the
media, freedom of assembly and association. It suggested that mechanisms for dispute settlement and sanctions in case of human rights
violations should be developed, along the same lines as those existing in other regions. It urged the Commission to carry on helping ASEAN
countries to continue to reduce disparities between countries and to accompany them along the path of political, economic and institutional
integration at regional level, paying special attention to Cambodia, Laos and Myanmar.
Protection of biodiversity and over-exploited areas: Parliament expressed concern regarding environmental policy, in particular over the rate of
illegal logging, burning and resulting smog that has a significant negative impact also across ASEAN borders. It particularly regretted the fact
that the EU biofuel policy contributes to the rapid expansion of oil palm production, leading to dispossession and/or adverse incorporation of
the rural poor into oil palm plantation. It deemed it therefore essential to support, within the context of development aid, the right to land
resources of poor people in developing countries. It also encouraged stronger efforts for the protection of the environment and biodiversity.
Other sectoral questions: Members raised many other questions, such as the question of migratory flows within the ASEAN countries or the
situation of ethnic minorities such as the Rohingyas. In this regard, they urged the Burmese Government and its neighbours to make every
possible effort to improve their living conditions and rights as citizens.
Lastly, Parliament called for:
strengthening the dialogue between European and Asian companies and public-private cooperation on financial, investment,
economic and trade issues with the view to improving access to the Asian markets;
respect for social standards by the countries concerned so that they can benefit from the GSP and GSP +;
strengthening of the peace process and the democratic reforms in Myanmar/Burma;
the ratification by ASEAN member states of statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC) and the UN Convention Against
Corruption.

