Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2168(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Pakistan's regional role and political relations with the EU

Subject
6.40.08 Relations with Asian countries
Geographical area
Pakistan

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D ZALA Boris

17/06/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE GAHLER Michael
ALDE
NEYTS-UYTTEBROECK
Annemie
ECR TANNOCK Charles
Committee for opinion
DEVE

Development

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

ECR ZAHRADIL Jan

09/10/2013

Key events
12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

11/02/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

17/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

12/03/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

12/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/03/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0117/2014

Summary

T7-0208/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2168(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/7/13700

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE524.635

03/12/2013

EP

PE521.550

04/12/2013

EP

PE526.271

09/01/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0117/2014

17/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0208/2014

12/03/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)457

11/08/2014

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

DEVE

2013/2168(INI) - 17/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Boris ZALA (S&D, SK) on Pakistans regional role and political relations
with the EU.
Members noted that Pakistans strategic role in the region, its relationship to its neighbours and EU-Pakistan relations are of major and growing
importance to the EU.
Although parliamentary elections in March 2013 marked the first transfer of power from one elected civilian government to another in the
modern history of Pakistan, the countrys political and economic progress is hampered by pervasive internal and regional security problems
(extremism, sectarian strife, suicide and targeted killings).
Members highlighted that Pakistan is one of the largest recipients of EU development and humanitarian assistance and the EU is Pakistans
largest export market. The EU and Pakistan have recently chosen to deepen and broaden their bilateral ties, as exemplified by the 2012
EU-Pakistan five-year engagement plan and the first EU-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue. Moreover, as from 1 January 2014, Pakistan is now
integrated into the EUs special generalised scheme of trade preferences (GSP+).
The report stated that building a sustainable democracy and a pluralistic society as well as achieving greater social justice, eradicating deep
poverty and malnutrition in parts of the country, raising the basic education level and preparing the country for the effects of climate change
will entail deep and difficult reforms of Pakistans political and socio-economic order, which remains characterised by feudalistic structures of
land ownership and political allegiances and imbalances in priorities between military spending on the one hand and welfare provision,
education and economic development on the other, and a dysfunctional revenue collection system that systematically undercuts the states
capacity to deliver public goods.
Members considered that that elected civilian governments, endowed with democratic legitimacy, devolution of power to the provinces and
effective local government are the best means of containing the tide of violence and extremism, restoring state authority in the Federally
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), and ensuring Pakistans sovereignty and territorial integrity.
As regards drone attacks, the report noted that the Pakistani Government has clearly expressed its opposition to US drone strikes on its
territory. It welcomed the UN General Assembly resolution which calls for further clarification of the legal framework applicable for the use of
armed drones.
Members, on the other hand, are concerned by reports that Pakistan is considering exporting nuclear weapons to third countries. They called
on Pakistan, as a nuclear weapon state, to legally ban exports of all nuclear weapons-related material or know-how and to actively contribute
to international non-proliferation efforts.
The report stressed that EU-Pakistan relations need to grow deeper and more comprehensive by developing political dialogue, thereby
maintaining a relationship of mutual interest amongst equal partners. Members considered that Pakistans democratic transition has
engendered an opportunity for the EU to follow a more explicitly political approach in bilateral relations and provision of assistance.
The EEAS and the Commission are urged to pursue a nuanced and multi-dimensional policy towards Pakistan that synergises all the relevant
instruments at the EUs disposal, such as political dialogue, security cooperation, trade and assistance, in line with the EUs comprehensive
approach to external action and with a view to preparations for the next EU-Pakistan summit. They should also ensure that EU policy towards
Pakistan is contextualised and embedded in a broader strategy for the region, thereby reinforcing EU interests across South and Central Asia.
Members remained deeply concerned about the quality of education and, in a related manner, the alarming situation of women in many parts
of Pakistan. They called for concrete and visible measures to enforce womens fundamental rights in the society, including the enactment of
legislation against domestic violence, steps to improve the investigation and prosecution of honour killings and acid attacks, and a revision of
the legislation that facilitates impunity; points to the need to ensure better access to education, better integration of women in the labour
market and better maternal healthcare.
Lastly, they also reiterated their concern that Pakistans blasphemy laws which can carry the death sentence and are often used to justify
censorship, criminalisation, persecution and, in certain cases, the murder of members of political and religious minorities are open to a misuse
that affects people of all faiths in Pakistan. The Pakistani government should implement a moratorium on the use of these laws. Pakistan
should also intensify its efforts to preserve freedom of religion and belief, including by moving towards abolition of the death penalty.

2013/2168(INI) - 12/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

The European Parliament adopted by 457 votes to 26 with 65 abstentions, a resolution on Pakistans regional role and political relations with
the EU.
Parliament noted that Pakistans strategic role in the region, its relationship to its neighbours and EU-Pakistan relations were of major and
growing importance to the EU.
Although parliamentary elections in March 2013 marked the first transfer of power from one elected civilian government to another in the
modern history of Pakistan, the countrys political and economic progress was hampered by pervasive internal and regional security problems
(extremism, sectarian strife, suicide and targeted killings).
Parliament recalled that that Pakistan was one of the largest recipients of EU development and humanitarian assistance and the EU was
Pakistans largest export market. The EU and Pakistan had recently chosen to deepen and broaden their bilateral ties, as exemplified by the
2012 EU-Pakistan five-year engagement plan and the first EU-Pakistan Strategic Dialogue. Moreover, as from 1 January 2014, Pakistan was
integrated into the EUs special generalised scheme of trade preferences (GSP+).
Governance: Parliament stated that building a sustainable democracy and a pluralistic society as well as achieving greater social justice,
eradicating deep poverty and malnutrition in parts of the country, raising the basic education level and preparing the country for the effects of
climate change would entail deep and difficult reforms of Pakistans political and socio-economic order. The latter remained characterised by:
·

feudalistic structures of land ownership and political allegiances;

·

imbalances in priorities between military spending on the one hand and welfare provision, education and economic development on
the other;

·

a dysfunctional revenue collection system that systematically undercut the states capacity to deliver public goods.

Parliament considered that that elected civilian governments, endowed with democratic legitimacy, devolution of power to the provinces and
effective local government were the best means of containing the tide of violence and extremism, restoring state authority in the Federally
Administered Tribal Areas (FATA), and ensuring Pakistans sovereignty and territorial integrity.
Governance: Parliament reiterated that good governance, accountable and inclusive institutions, separation of powers and respect for
fundamental rights were important elements to address the nexus of development and security in Pakistan.
Security issues: Parliament called on the Pakistani Government to fulfil its security obligations and responsibilities by further engaging in the
fight against extremism, terrorism and radicalisation, with the implementation of strict and uncompromising security measures and law
enforcement, as well as by addressing inequality and socio-economic issues likely to fuel the radicalisation of Pakistani youth.
As regards drone attacks, Parliament noted that the Pakistani Government had clearly expressed its opposition to US drone strikes on its
territory. It welcomed the UN General Assembly resolution which called for further clarification of the legal framework applicable for the use of
armed drones.
On the other hand, Parliament was concerned by reports that Pakistan were considering exporting nuclear weapons to third countries. It called
on Pakistan, as a nuclear weapon state, to legally ban exports of all nuclear weapons-related material or know-how and to actively contribute
to international non-proliferation efforts.
It considered that the signing and ratification of the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) by Pakistan as well as India would demonstrate a strong
commitment to peaceful regional co-existence and enormously contribute to the security of the whole region.
Pakistan-EU relations: Parliament stressed that EU-Pakistan relations needed to grow deeper and more comprehensive by developing political
dialogue, thereby maintaining a relationship of mutual interest amongst equal partners. Members considered that Pakistans democratic
transition had engendered an opportunity for the EU to follow a more explicitly political approach in bilateral relations and provision of
assistance. EU support to Pakistan should prioritise the consolidation of democratic institutions at all levels.
The EEAS and the Commission were urged to pursue a nuanced and multi-dimensional policy towards Pakistan that synergised all the
relevant instruments at the EUs disposal, such as political dialogue, security cooperation, trade and assistance, in line with the EUs
comprehensive approach to external action and with a view to preparations for the next EU-Pakistan summit. They should also ensure that EU
policy towards Pakistan was contextualised and embedded in a broader strategy for the region, thereby reinforcing EU interests across South
and Central Asia.
Discrimination against women: Parliament remained deeply concerned about the quality of education and, in a related manner, the alarming
situation of women in many parts of Pakistan. They called for concrete and visible measures to enforce womens fundamental rights in the
society, including the enactment of legislation against domestic violence, steps to improve the investigation and prosecution of honour killings
and acid attacks, and a revision of the legislation that facilitates impunity. Parliament pointed to the need to ensure better access to education,
better integration of women in the labour market and better maternal healthcare.
Parliament also reiterated concern that Pakistans blasphemy laws which could carry the death sentence and are often used to justify
censorship, criminalisation, persecution and, in certain cases, the murder of members of political and religious minorities were open to a
misuse that affects people of all faiths in Pakistan. The Pakistani government should implement a moratorium on the use of these laws.
Pakistan should also intensify its efforts to preserve freedom of religion and belief, including by moving towards abolition of the death penalty.
Lastly, the resolution condemned all attacks on Christians and other religious minorities living in Pakistan.

