Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2038(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Implementation and impact of the energy efficiency measures under the
cohesion policy

Subject
3.60.08 Energy efficiency
4.70.02 Cohesion policy, Cohesion Fund (CF)

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
REGI

Regional Development

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D KLEVA KEKUŠ Mojca

18/12/2012

Shadow rapporteur
ALDE THEURER Michael
Verts/ALE DELLI Karima
Verts/ALE SCHROEDTER
Elisabeth
ECR VLASÁK Oldřich
Committee for opinion
ITRE

European Commission

Industry, Research and Energy

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

GUE/NGL RANSDORF
Miloslav

18/03/2013

Commission DG

Commissioner

Regional and Urban Policy

HAHN Johannes

Key events
14/03/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

10/07/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

18/07/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

09/09/2013

Debate in Parliament

10/09/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

10/09/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

10/09/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0271/2013

Summary

T7-0345/2013

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2038(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Implementation

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

REGI/7/12124

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE510.707

08/05/2013

EP

PE508.006

04/06/2013

EP

PE513.322

12/06/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0271/2013

18/07/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0345/2013

10/09/2013

EP

Summary

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

ITRE

2013/2038(INI) - 18/07/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Regional Development adopted the own-initiative report by Mojca KLEVA KEKU (S&D, SI) on the implementation and
impact of the energy efficiency (EE) measures under Cohesion Policy.
The report supports the EUs commitment to achieve the objective of increasing EE by 20 % by 2020 and asks the Member States to pave the
way for further savings beyond this date.
The experience of the current funding period shows that the funds set aside for energy efficiency from the European Structural and Investment
Funds cannot be fully exploited. The report stresses, therefore, that in the financial framework for 2014-2020 in which the share of funding set
aside for energy efficiency is greater than before care must be taken to facilitate access by local and regional authorities to these funds.
Members note that European Structural and Investment Funds could help provide incentives for private investment in energy-efficient
products, transport modes, buildings, industry, works and services.
The report stresses that the Member States should see the use of European Structural and Investment Funds for EE as an investment
opportunity with a high leverage effect and not as an expenditure. It calls on the Commission to revise the rules on State Aids further in order
to allow greater national funding for EE alongside European investments.
(1) Importance of the buildings sector: Members welcome the new opportunities offered by, and the more important role in realising the EE
objectives given to, the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund in the programming period 2014-2020. They support in particular the future role of
Cohesion Policy funding in the entire building sector, including housing.
The report points out that in 2010 the energy consumption in buildings constituted the largest share of the total final energy consumption in the
EU 40%, of which households accounted for 26.7% and that this consumption accounted for 36 % of the Unions CO2 emissions.
The Commission is called upon to find ways to encourage efforts to ensure that the greatest energy saving potential does not remain untapped
by delivering proposals for clear objectives as regards to the energy consumption of buildings in Member States.
The Member States are urged to: (i) introduce, within their operational programmes, simple and non-bureaucratic procedures for the use of
funding earmarked for the improvement of household energy efficiency; (ii) ensure that decentralisation arrangements give municipal
authorities direct access to funding for household energy efficiency; (iii) maximise the use of national and regional programmes to ensure that
a high degree of EE is designed into new buildings.
(2) Raising awareness and information dissemination: the report highlights that the lack of detailed information regarding the characteristics of
the building stock at the regional level presents a major barrier for national and regional authorities when formulating strategies and plans.
The Commission is called upon to improve the quality and the dissemination of practical information on EE issues available to local and
regional authorities. It encourages the Managing Authorities, in the programming period 2014-2020, to promote integrated projects by adopting
a holistic approach to EE on a territorial level.
(3) Capacity building and technical assistance: the report invites the Member States to increase capacity building, using technical assistance
budgets, in order to strengthen the effective participation of local, regional and civil society actors in the design of regional and local energy
strategies. It encourages Member States to continue to use funds to provide technical assistance at all levels. The report encourages further
administrative support to local and regional authorities in order to assist them create groupings of small and medium-sized energy efficiency
projects.
(4) Role of financial instruments: the report stresses that a combination of grants and Financial Instruments (FI) can serve as a successful and
innovative approach to leverage private funding, create new models of private-public partnerships and enhance innovation.
The Commission is invited to: (i) present without delay proposals for off-the-shelf FI to be available in support of EE measures; (ii) improve
further the targeted financial support of the European Investment Bank (EIB), the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD), the Council of Europe Development Bank (CEB) and the European Energy Efficiency Fund (EEEF) for EE projects.
Member States are called upon to share best practices in the design of national energy efficiency funds , whereby European Structural and
Investment Funds can be used as equity contributions, or similar, and be aligned with additional funding sources from the private sector.

(5) Climate realities: the report highlights the importance of regularly assessing whether EE measures and requirements are still adequate
given climate realities and calls on the Commission to consider this carefully when preparing a set of performance indicators.
Members call on the Member States to set demanding targets for ensuring that public buildings, and buildings serving other purposes, meet
the highest EE standards provided by in Directive 2010/31/EU, and to make them subject to energy certification on a regular basis.
Lastly, the report stresses the need to take account as well of the specific geographical characteristics of the outermost regions (OR) with
regard to EE.

2013/2038(INI) - 10/09/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 622 votes to 26, with 60 abstentions, a resolution on the implementation and impact of the energy
efficiency (EE) measures under Cohesion Policy.
Members note that European Structural and Investment Funds could help provide incentives for private investment in energy-efficient
products, transport modes, buildings, industry, works and services.
The resolution stresses that the European Structural and Investment Funds could help provide incentives for private investment in
energy-efficient products. In the financial framework for 2014-2020 in which the share of funding set aside for energy efficiency is greater than
before care must be taken to facilitate access by local and regional authorities to these funds.
The Member States should see the use of European Structural and Investment Funds for EE as an investment opportunity with a high
leverage effect and not as an expenditure. In this respect, the Commission is called upon to revise the rules on State Aids further in order to
allow greater national funding for EE alongside European investments.
(1) Importance of the buildings sector: Members welcome the new opportunities offered by, and the more important role in realising the EE
objectives given to, the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund in the programming period 2014-2020. They support in particular the future role of
Cohesion Policy funding in the entire building sector, including housing.
The resolution points out that in 2010 the energy consumption in buildings constituted the largest share of the total final energy consumption in
the EU 40%, of which households accounted for 26.7% and that this consumption accounted for 36 % of the Unions CO2 emissions.
The Commission is called upon to find ways to encourage efforts to ensure that the greatest energy saving potential does not remain untapped
by delivering proposals for clear objectives as regards to the energy consumption of buildings in Member States.
The Member States are urged to:
introduce, within their operational programmes, simple and non-bureaucratic procedures for the use of funding earmarked for the
improvement of household energy efficiency;
ensure that decentralisation arrangements give municipal authorities direct access to funding for household energy efficiency;
maximise the use of national and regional programmes to ensure that a high degree of EE is designed into new buildings.
(2) Raising awareness and information dissemination: the lack of detailed information regarding the characteristics of the building stock at the
regional level presents a major barrier for national and regional authorities when formulating strategies and plans.
The Commission is called upon to improve the quality and the dissemination of practical information on EE issues available to local and
regional authorities. It encourages the Managing Authorities, in the programming period 2014-2020, to promote integrated projects by adopting
a holistic approach to EE on a territorial level.
(3) Capacity building and technical assistance: the resolution invites the Member States to increase capacity building, using technical
assistance budgets, in order to strengthen the effective participation of local, regional and civil society actors in the design of regional and local
energy strategies. It encourages Member States to continue to use funds to provide technical assistance at all levels. Parliament encourages
further administrative support to local and regional authorities in order to assist them create groupings of small and medium-sized energy
efficiency projects.
(4) Role of financial instruments: the resolution stresses that a combination of grants and Financial Instruments (FI) can serve as a successful
and innovative approach to leverage private funding, create new models of private-public partnerships and enhance innovation.
The Commission is invited to: (i) present without delay proposals for off-the-shelf FI to be available in support of EE measures; (ii) improve
further the targeted financial support of the European Investment Bank (EIB), the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
(EBRD), the Council of Europe Development Bank (CEB) and the European Energy Efficiency Fund (EEEF) for EE projects.
Member States are called upon to share best practices in the design of national energy efficiency funds , whereby European Structural and
Investment Funds can be used as equity contributions, or similar, and be aligned with additional funding sources from the private sector.
(5) Climate realities: Parliament highlights the importance of regularly assessing whether EE measures and requirements are still adequate
given climate realities and calls on the Commission to consider this carefully when preparing a set of performance indicators.
Members call on the Member States to set demanding targets for ensuring that public buildings, and buildings serving other purposes, meet
the highest EE standards provided by in Directive 2010/31/EU, and to make them subject to energy certification on a regular basis.
Lastly, the resolution stresses the need to take account as well of the specific geographical characteristics of the outermost regions (OR) with
regard to EE.

