Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2114(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Private copying levies

Subject
3.30.25 International information networks and society, internet
3.50.15 Intellectual property, copyright

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Legal Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D CASTEX Françoise

18/12/2012

Shadow rapporteur
ALDE WIKSTRÖM Cecilia
Committee for opinion
ITRE

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

Industry, Research and Energy

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

BARNIER Michel

Key events
13/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

11/02/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

17/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

27/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

27/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

27/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/02/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0114/2014

Summary

T7-0179/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2114(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/7/12936

Documentation gateway
For information

COM(2012)0789

18/12/2012

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE519.560

09/10/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE521.789

21/10/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0114/2014

17/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0179/2014

27/02/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)447

22/07/2014

2013/2114(INI) - 18/12/2012 For information
The Commission presents a communication on content in the Digital Single Market.
In 2010, in its Digital Agenda for Europe, the Commission endeavoured to open up access to content as part of its strategy to achieve a
vibrant Digital Single Market and identified a number of actions in the field of copyright. In 2011, in its Intellectual Property Strategy "A Single
Market for Intellectual Property Rights", the Commission recognised the strategic importance of copyright for the development of the Digital
Single Market.
In the Compact for Growth and Jobs in June 2012, the Heads of State or Government underlined, among other measures needed to achieve a
well-functioning Digital Single Market by 2015, the importance of modernising Europe's copyright regime and facilitating licensing, while
ensuring a high level of protection of intellectual property rights and taking into account cultural diversity.
Whilst good progress has been made in delivering the copyright-related actions identified in the Digital Agenda and the Intellectual Property
Strategy, there remains work to be done to ensure an effective single market in the area of copyright .
The Commission will therefore work on two parallel tracks of action.
1. Structured stakeholder dialogue: a structured stakeholder dialogue will be launched by the Commission, with the assigned objective of
delivering by the end of 2013 practical industry-led solutions to these issues, without prejudice to further public policy action, including
legislative reform, as appropriate. Under the name of "Licensing Europe", this process will seek to tap the potential and explore the possible
limits of innovative licensing and technological solutions in making EU copyright law and practice fit for the digital age.
"Licensing Europe" will comprise four parallel work strands, tasked with delivering effective market-led solutions. The process will cover the
following issues:
Cross-border access and the portability of services: the Commission's objective is to foster cross-border on-line access and
"portability" across borders of content. It also concerns cross-border legal access to cloud-stored content and services which should
also be facilitated.
User-generated content and licensing for small-scale users of protected material: the Commission's objective is to foster transparency
and ensure that end-users have greater clarity on legitimate and non-legitimate uses of protected material, and easier access to
legitimate solutions.
Audiovisual sector and cultural heritage institutions: the Commission's objective is to facilitate the deposit and online accessibility of
films in the EU both for commercial purposes and non-commercial cultural and educational uses.
Text and data mining: the Commission's objective is to promote the efficient use of text and data mining (TDM) for scientific research
purposes.
In addition to these areas, during 2012 the issue of private copying levies has been the subject of an industry mediation process,
fostered by the Commission and led by former Commissioner António Vitorino. Mr. Vitorino is expected to deliver a report on this issue
at the beginning of next year, including a number of recommendations.
2. Review of the copyright framework: in parallel the Commission will complete its on-going review of the EU copyright framework, based on
market studies and impact assessment and legal drafting work, with a view to a decision in 2014 whether to table the resulting legislative
reform proposals. The following elements will be addressed:
territoriality in the Internal Market; harmonisation, limitations and exceptions to copyright in the digital age;
fragmentation of the EU copyright market;
how to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of enforcement while underpinning its legitimacy in the wider context of copyright
reform.
Lastly, over the next two years, the Commission will continue to : (i) work for a modern copyright framework that remains fit for purpose and
seeks to foster innovative market practices in order to guarantee effective recognition and remuneration of rights holders; (ii) provide
sustainable incentives for creativity, cultural diversity and innovation; (iii) increase the choice of and open up access to legal offers by end
users; (iv) allow new business models to emerge; (v) more effectively contribute to combating illegal offers and piracy.

2013/2114(INI) - 17/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Françoise CASTEX (S&D, FR) on private copying levies.
Digital private copying has taken on major economic importance as a result of technological progress and the shift to the internet and cloud

computing. Authors claim to protection of their creative work, and their right to equitable remuneration for that work must also exist in the digital
age.
Modernised and harmonised system: the Commission is called upon to present a legislative proposal to review Directive 2001/29/EC on the
harmonisation of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the information society, including a provision on the full harmonisation of
exceptions and limitations, inter alia with regard to private copying. Members emphasised that the current fragmented copyright regime needs
to be reformed in order to facilitate access to, and increase (global) circulation of, cultural and creative content, in such a way as to enable
artists, creators, consumers, businesses and audiences to benefit from digital developments, new distribution channels, new business models
and other opportunities, especially in times of budget austerity.
Members stated that the private copying system is a virtuous system that balances the exception for copying for private use with the right to
fair remuneration for rightholders, and that it is worth preserving, especially in cases where rightholders are not in a position to license directly
the right of reproduction on multiple devices. They considered that there is no alternative to this balanced system in the short term. They
stressed, however, that discussions need to be held in the long term with a view to continually assessing the private copying system in the
light of digital and market developments and consumer behaviour and, if possible, exploring potential alternatives that would fulfil the objective
of striking a balance between the exception for copying by consumers and the compensation of creators.
The report emphasised that the major disparities between national systems for the collection of levies, especially as regards the types of
product subject to the levy and the rates of levy, can distort competition and give rise to forum shopping within the internal market.
The Member States and the Commission are invited to conduct a study on the essential elements of private copying, in particular a common
definition, the concept of fair compensation which at present is not explicitly regulated by Directive 2001/29/EC and the concept of harm to an
author resulting from unauthorised reproduction of a rightholders work for private use. The Commission is called upon to look for common
ground as regards which products should be subject to the levy and to establish common criteria for the negotiating arrangement for the rates
applicable to private copying, with a view to enforcing a system that is transparent, equitable and uniform for consumers and creators.
Single collection procedure, reimbursements and clearer consumer information: the report stressed that the concept of private copies should
be clearly defined for all materials and that the user should be able to access copyright content on all media on the basis of a single payment.
It called for arrangements already in force in Member States, such as exceptions and levy exemptions, to be respected and for it to be possible
for them to apply in parallel on the market. Members stated that private copying levies should be payable by manufacturers or importers. In the
case of cross-border transactions, private copying levies should be collected in the Member State in which the end user having purchased the
product resides. Member States in which levies are currently charged or collected should simplify and harmonise their levy rates. The report
stressed the need to make clear to consumers the role of the private copying system with regard to remuneration of artists and cultural
dissemination. Consumers must be informed of the amount, purpose and use of the levy they pay. In this respect, the Commission and the
Member States are urged, in consultation with manufacturers, importers, retailers and consumer associations, to ensure that this information is
clearly available to consumers.
Member States are urged to adopt transparent exemption rules for professional uses in order to ensure that they are exempt, including in
practice, from private copy levies. The committee called on the Member States to ensure that private copy levies never have to be paid where
the media in question are used for professional purposes, and that various arrangements for the reimbursement of levies paid for professional
users are replaced with systems which guarantee that these users are not liable to pay the levy in the first place.
Transparency regarding allocation of revenue: Member States are urged to ensure greater transparency regarding the allocation of proceeds
from private copying levies. They should earmark at least 25 % of revenue from private copying levies to promote the creative and
performance arts and their production and publish reports on the allocation of proceeds in open source format with interpretable data.
Technical protection measures: Members considered that it is necessary to authorise the deployment of technical protection measures in order
to restore the balance between freedom to make copies for private use and exclusive copying rights. These protection measures should not
prevent consumers from making copies or rightholders from being fairly remunerated for private copying.
Licences: Members noted that, despite some streaming access to works, downloading, storage and private copying continue. They took the
view that a private copying levy system is therefore still relevant in the online environment and that preference should always be given to
licensing models benefiting all rightholders if no copies of the copyright work are permitted on media and devices. Private copying exception
arrangements should apply to certain online services, including certain cloud computing services.

2013/2114(INI) - 27/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 252 votes to 122, with 19 abstentions, a resolution on private copying levies.
Digital private copying has taken on major economic importance as a result of technological progress and the shift to the internet and cloud
computing. Authors claim to protection of their creative work, and their right to equitable remuneration for that work must also exist in the digital
age. The cultural sector provides 5 million jobs in the EU and 2.6% of its GDP and is one of the main drivers of growth in Europe.
Modernised and harmonised system: copyright law should balance the interests of creators and consumers. All European consumers should
have the right to make private copies of legally acquired content.
The resolution emphasised that the current fragmented copyright regime needs to be reformed in order to facilitate access to, and increase
(global) circulation of, cultural and creative content, in such a way as to enable artists, creators, consumers, businesses and audiences to
benefit from digital developments, new distribution channels, new business models and other opportunities, especially in times of budget
austerity.
Parliament stated that the private copying system is a virtuous system that balances the exception for copying for private use with the right to
fair remuneration for rightholders, and that it is worth preserving. It considered that there is no alternative to this balanced system in the short
term. They stressed, however, that discussions need to be held in the long term with a view to continually assessing the private copying
system in the light of digital and market developments and consumer behaviour and, if possible, exploring potential alternatives that would fulfil
the objective of striking a balance between the exception for copying by consumers and the compensation of creators.
The resolution emphasised that the major disparities between national systems for the collection of levies, especially as regards the types of

product subject to the levy and the rates of levy, can distort competition and give rise to forum shopping within the internal market.
The Member States and the Commission are invited to conduct a study on the essential elements of private copying, in particular a common
definition, the concept of fair compensation which at present is not explicitly regulated by Directive 2001/29/EC and the concept of harm to an
author resulting from unauthorised reproduction of a rightholders work for private use. The Commission is called upon to look for common
ground as regards which products should be subject to the levy and to establish common criteria for the negotiating arrangement for the rates
applicable to private copying, with a view to enforcing a system that is transparent, equitable and uniform for consumers and creators.
Single collection procedure, reimbursements and clearer consumer information: Parliament stressed that the concept of private copies should
be clearly defined for all materials and that the user should be able to access copyright content on all media on the basis of a single payment.
It called for arrangements already in force in Member States, such as exceptions and levy exemptions, to be respected and for it to be possible
for them to apply in parallel on the market. Members stated that private copying levies should be payable by manufacturers or importers. In the
case of cross-border transactions, private copying levies should be collected in the Member State in which the end user having purchased the
product resides. Member States in which levies are currently charged or collected should simplify and harmonise their levy rates. The
resolution stressed the need to make clear to consumers the role of the private copying system with regard to remuneration of artists and
cultural dissemination. Consumers must be informed of the amount, purpose and use of the levy they pay. In this respect, the Commission and
the Member States are urged, in consultation with manufacturers, importers, retailers and consumer associations, to ensure that this
information is clearly available to consumers.
Member States are urged to adopt transparent exemption rules for professional uses. Parliament called on the Member States to ensure that
private copy levies never have to be paid where the media in question are used for professional purposes, and that various arrangements for
the reimbursement of levies paid for professional users are replaced with systems which guarantee that these users are not liable to pay the
levy in the first place.
Transparency regarding allocation of revenue: Member States are urged to ensure greater transparency regarding the allocation of proceeds
from private copying levies. They should earmark at least 25 % of revenue from private copying levies to promote the creative and
performance arts and their production and publish reports on the allocation of proceeds in open source format with interpretable data.
Technical protection measures: Parliament considered that it is necessary to authorise the deployment of technical protection measures in
order to restore the balance between freedom to make copies for private use and exclusive copying rights. These protection measures should
not prevent consumers from making copies or rightholders from being fairly remunerated for private copying.
Licences: Members noted that, despite some streaming access to works, downloading, storage and private copying continue. However, They
took the view that a private copying levy system is therefore still relevant in the online environment and that preference should always be given
to licensing models benefiting all rightholders if no copies of the copyright work are permitted on media and devices. Private copying exception
arrangements should apply to certain online services, including certain cloud computing services.

