Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2122(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Misleading advertisement practices

Subject
2.40 Free movement of services, freedom to provide
2.80 Cooperation between administrations
3.30.25 International information networks and society, internet
3.45.02 Small and medium-sized enterprises (SME), craft industries
3.45.05 Business policy, electronic commerce, after-sales service,
commercial distribution
4.60.02 Consumer information, advertising, labelling
7.40.02 Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Rapporteur

Appointed

GUE/NGL DE JONG Dennis

20/02/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE SCHWAB Andreas
S&D PRENDERGAST Phil
ALDE ROCHEFORT Robert
Verts/ALE RÜHLE Heide
ECR BIELAN Adam
EFD SALVINI Matteo
Committee for opinion

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI

Legal Affairs

PPE BALDASSARRE Raffaele 19/06/2013

PETI

Petitions

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Health and Food Safety

BORG Tonio

Key events
27/11/2012

Non-legislative basic document published

12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

26/09/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/09/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

22/10/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

COM(2012)0702

Summary

A7-0311/2013

Summary

22/10/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

22/10/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T7-0436/2013

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2122(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

IMCO/7/12302

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2012)0702

27/11/2012

EC

Committee draft report

PE510.678

08/05/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE514.655

21/06/2013

EP

PE514.684

19/09/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0311/2013

30/09/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0436/2013

22/10/2013

EP

Summary

SP(2014)62

07/03/2014

Committee opinion

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

JURI

Summary

2013/2122(INI) - 27/11/2012 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to provide increased protection for companies against misleading marketing practices by revising the provisions of Directive
2006/114/EC concerning misleading and comparative advertising.
BACKGROUND: advertising has a strong economic impact on companies. It allows traders to present their goods and services and is an
important element for commercial success. It can also enhance competition by providing customers with better information and the possibility
to compare products.
In business relations, customers and competitor firms expect companies to use truthful marketing communication and to act with professional
diligence. Small businesses the mainstay of Europe's economy are particularly vulnerable to misleading marketing practices as they lack the
resources to protect themselves.
A clear and efficient framework safeguarding fair competition and providing effective means to enforce it is required.
The Misleading and Comparative Advertising Directive provides a common minimum level of protection against misleading advertising for
traders across the EU and also regulates comparative advertising.
As more and more advertising moves online, advertising and marketing practices are changing and may affect thousands of businesses
worldwide.
Misleading marketing practices, such as misleading directory companies (traders who send out forms asking businesses to update details in
their directories, seemingly for free, but later this is revealed to be a service which must be paid for), continue to cause considerable harm to
companies, especially SMEs.
The Commission announced its intention to reassess the functioning of existing rules in its review of the Small Business Act. The
Communication therefore gives an overview of how the Directive is currently implemented in the Member States, identifies problems in how it
is applied and outlines plans to revise it in the future.
CONTENT: the Misleading and Comparative Advertising Directive was transposed in Member States through various legislative instruments.
However, there is a great variety of rules going beyond the minimum EU-wide protection against misleading advertising. Some Member States

decided to go beyond the minimum legal standard enshrined in the Directive and extended the level of protection to business-to-business
relations. Other Member States emphasise contractual freedom and the higher degree of diligence expected in transactions between
businesses instead, and do not consider it appropriate that businesses and consumers should be protected to an equal degree.
Consequently, the level of protection for European businesses remains varied leaving businesses uncertain about their rights and obligations
in cross-border situations. Furthermore, Member States currently enforce the Directive on the basis of different national systems, the key
factor being whether public authorities have the power to enforce the Directive effectively.
Most common misleading marketing practices: having examined the application of the Directive, the Commission reached the conclusion that
most of the misleading marketing practices operating cross-border take the following forms:

·

misleading payment forms disguised as an invoice for services that the trader has purportedly already ordered, where in fact he has
not ;

·

offers to extend internet domain names (e.g. extension to other country domains) whereby a trader provides false information and
exercises psychological pressure in order to conclude a contract ;

·

offers to extend protection for trademarks in other countries employed by traders who use misleading advertising and provide
untruthful information about the nature of the service, which may, in fact, only be granted by official bodies ;

·

legal advice through an internet platform based on a marketing scheme where the service offered is purely based on publicly
accessible free legal databases ;

·

misleading marketing concerning advertising on social networks based on a practice involving abusive prices (e.g. very expensive
pay per click), whilst actually this service is offered by the social networks themselves at much lower rates.

In this context, the Commission considers that even though the current Directive provides a fairly solid regulatory framework for a considerable
part of the business-to-business advertising market, the Directive is not effective against certain large-scale misleading schemes which also
affect SMEs, which are particularly vulnerable.
Proposal to revise Directive 2006/114/EC: the scale, persistence and financial detriment resulting from certain, clearly misleading marketing
practices both at cross-border and national level need to be addressed in a more targeted and efficient manner at EU level.
In this context, the Commission considers that:
1)

the definition of advertising in the current Directive is not clear enough to stop current misleading marketing practices and respond to
future developments. Consequently, traders as well as national enforcers find it sometimes difficult to recognise that such practices
are "advertising" within the meaning of the Directive: it is intended, then, to clarify the scope of the Directive by introducing a new
definition of misleading marketing practices;

2)

the test for determining whether a practice is misleading does not give sufficient legal certainty for the purpose of tackling these
clearly misleading schemes, as it is broad, general and open to different interpretations and case-by-case assessment. An additional
specific ban on harmful marketing practices, such as, for example, the fact of concealing the commercial intent of a communication,
in the form of a "black-list" would strengthen legal certainty and the level of protection, without unduly affecting the contractual
freedom in business-to-business relations.

Furthermore, the current Directive does not provide for a cross-border cooperation procedure and therefore, national authorities have no
formal basis to request an enforcement action from their counterparts in other Member States. Moreover, there are no established tools to
share information about marketing practices affecting businesses in Europe. In some Member States national authorities lack enforcement
powers to stop such practices in business-to-business relations, particularly in cross-border cases.
The Commission therefore intends to table a proposal to strengthen the protection of businesses against cross-border misleading marketing
practices. This proposal to amend the Directive will be complemented by a forthcoming initiative addressing unfair trading practices between
businesses in the retail chain.
Apart from revising the definition of advertising and establishing a black list, the revision of the Directive will:

·

clarify the interplay of the Directive with the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive;

·

respond to businesses' needs while at the same time not creating any unnecessary administrative burden;

·

step up enforcement and create an ad-hoc working group of national enforcers with immediate effect;

·

introduce effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalties for infringements of the national provisions adopted in application of the
Directive.

With regard to a cooperation procedure between Member States, the revision of the Directive will:

·

create an enforcement cooperation procedure (enforcement network) grouping national enforcement authorities in charge of the
legislation protecting businesses to cooperate in cases of cross-border misleading marketing practices;
introduce mutual assistance obligations for the Member States entailing the explicit possibility of requesting enforcement measures in
cross-border situations;
introduce provisions that will require Member States to designate an enforcement authority in the area of business-to-business
marketing.

2013/2122(INI) - 30/09/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection unanimously adopted the own-initiative report by Cornelis de JONG
(GUE/NGL, NL) on misleading advertisement practices in response to the Commission communication on the subject.

Members recall that Parliament has repeatedly expressed its concern over the problem of misleading marketing practices, which are often of a
cross-border nature, and has called on the Commission and the Member States to step up their efforts in terms of raising awareness,
strengthening cooperation, enforcement and legislation. For this reason, they welcome the Commission communication, but stresses that an
additional effort is needed, especially with regard to enforcement. They ask the Commission to clarify the scope of Directive 2006/114/EC in
order to allow better protection for businesses against misleading marketing practices.
Prevention and information: the report calls on all Member States to assign a national focal point to which businesses and other victims of
misleading practices can report the latter and can obtain information on judicial and non-judicial means of redress. These focal points should
play an active role in sharing information between public authorities, citizens and businesses, and should work together in order to warn each
other of new misleading practices.
Members also call on national as well as international business organisations, and in particular SME organisations, to work closely together
with the national focal points and welcome public-private cooperation.
They support the Commissions intention to investigate the possibility of introducing, on the basis of validated criteria, an EU-wide blacklist of
misleading marketing practices, and, if practicable, of companies who have been repeatedly convicted for such practices. Such a blacklist
should be coherent with that which already exists under the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive, should be exhaustive, and should include
clear definitions of misleading marketing practices.
In addition, Members call for

·

Europol to play a more active role in tackling these forms of fraud by collecting information regarding cross-border forms of
misleading marketing practices;

·

closer cooperation between national enforcement authorities with providers whose services have been used by perpetrators of
misleading marketing practices, such as banks, telephone companies, postal services and collection agencies, in particular by
stepping up the exchange of information;

·

initiatives on education and information and exchanges of best practice on the dangers.

Enforcement and prosecution: the report emphasises that different levels of protection and public enforcement mechanisms among Member
States are proving to be obstacles to running advertising campaigns across national borders, and that this leads to major legal and operative
uncertainties for businesses. It also notes with concern that the investigative authorities in a number of Member States are extremely unwilling
to take up cases of misleading marketing practices because of the lack of clarity of the existing provisions, and lack of confidence that the
burden of proof can be sufficiently discharged. Members call on the Commission, therefore, to draw up guidelines for national enforcement
bodies on best practices regarding priorities for investigation and prosecution.
Member States, for their part, are asked to boost the capacity of the relevant investigative and judicial authorities.
The report stresses the need to introduce effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalties, recalling that sanctions can have a preventive
effect.
Members call on the Commission to establish a mutual cooperation network between national enforcement bodies to improve the
implementation of the Directive in cross-border cases.
Furthermore, the Commission to examine, as a matter of priority, how any convictions for using serious and repeated misleading marketing
practices could affect the eligibility of the companies concerned for taking part in EU procurement procedures and/or receiving EU funding.
Members call on Member States to ensure that their tax authorities cooperate closely with national focal points by actively inspecting
companies which have been reported to use misleading marketing techniques.
Noting that dispute resolution processes have proven inefficient, lengthy and costly, and that they offer no guarantee of adequate and timely
compensation for the damage caused, Members call for national laws making it possible for the victims of misleading marketing practices to
act collectively in a case against a rogue company.
They ask the Commission to evaluate Parliaments recommendation for a partial extension of the scope of the Unfair Commercial Practices
Directive by having Annex I (the blacklist) cover business-to-business (B2B) contracts.
International cooperation beyond the EU: lastly, Members stress that misleading marketing practices constitute an international problem that
extends beyond individual Member States as well as the EU. They call on the Commission and Member States, therefore, to pursue
international cooperation on the matter, and to step up involvement in the International Mass Marketing Working Group, which consists of law
enforcement, regulatory, and consumer agencies in the US, Australia, Belgium, Canada, the Netherlands, Nigeria, and the UK, and also
includes Europol.

2013/2122(INI) - 22/10/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on misleading advertisement practices in response to the Commission communication on the
subject.
Parliament recalled that it has repeatedly expressed its concern over the problem of misleading marketing practices, which are often of a
cross-border nature, and has called on the Commission and the Member States to step up their efforts in terms of raising awareness,
strengthening cooperation, enforcement and legislation. For this reason, it welcomed the Commission communication, but stressed that an
additional effort was needed, especially with regard to enforcement. It asked the Commission to clarify the scope of Directive 2006/114/EC in
order to allow better protection for businesses against misleading marketing practices.
Prevention and information: Parliament called on all Member States to assign a national focal point to which businesses and other victims of
misleading practices can report the latter and can obtain information on judicial and non-judicial means of redress. These focal points should
play an active role in sharing information between public authorities, citizens and businesses, and should work together in order to warn each
other of new misleading practices.

It also called on national as well as international business organisations, and in particular SME organisations, to work closely together with the
national focal points and welcome public-private cooperation.
Members supported the Commissions intention to investigate the possibility of introducing, on the basis of validated criteria, an EU-wide
blacklist of misleading marketing practices, and, if practicable, of companies who have been repeatedly convicted for such practices. Such a
blacklist should be coherent with that which already exists under the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive, should be exhaustive, and should
include clear definitions of misleading marketing practices.
In addition, Parliament called for:
Europol to play a more active role in tackling these forms of fraud by collecting information regarding cross-border forms of misleading
marketing practices;
closer cooperation between national enforcement authorities with providers whose services have been used by perpetrators of
misleading marketing practices, such as banks, telephone companies, postal services and collection agencies, in particular by
stepping up the exchange of information;
initiatives on education and information and exchanges of best practice on the dangers.
Enforcement and prosecution: Parliament emphasised that different levels of protection and public enforcement mechanisms among Member
States are proving to be obstacles to running advertising campaigns across national borders, and that this leads to major legal and operative
uncertainties for businesses. It also noted with concern that the investigative authorities in a number of Member States are extremely unwilling
to take up cases of misleading marketing practices because of the lack of clarity of the existing provisions, and lack of confidence that the
burden of proof can be sufficiently discharged. Members called on the Commission, therefore, to draw up guidelines for national enforcement
bodies on best practices regarding priorities for investigation and prosecution.
Member States, for their part, are asked to boost the capacity of the relevant investigative and judicial authorities.
Parliament also stressed the need to introduce effective, proportionate and dissuasive penalties, recalling that sanctions can have a preventive
effect. It also called on the Commission to establish a mutual cooperation network between national enforcement bodies to improve the
implementation of the Directive in cross-border cases.
Furthermore, the Commission is also called upon to examine, as a matter of priority, how any convictions for using serious and repeated
misleading marketing practices could affect the eligibility of the companies concerned for taking part in EU procurement procedures and/or
receiving EU funding. Parliament called on Members States to ensure that their tax authorities cooperate closely with national focal points by
actively inspecting companies which have been reported to use misleading marketing techniques.
Noting that dispute resolution processes have proven inefficient, lengthy and costly, and that they offer no guarantee of adequate and timely
compensation for the damage caused, Members called for national laws making it possible for the victims of misleading marketing practices to
act collectively in a case against a rogue company.
In order to avoid abusive litigation, the victims should be represented by a qualified entity, as outlined in the Commission documents.
Parliament asked the Commission to evaluate Parliaments recommendation for a partial extension of the scope of the Unfair Commercial
Practices Directive by having Annex I (the blacklist) cover business-to-business (B2B) contracts, in parallel to the consideration of a possible
review of Directive 2006/114/EC in order to assess whether this would result in a more coherent approach since it would extend the concept of
unfair commercial practices, together with the blacklist, to B2B relations.
International cooperation beyond the EU: lastly, Parliament stressed that misleading marketing practices constitute an international problem
that extends beyond individual Member States as well as the EU. It called on the Commission and Member States, therefore, to pursue
international cooperation on the matter, and to step up involvement in the International Mass Marketing Working Group, which consists of law
enforcement, regulatory, and consumer agencies in the US, Australia, Belgium, Canada, the Netherlands, Nigeria, and the UK, and also
includes Europol.

