Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2048(BUD)

BUD - Budgetary procedure

Procedure completed

Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund: redundancies
in the tobacco industry in Austria

Subject
3.40.12 Luxury products industry, cosmetics
4.15.05 Industrial restructuring, job losses, redundancies, relocations,
Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF)
8.70.60 Previous annual budgets
Geographical area
Austria

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
Budgets

BUDG

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D DAERDEN Frédéric

11/03/2013

Shadow rapporteur
ALDE ALVARO Alexander
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Budget

Appointed

Commissioner
LEWANDOWSKI Janusz

Key events
07/03/2013

Non-legislative basic document published

14/03/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

26/03/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

28/03/2013

Budgetary report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading

16/04/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

16/04/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

22/04/2013

Draft budget approved by Council

22/04/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

12/06/2013

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information

COM(2013)0119

Summary

A7-0134/2013

Summary

T7-0111/2013

Summary

Procedure reference

2013/2048(BUD)

Procedure type

BUD - Budgetary procedure

Procedure subtype

Mobilisation of funds

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

BUDG/7/12165

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2013)0119

07/03/2013

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE506.253

11/03/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE507.966

21/03/2013

EP

Budgetary report tabled for plenary, 1st reading

A7-0134/2013

28/03/2013

EP

Summary

Budgetary text adopted by Parliament

T7-0111/2013

16/04/2013

EP

Summary

Final act
Decision 2013/276
OJ L 160 12.06.2013, p. 0011 Summary

2013/2048(BUD) - 07/03/2013 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) in respect of redundancies in the tobacco industry in Austria.
CONTENT: the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) was established by Council Regulation No 1927/2006 to provide additional
support to redundant workers who suffer from the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to assist them with
their reintegration into the labour market.
The Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline allows for the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment
Fund (EGF) through a flexibility mechanism, within the annual ceiling of EUR 500 million over and above the relevant headings of the financial
framework.
The Commission services have carried out a thorough examination of the application submitted by Austria to mobilise the EGF. The main
elements of the assessment are as follows:
Austria: application EGF/2011/010 AT/Austria Tabak: on 20 December 2011, Austria submitted application EGF/2011/010 AT/Austria Tabak
for a financial contribution from the EGF, following redundancies in Austria Tabak GmbH and in 14 suppliers and downstream producers in
Austria. The application was supplemented by additional information up to 9 October 2012.
In order to establish the link between the redundancies and major structural changes in world trade patterns due to globalisation, Austria
argues that the cigarette and tobacco product manufacturing industry in the EU, has been seriously affected by changes in world trade
patterns, in particular a significant reduction of the EU market share and delocalisation of production to third countries. These changes in trade
patterns reflect the decline in cigarette consumption in the industrialised European countries as well as the USA and Japan over the past
decade (mainly because of tobacco control measures and increasing taxation).
In response to these developments, Japan Tobacco International (JTI), owners of Austria Tabak and other major tobacco companies, has
reduced its production sites and shifted production to the emerging markets. The firm has vigorously promoted the globalisation of its tobacco
business and steadily broadened its business base, currently owning 28 production sites world-wide. JTI reduced the number of marketed
cigarette brands to the most promising ones and adapted the production processes to the new global set-up allowing them to assign
production volumes flexibly to the factories with free capacities.
Austria submitted the application under the intervention criterion of Article 2(c) of Regulation (EC) No 1927/2006. This provision allows
applicants to derogate from the requirements of Articles 2(a) and 2(b) in small labour markets or in exceptional circumstances when
redundancies have a serious impact on employment and the local economy. In this case the applicant must specify which of the main eligibility
requirements its application fails to meet, and thus from which it is seeking a derogation. The Austrian authorities specified that the application
seeks to derogate from Article 2(a), where the normal threshold is at least 500 redundancies over a four-month period.
The application cites a total of 320 redundancies in Austria Tabak GmbH, and 13 further suppliers and downstream producers during the
period from 20 August 2011 to 19 December 2011.
Austria justifies the request for EGF support and the use of the exceptional circumstances criterion by the particular situation of the
cross-border area where the redundancies occurred and the serious impact of the redundancies on the local and regional economies and
labour markets (internal competition with Slovakian workers weakening even more the job market).

After a thorough examination of this application, the Commission has concluded in accordance with Article 10 of Regulation (EC) No
1927/2006 that the conditions for a financial contribution under this Regulation are met.
On the basis of the application from Austria, the proposed contribution from the EGF to the coordinated package of personalised services is
EUR 3 941 999, representing 65% of the total cost.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: not applicable.
FINANCIAL IMPLICATION: considering the maximum possible amount of a financial contribution from the EGF under Article 10(1) of
Regulation (EC) No 1927/2006, as well as the scope for reallocating appropriations, the Commission proposes to mobilise the EGF for the
total amount of EUR 3 941 999, to be allocated under heading 1a of the financial framework.
The proposed amount of financial contribution will leave more than 25% of the maximum annual amount earmarked for the EGF available for
allocations during the last four months of the year.
By presenting this proposal to mobilise the EGF, the Commission initiates the simplified trialogue procedure, as required by Point 28 of the
Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006, with a view to securing the agreement of the two arms of the budgetary authority on the need to
use the EGF and the amount required. The Commission invites the first of the two arms of the budgetary authority that reaches agreement on
the draft mobilisation proposal, at appropriate political level, to inform the other arm and the Commission of its intentions. In case of
disagreement by either of the two arms of the budgetary authority, a formal trialogue meeting will be convened.
The Commission presents separately a transfer request in order to enter in the 2013 budget specific commitment appropriations, as required
in Point 28 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006. Appropriations from the EGF budget line will be used to cover the amount
needed for the present application.

2013/2048(BUD) - 28/03/2013 Budgetary report tabled for plenary, 1st reading
The Committee on Budgets adopted the report by Frédéric DAERDEN (S&D, BE) on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for a total amount of EUR 3 941 999 in commitment and
payment appropriations to assist Austria hit by redundancies in the tobacco industry.
Members recall that the European Union with its European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) has set up a legislative and budgetary
instrument to provide additional support to workers made redundant as a result of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to
assist their reintegration into the labour market. Given that Austria submitted an application for a financial contribution from the EGF, following
320 redundancies in Austria Tabak GmbH and in 14 suppliers and downstream producers with 270 workers targeted for EFG co-funded
measures, during the four-month reference period from 20 August 2011 to 19 December 2011, Members request the institutions involved to
make the necessary efforts to improve procedural and budgetary arrangements in order to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF for the
requested amount. They agree with the Commission that the conditions set out in Article 2(c) of the EGF Regulation are met and that Austria is
therefore entitled to a financial contribution under that Regulation.
The Austria Tabak case: Members emphasise the fact that the closure of Austria Tabak, the then second-largest employer in the Bruck an der
Leitha district, with many small businesses linked to the enterprise, has put the district in a particularly difficult situation. In September 2011,
the number of job vacancies had almost halved (-47%), compared to the same month in the previous year, whereas for Niederösterreich
(NUTS II level) and at national level, this decline was much lower (-4% and -7%, respectively). They recall that at NUTS II level, the Land of
Niederösterreich was also affected by other mass redundancies for which EGF applications were submitted to the Commission in 2009 and
2010.
Members welcome the fact that in order to provide workers with speedy assistance, the Austrian authorities decided to initiate the
implementation of the personalised measures on 15 November 2011, well ahead of the final decision on granting the EGF support for the
proposed coordinated package. They recall the importance of improving the employability of all workers by means of adapted training and the
recognition of skills and competences gained throughout a worker's professional career. They welcome the proposed coordinated package of
personalised services and the detailed descriptions of the measures presented in the Commission proposal. They welcome the fact that the
training on offer is combined with the future economic prospects and the future skills and qualification needs in the region.
Members draw the attention to the subsistence allowance for workers on training and on job search which is said to amount EUR 1 000 per
worker per month which will be combined with training allowance of EUR 200 per worker per month. They recall that the EGF should in the
future be primarily allocated to training and job search as well as occupational orientation programs and its financial contribution to allowances
should always be of additional nature and in parallel to what is available to dismissed workers by virtue of national law or collective
agreements.
Learn lessons from the implementation of the EGF: Members request the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to improve
procedural and budgetary arrangements in order to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF. They hope that further improvements in the
procedure will be integrated in the new Regulation on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (20142020) and that greater efficiency,
transparency and visibility of the EGF will be achieved.
Members reiterate their position as regards the processing of an application of this kind:
the need to ensure a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF,
the fact that assistance from the EGF must not replace actions which are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or
collective agreements nor measures restructuring companies or sectors;
EGF assistance can co-finance only active labour market measures which lead to durable, long-term employment;
the need to obtain information on the coordinated package of personalised services to be funded from the EGF including information
on complementarity with actions funded by the Structural Funds.
Budget appropriations: Members welcome the fact that following requests from Parliament, the 2013 budget shows payment appropriations of
EUR 50 million on the EGF budget line 04 05 01. They recall that the EGF was created as a separate specific instrument with its own
objectives and deadlines and that, therefore, it deserves a dedicated allocation, which will avoid transfers to the extent possible from other

budget lines, as has happened in the past, which could be detrimental to the achievement of the policy objectives of the EGF.
Lastly, Members regret the decision of the Council to block the extension of the "crisis derogation", allowing for the provision of financial
assistance to workers made redundant as a result of the current economic crisis, in addition to those losing their jobs because of changes in
global trade patterns.

2013/2048(BUD) - 16/04/2013 Budgetary text adopted by Parliament
The European Parliament adopted by 557 votes to 83, with 74 abstentions, a resolution approving the proposal for a decision of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for a total amount of EUR 3 941 999 in
commitment and payment appropriations to assist Austria hit by redundancies in the tobacco industry.
Parliament recalls that the European Union with its European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) has set up a legislative and budgetary
instrument to provide additional support to workers made redundant as a result of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to
assist their reintegration into the labour market. Given that Austria submitted an application for a financial contribution from the EGF, following
320 redundancies in Austria Tabak GmbH and in 14 suppliers and downstream producers with 270 workers targeted for EFG co-funded
measures, during the four-month reference period from 20 August 2011 to 19 December 2011, Parliament requests the institutions involved to
make the necessary efforts to improve procedural and budgetary arrangements in order to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF for the
requested amount. It agrees with the Commission that the conditions set out in Article 2(c) of the EGF Regulation are met and that Austria is
therefore entitled to a financial contribution under that Regulation.
The Austria Tabak case: Parliament emphasises the fact that the closure of Austria Tabak, the then second-largest employer in the Bruck an
der Leitha district, with many small businesses linked to the enterprise, has put the district in a particularly difficult situation. In September
2011, the number of job vacancies had almost halved (-47%), compared to the same month in the previous year, whereas for Niederösterreich
(NUTS II level) and at national level, this decline was much lower (-4% and -7%, respectively). It also recalls that at NUTS II level, the Land of
Niederösterreich was also affected by other mass redundancies for which EGF applications were submitted to the Commission in 2009 and
2010.
Parliament welcomes the fact that in order to provide workers with speedy assistance, the Austrian authorities decided to initiate the
implementation of the personalised measures on 15 November 2011, well ahead of the final decision on granting the EGF support for the
proposed coordinated package.
It notes that the coordinated package of personalised services to be co-funded includes measures for the reintegration of 270 workers into
employment such as career advice, job search assistance, job mentoring, various types of training and qualification measures, including
vocational training in higher technical and vocational schools, apprenticeships/internships in enterprises, practical on-the-job training, intensive
support for workers aged over 50 as well as training and subsistence allowances during the training and active job search.
Parliament also welcomes the proposed coordinated package of personalised services and the detailed descriptions of the measures
presented in the Commission proposal. It welcomes the fact that the training on offer is combined with the future economic prospects and the
future skills and qualification needs in the region.
It draws the attention to the subsistence allowance for workers on training and on job search which is said to amount EUR 1 000 per worker
per month which will be combined with training allowance of EUR 200 per worker per month. Members recall that the EGF should in the future
be primarily allocated to training and job search as well as occupational orientation programs and its financial contribution to allowances
should always be of additional nature and in parallel to what is available to dismissed workers by virtue of national law or collective
agreements. They regret that EUR 4 266 000 of the total cost of the package amounting to EUR 5 864 615 is devoted to various financial
allowances, a similar proportion to previous cases and recommend that a proportionate amount should be dedicated to training-related
measures in future mobilisations.
Learn lessons from the implementation of the EGF: Parliament requests the institutions involved to make the necessary efforts to improve
procedural and budgetary arrangements in order to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF. It hopes that further improvements in the
procedure will be integrated in the new Regulation on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (20142020) and that greater efficiency,
transparency and visibility of the EGF will be achieved.
Parliament reiterates its position as regards the processing of an application of this kind:
the need to ensure a smooth and rapid procedure for the adoption of the decisions on the mobilisation of the EGF,
the fact that assistance from the EGF must not replace actions which are the responsibility of companies by virtue of national law or
collective agreements nor measures restructuring companies or sectors;
EGF assistance can co-finance only active labour market measures which lead to durable, long-term employment;
the need to obtain information on the coordinated package of personalised services to be funded from the EGF including information
on complementarity with actions funded by the Structural Funds.
Budget appropriations: Parliament welcomes the fact that following requests from Parliament, the 2013 budget shows payment appropriations
of EUR 50 million on the EGF budget line 04 05 01. It recalls that the EGF was created as a separate specific instrument with its own
objectives and deadlines and that, therefore, it deserves a dedicated allocation, which will avoid transfers to the extent possible from other
budget lines, as has happened in the past, which could be detrimental to the achievement of the policy objectives of the EGF.
Lastly, Parliament regrets the decision of the Council to block the extension of the "crisis derogation", allowing for the provision of financial
assistance to workers made redundant as a result of the current economic crisis, in addition to those losing their jobs because of changes in
global trade patterns.

2013/2048(BUD) - 17/05/2013 Final act
PURPOSE: to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) in respect of redundancies in the tobacco industry in Austria.

NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision 2013/276/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the European
Globalisation Adjustment Fund, in accordance with point 28 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 between the European
Parliament, the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline and sound financial management (application EGF/2011/010 AT/Austria
Tabak from Austria).
CONTENT: by means of this Decision, the European Parliament and the Council mobilise the sum of EUR 3 941 999 in commitment and
payment appropriations from the European Globalisation Fund for the financial year 2013.
This sum is made available to assist Austria in respect of redundancies in Austria Tabak GmbH, as well as in 14 suppliers and downstream
producers (tobacco industry).
Given that this application complies with the requirements for determining the financial contributions as laid down in Regulation (EC) No
1927/2006 (EGF Regulation), Parliament and the Council respond by granting the above-mentioned sum.
To recap, the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) aims to provide additional support to redundant workers who suffer from the
consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to assist them with their reintegration into the labour market. The
Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 allows for the mobilisation of the Fund through a flexibility mechanism, within the annual ceiling of
EUR 500 million.

