Procedure file
Basic information
2013/0285(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments
Decision

Procedure completed

International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and
Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel (1995) of the International
Maritime Organisation (IMO): signing and/or ratification by Member States

Subject
3.15.08 Fishing enterprises, fishermen, working conditions on board
3.20.15.06 Maritime or inland transport agreements and cooperation
4.15.06 Professional qualifications, recognition of qualifications

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL

Rapporteur

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
17/09/2014

RIBEIRO Sofia
Shadow rapporteur

GENTILE Elena

GERICKE Arne

TØRNÆS Ulla

ZUBER Inês Cristina

DELLI Karima
Former committee responsible
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

Committee for opinion

PPE CASA David

17/12/2013

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

PECH

Fisheries

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Former committee for opinion
TRAN

Transport and Tourism

PECH

Fisheries

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Maritime Affairs and Fisheries

S&D THOMAS Isabelle

18/09/2013

Commissioner
VELLA Karmenu

Key events
20/08/2013

Initial legislative proposal published

17/12/2014

Legislative proposal published

12/01/2015

Committee referral announced in

COM(2013)0595

Summary

15528/2014

Summary

Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
24/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

26/03/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

28/04/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

28/04/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

18/05/2015

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

18/05/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

22/05/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0064/2015

Summary

T8-0097/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0285(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legislative instrument

Decision

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 043-p2; Treaty on the Functioning
of the EU TFEU 218-p6a; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 046;
Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 062; Treaty on the Functioning of
the EU TFEU 153-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/8/00215

Documentation gateway
Initial legislative proposal

COM(2013)0595

20/08/2013

EC

Summary

Legislative proposal

15528/2014

17/12/2014

CSL

Summary

Committee draft report

PE549.095

05/02/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE549.378

23/02/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0064/2015

26/03/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0097/2015

28/04/2015

EP

Summary

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Decision 2015/799
OJ L 127 22.05.2015, p. 0020 Summary

2013/0285(NLE) - 20/08/2013 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to authorise Member States to sign and/or ratify, in the interest of the European Union, the International Convention on Standards
of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, 1995, of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO).
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the Convention of the International Maritime Organisation on Standards of Training, Certification and Watch-keeping for
Fishing Vessel Personnel (the 'IMO' and 'the STCW-F Convention' respectively), was adopted on 7 July 1995 at the International Conference
convened by the IMO in London at which delegations of 22 attending Member States voted in favour of its adoption.
The objective of the STCW-F Convention is to ensure that personnel on board fishing vessels are qualified (as proven by an official certificate)
and fit for the job (following medical examination), so that potential threats to safety of life and/or property at sea or to the marine environment
are minimised during operations on board sea-going vessels, bearing in mind that fishing at sea is one of the most hazardous professions.
Another aim of the Convention is to achieve and maintain a level playing field in the fisheries sector by fostering vocational education.
Pursuant to the right of freedom of movement of workers, in matters of professional qualifications, Directive 2005/36/EC sets clear rules on
mutual recognition between Member States under the so-called "general system of recognition". The Directive applies to EU nationals wishing
to pursue a profession in another Member State where this profession is regulated, except where, for a given profession and in accordance of
the principle of lex specialis, other specific rules directly related to the recognition of professional qualifications are laid down by a separate
piece of legislation under EU law.
The STCW-F Convention does not lay down a system of recognition of professional qualifications similar to the one established by Directive
2005/36/EC. On the contrary, the STCW-F Convention does not admit the use of certificates issued by States that are not party to the
Convention. However, Member States are under the obligation to comply with EU law, namely to the provisions contained in Directive
2005/36/EC.
In accordance with case law of the Court of Justice on external competence, the Member States are not allowed to ratify the STCW-F
Convention without European Union authorisation as the provisions concerning the recognition of regulated professions pursed by EU
nationals on board fishing vessels affect the exercise of the European Union's exclusive competence in this area.
As regards those Member States that have already ratified the Convention before the entry into force of the proposed Decision, they are
required to deposit with the IMO Secretary-General a statement whereby they acknowledge that EU law shall prevail in case of conflict in
relations between Member States.
Against this background, it is now appropriate, in the interest of the Common Fisheries Policy, to authorise the Member States to sign and/or
ratify the international Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watch-keeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, 1995, of the
International Maritime Organisation.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: no impact assessment was undertaken.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 43(2), 46, 53(1) and 62 in conjunction with Article 218(6)(a)(v) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
(TFEU).
CONTENT: with this proposed Decision, the Commission proposes that the Member States are authorised to sign and/or ratify the
international Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watch-keeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, 1995, of the International
Maritime Organisation, adopted on 7 July 1995, for the parts falling under the European Union's competence.
The authorisation to the Member States shall be granted on condition that they formulate a reservation when depositing their instrument of
ratification to the effect that European Union law shall continue to be applied in their mutual relations.
Those Member States that have already ratified the Convention, shall submit a statement to the Secretary-General of IMO whereby they state
that Union law relating to recognition of professional qualifications applies in relations between Member States.
The proposed Decision will therefore enable and encourage Member States to take all the necessary steps for ratification without further delay.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: this proposal has no implications for the EU budget.

2013/0285(NLE) - 17/12/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to authorise Member States to become party, in the interest of the European Union, to the International Convention of 1995 on
Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO).
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel was
adopted on 7 July 1995 at the International Conference convened by the IMO in London, where 74 governments participated, 22 of which
were Member States of the EU. The Convention entered into force on 29 September 2012.
The Convention represents a significant contribution to the fishing sector at international level by promoting the safety of life and property at
sea, thereby also contributing to the protection of the marine environment. Fishing at sea is one of the most hazardous professions, and
therefore, appropriate training and qualifications are an essential means by which to cut the number of accidents.
The Union cannot become party to the Convention, as only states can be parties thereto. Some Member States have not yet become party to

the Convention, while others already Have done so. Those Member States which have fishing vessels flying their flag, ports receiving
seagoing fishing vessels which fall within the scope of the Convention, or training institutions for fishing vessel personnel, and which have not
yet become party to the Convention, are invited to do so.
CONTENT: under the proposal, Member States would be authorised to become party to the International Convention on Standards of
Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, of the International Maritime Organisation, adopted on 7 July 1995, in
respect of those parts falling under the competence of the Union.
When reporting to the Secretary-General of the IMO, Member States shall, if appropriate, with provide information on relevant national
provisions regarding the recognition of certificates of competency of personnel on board fishing vessels covered by the Convention, taking into
account obligations laid down by relevant Union law on the recognition of qualifications.
Member States which have fishing vessels flying their flag, ports receiving seagoing fishing vessels which fall within the scope of the
Convention, or training institutions for fishing vessel personnel, and which have not yet become party to the Convention, shall endeavour to
take the necessary steps to deposit their instrument of accession to the Convention with the Secretary-General of the IMO within a reasonable
time and, if possible, within two years following the publication of the Decision.

2013/0285(NLE) - 26/03/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the report by Sofia RIBEIRO (PPE, PT) on the draft Council decision authorising
Member States to become party, in the interest of the European Union, to the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification
and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, of the International Maritime Organization.
The parliamentary committee recommended that the European Parliament gives its consent to the draft Council decision.
To recall, the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel (STCW-F
Convention) was adopted by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) in London on 7 July 1995; with 74 participating governments,
including those of 22 of the present EU Member States. To date, four Member States to date (Spain, Denmark, Latvia, and Lithuania) have
ratified this convention.
Its objective is to ensure that personnel sailing on fishing vessels are qualified (as evidenced by official certificates) and fit for the job (on the
strength of a medical certificate), so that potential threats to safety of life and/or property at sea or to the marine environment can, wherever
possible, be minimised when operations are being carried out on seagoing vessels. The EU as such cannot ratify the STCW-F Convention, the
power to do so being accorded solely to Member States. However, following the precedent set by the Court of Justice as regards external
competence (AETR), Member States are not allowed to ratify the STCW-F Convention without EU authorisation.
The decision under consideration is intended to enable Member States to ratify the STCW-F Convention without encroaching on the EUs
exclusive competence regarding the recognition of regulated professions pursed by EU nationals on board fishing vessels.

2013/0285(NLE) - 28/04/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 621 votes to 10, with 12 abstentions, a European Parliament legislative resolution on the draft Council
decision authorising Member States to become party, in the interest of the European Union, to the International Convention on Standards of
Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, of the International Maritime Organization.
The European Parliament gave its consent to the draft Council decision.
The decision under consideration is intended to enable Member States to ratify the International Convention on Standards of Training,
Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel (STCW-F Convention) without encroaching on the EUs exclusive competence
regarding the recognition of regulated professions pursed by EU nationals on board fishing vessels.
The STCW-F Convention was adopted by the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) in London on 7 July 1995; the 74 participating
governments included those of 22 of the present EU Member States. The STCW-F Convention has been ratified by four Member States to
date (Spain, Denmark, Latvia, and Lithuania).
The object of the STCW-F Convention is to ensure that personnel sailing on fishing vessels are qualified (as evidenced by official certificates)
and fit for the job (on the strength of a medical certificate), so that potential threats to safety of life and/or property at sea or to the marine
environment can, wherever possible, be minimised when operations are being carried out on seagoing vessels.

2013/0285(NLE) - 18/05/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to authorise Member States to sign and/or ratify, in the interest of the European Union, the International Convention on Standards
of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, 1995, of the International Maritime Organisation (IMO).
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2015/799 authorising Member States to become party, in the interest of the European Union, to the
International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, of the International Maritime
Organization.
BACKGROUND: the International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel (the
STCW Convention) of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) was adopted on 7 July 1995 at the International Conference convened by
the IMO in London. 74 participating governments included those of 22 of the present EU Member States.
It entered into force on 29 September 2012.

The Convention represents a significant contribution to the fishing sector at international level by promoting the safety of life and property at
sea, thereby also contributing to the protection of the marine environment. It is therefore desirable that its provisions be implemented as soon
as possible.
Fishing at sea is one of the most hazardous professions, therefore appropriate training and qualifications are an essential means by which to
cut the number of accidents.
Member States should make every effort to avoid friction between international and Union law, including any possible negative impact on the
conclusion and the implementation of the Agreements, when applying the Convention. Furthermore, relevant third countries should be
encouraged to become parties to the Convention.
CONTENT: under this Decision, Member States are hereby authorised to become party to the International Convention on Standards of
Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Fishing Vessel Personnel, of the International Maritime Organization, adopted on 7 July 1995, in
respect of those parts falling under the competence of the Union.
The authorisation to the Member States shall be granted on condition that they formulate a reservation when depositing their instrument of
ratification to the effect that European Union law shall continue to be applied in their mutual relations.
Those Member States that have already ratified the Convention, shall submit a statement to the Secretary-General of IMO whereby they state
that Union law relating to recognition of professional qualifications applies in relations between Member States.
Report on the implementation: Member States which have fishing vessels flying their flag, ports receiving seagoing fishing vessels which fall
within the scope of the Convention, or training institutions for fishing vessel personnel, and which have not yet become party to the
Convention, shall endeavour to take the necessary steps to deposit their instrument of accession to the Convention with the Secretary-General
of the IMO within a reasonable time and, if possible, by 23 May 2017.
Until all Member States which have fishing vessels flying their flag, ports receiving seagoing fishing vessels which fall within the scope of the
Convention, or training institutions for fishing vessel personnel have become party to the Convention, each Member State party to the
Convention should apply the flexibility provided by the Convention to ensure legal compatibility with Union law, notably the provisions of
Chapter I, Regulation 10 of the Annex to the Convention on equivalents, to align the application of the Convention with Directive 2005/36/EC
The Commission shall present a report to the Council reviewing the progress of accession by 23 May 2018
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 18.05.2015.

