Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2154(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

SOLVIT

Subject
1.20.05 Public access to information and documents, administrative practice
2.80 Cooperation between administrations
8.50.01 Implementation of EU law

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO

Rapporteur

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Appointed

ALDE LØKKEGAARD Morten 18/06/2013
Shadow rapporteur
PPE HANDZLIK Małgorzata
S&D ABELA BALDACCHINO
Claudette
ECR FOX Ashley
EFD SALVINI Matteo

Committee for opinion
EMPL

European Commission

Employment and Social Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

PPE KASTLER Martin

03/07/2013

Commission DG

Commissioner

Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

BARNIER Michel

Key events
12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

23/01/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

28/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

27/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

27/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

27/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/02/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0059/2014

Summary

T7-0164/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2154(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

IMCO/7/13388

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE522.880

11/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE524.802

06/12/2013

EP

PE519.559

17/12/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0059/2014

28/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0164/2014

27/02/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)447

22/07/2014

Committee opinion

EMPL

2013/2154(INI) - 28/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted the own-initiative report by Morten LØKKEGAARD (ALDE, DK) on
SOLVIT.
It stressed that the rights of citizens and businesses in the single market need to be used effectively and that EU law guaranteeing these rights
needs to be enforced effectively to ensure that citizens and businesses all benefit from the internal markets potential.
SOLVIT currently handles around 1 300 cases a year, and manages to find solutions for around 90 % of its clients within the deadline of 70
days.
Effective use of rights and opportunities in the single market: Members called on the Commission, in this regard, to put pressure on those
Member States that are not complying with single market rules. Many problems relating to the implementation of single market rules are
detected through the SOLVIT network. In this regard, they commended the contribution of SOLVIT to administrative and regulatory changes to
remedy such problems. The Council is urged to take measures to improve the tasks of public administrations in order to strengthen the
cooperation between national authorities and the Commission. The report also stressed the need for SOLVIT to have an efficient means of
alerting the Commission to internal-market problems arising from non-implementation of EU law that have come to its notice. It highlighted the
use of zero-tolerance for non-compliance with, and of peer review in the implementation and transposition of, the Services Directive, as
methods to ensure effective application of single market law.
SOLVIT: helping individuals and businesses solve problems: the report welcomed the new Commission recommendation on the principles
governing SOLVIT, paving the way for SOLVIT 2.0. Although the SOLVIT network has achieved tangible results and proved its usefulness,
Members noted that there is ample room for improvement, in particular as regards settling business-related disputes and the time taken to
resolve queries. A special focus is called for on all cross border labour law issues, social rights and equal treatment, paying particular attention
to issues related to pensions, European Union workers and posted workers. More needs to be done to make businesses, in particular SMEs,
more aware of SOLVIT.
The report drew attention to the fact that SOLVIT is still attracting a large volume of non-SOLVIT cases, and that this is slowing down the
handling of SOLVIT complaints. It stressed, therefore, the need for SOLVITs remit to be better explained to citizens and businesses.
Member States are called upon to ensure that adequate resources (financial and human) are made available to maintain the SOLVIT network.
As regards complaints, the report called for better streamlining with other complaint-handling procedures, in particular the EU Pilot. The
SOLVIT centres should be bolder and more efficient in responding to complaints and, in particular, in handling more complex cases.
Furthermore, the Commission is called upon to:
continue monitoring, within the annual report on the single market integration, the performance of the Unions problem-solving
mechanisms in particular SOLVIT as part of the Annual Growth Survey;
strengthen single market governance by establishing a specific pillar of the European Semester, including dedicated country-specific
recommendations;
set up measurable milestones for the desired development of SOLVIT;
Member States should also set their own measurable targets and deadlines for the development of case handling in local SOLVIT centres.
The report considered, in this regard, that splitting up citizen- and business-related cases for the purpose of monitoring progress could be the
way forward. If these targets are not reached, the possibility of replacing the informal procedure by a legislative act should be reconsidered,
taking into account existing mechanisms such as those provided for in Directive 2013/11/EU on alternative dispute resolution and Regulation
(EU) No 524/2013 on online dispute resolution. The Council is urged to follow Parliaments ambition in this respect.
Your Europe: the report encouraged the Commission and the Member States to make a clear difference between Your Europe and SOLVIT
while coordinating their respective visibility campaigns. It is considered that, that through branding and with the inclusion of SOLVIT, the Your
Europe portal should become the single access point for European consumers and businesses when confronted with problems or when

seeking information. Such a single access point could serve as the reference point of citizens and businesses and better facilitate their access
to different information tools and specialised problem solving mechanisms, including SOLVIT.

2013/2154(INI) - 27/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 447 votes to 18 with 19 abstentions a resolution on SOLVIT.
It stressed that EU law guaranteeing rights in the single market needed to be enforced effectively to ensure that citizens and businesses all
benefit from the internal markets potential.
SOLVIT currently handles around 1 300 cases a year, and manages to find solutions for around 90 % of its clients within the deadline of 70
days. It plays an important role as a means of ensuring better compliance with Union law pertaining to the single market, but in spite of this,
SOLVIT remains under-used and has not fulfilled its potential.
Effective use of rights and opportunities in the single market: Parliament called on the Commission to put pressure on those Member States
that are not complying with single market rules. Many problems relating to the implementation of single market rules are detected through the
SOLVIT network. In this regard, Parliament commended the contribution of SOLVIT to administrative and regulatory changes to remedy such
problems. The Council is urged to take measures to improve the tasks of public administrations in order to strengthen the cooperation between
national authorities and the Commission. The resolution also stressed the need for SOLVIT to have an efficient means of alerting the
Commission to internal-market problems arising from non-implementation of EU law that have come to its notice. It highlighted the use of
zero-tolerance for non-compliance with, and of peer review in the implementation and transposition of, the Services Directive, as methods to
ensure effective application of single market law.
SOLVIT: helping individuals and businesses solve problems: Parliament welcomed the new Commission recommendation on the principles
governing SOLVIT, paving the way for SOLVIT 2.0. Although the SOLVIT network has achieved tangible results and proved its usefulness,
Members noted that there is ample room for improvement, in particular as regards settling business-related disputes and the time taken to
resolve queries. A special focus is called for on all cross border labour law issues, social rights and equal treatment, paying particular attention
to issues related to pensions, European Union workers and posted workers. Parliament noted that a large majority of SOLVIT clients are
citizens, and it stressed the need to unleash the large potential of SOLVIT as a problem-solving tool for businesses. More needs to be done to
make businesses, in particular SMEs, more aware of SOLVIT.
Parliament drew attention to the fact that SOLVIT is still attracting a large volume of non-SOLVIT cases, and that this is slowing down the
handling of SOLVIT complaints. It stressed, therefore, the need for SOLVITs remit to be better explained to citizens and businesses.
Member States were called upon to ensure that adequate resources (financial and human) are made available to maintain the SOLVIT
network. Parliament stressed the importance of maintaining the quality of the service offered by SOLVIT in spite of budgetary restrictions and
limited human resources. It stressed the importance of ensuring that SOLVIT centres had sufficient numbers of well-trained staff, with
adequate legal expertise and knowledge of the relevant Union languages, and that staff are accordingly provided with appropriate training in
order to continually upgrade their skills and knowledge. It regretted that many business-related cases that could be handled by SOLVIT were
rejected on the grounds that they were too complex, and considered that this was a problem that needs to be addressed locally at those
SOLVIT centres which rejected cases.
As regards complaints, Parliament called for better streamlining with other complaint-handling procedures, in particular the EU Pilot. The
SOLVIT centres should be bolder and more efficient in responding to complaints and, in particular, in handling more complex cases.
Furthermore, the Commission is called upon to:
·

continue monitoring, within the annual report on the single market integration, the performance of the Unions problem-solving
mechanisms in particular SOLVIT as part of the Annual Growth Survey;

·

strengthen single market governance by establishing a specific pillar of the European Semester, including dedicated country-specific
recommendations;

·

set up measurable milestones for the desired development of SOLVIT.

Member States should also set their own measurable targets and deadlines for the development of case handling in local SOLVIT centres.
Splitting up citizen- and business-related cases for the purpose of monitoring progress could be the way forward. If these targets are not
reached, the possibility of replacing the informal procedure by a legislative act should be reconsidered, taking into account existing
mechanisms such as those provided for in Directive 2013/11/EU on alternative dispute resolution and Regulation (EU) No 524/2013 on online
dispute resolution. The Council is urged to follow Parliaments ambition in this respect.
Your Europe: Parliament encouraged the Commission and Member States to make a clear difference between Your Europe and SOLVIT while
coordinating their respective visibility campaigns. It considered that, that through branding and with the inclusion of SOLVIT, the Your Europe
portal should become the single access point for European consumers and businesses when confronted with problems or when seeking
information. Such a single access point could serve as the reference point of citizens and businesses and better facilitate their access to
different information tools and specialised problem solving mechanisms, including SOLVIT.

