Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2146(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU comprehensive approach and its implications for the coherence of EU
external action

Subject
6.10.05 Peace preservation, humanitarian and rescue tasks, crisis
management

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE DANJEAN Arnaud

16/01/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D MUÑIZ DE URQUIZA
María
ALDE JÄÄTTEENMÄKI Anneli
ECR VAN ORDEN Geoffrey
GUE/NGL MEYER Willy
Committee for opinion
DEVE

INTA

FEMM

Development

International Trade

Women's Rights and Gender Equality

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

S&D GUERRERO SALOM
Enrique

08/11/2013

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
S&D CLIVETI Minodora

19/06/2013

Key events
12/09/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

17/02/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

21/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

03/04/2014

Debate in Parliament

03/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

03/04/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0138/2014

Summary

T7-0286/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2146(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/7/13289

Documentation gateway
Committee opinion

PE516.859

22/10/2013

EP

PE524.877

11/12/2013

EP

PE523.103

21/01/2014

EP

PE527.844

22/01/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0138/2014

21/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0286/2014

03/04/2014

EP

Summary

FEMM

Committee draft report
Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

DEVE

2013/2146(INI) - 21/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Arnaud DANJEAN (EPP, FR) on the EU comprehensive approach and
its implications for the coherence of EU external action.
The EU in a changing world: Members recalled that significant geostrategic changes are also taking place in other parts of the world, owing in
particular to the rise of a multipolar international scene. They considered that the refocusing of US security policy towards the Asia-Pacific, the
growing struggle over energy and resource security, the increasingly serious effects of climate change and a severe and long-lasting global
financial and economic crisis affecting all EU Member States. They stressed that in such a geopolitical climate, a fresh approach is needed in
order to shape a new multipolar world order that is inclusive, credible, just, cooperative, underpinned by respect for human rights, to resolve
differences without recourse to armed conflict.
EU comprehensive approach: state of play in implementing the political framework: Members stressed the importance of effective coordination
and coherence in the European Unions external action. They underlined the fact that the Lisbon Treaty provides the framework for the Union
to achieve a more coherent, joined-up and comprehensive approach for the effective pursuit of the Unions external relations, including by
creating the triple-hatted High Representative (HR) of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , who is also Vice-President of the
Commission and Chair of the Foreign Affairs Council, and by establishing a unifying and effective European External Action Service (EEAS).
In this regard, Members regretted that, despite the Lisbon Treaty innovations, lack of progress in the consistency of the Unions external action
persists in areas relating to development, trade, energy, environment, migration and other global issues.
Member States are urged to meet their Treaty-based commitments to support the Unions external relations and security policy actively and in
a spirit of mutual solidarity and to comply, in conducting their own policies, with the Unions action in this area. Members called for active
engagement and dialogue with citizens and civil society to ensure legitimacy and a common understanding of the comprehensive and the EU
foreign policy in general.
Priority areas for a comprehensive approach: Members considered that as a basis for moving from concept to action in the pursuit of a
comprehensive approach, the following four areas must be addressed:
1. Institutional coherence: Members stated that the concept of a comprehensive approach should be understood as the coordinated work of all
relevant institutions (the EEAS and the Commissions relevant services, including ECHO, DEVCO, TRADE and ELARG, but also Parliament
and the Council) pursuing common objectives within an agreed framework designed at EU level, and mobilising its most relevant instruments,
including the CSDP.
This general approach should be supported by the EEAS and promote: i) mediation and dialogue; ii) the principles of humanitarian aid.
Members welcomed in this regard Joint Communication "A comprehensive approach to the European Union against external crises and
conflicts" (JOIN(2013)0030), which represents an opportunity to clarify and operationalise this approach in the new post-Lisbon institutional
setting. In addition, they stressed that the main goal of the EUs development policy is the eradication of poverty and that it is therefore
essential that antipoverty objectives are not marginalised.
Members also focused on other related aspects of the comprehensive approach:
the importance of conflict prevention;
joint analysis, joint assessment and planning as well as the clear division of responsibilities in this context.
2. Financial coherence: Members recalled Parliament's determination to ensure that the Unions external financial instruments for the period
2014-2020 are designed so as to facilitate the pursuit of a comprehensive approach to external relations Union.
They regretted that the lack of ambition in the EU budget for external action for the period 2014-2020 and called for better anticipation of the
funding needed for the implementation of EU strategies. They recalled the need to review the financing mechanism for military CSDP
operations (known as the ATHENA mechanism), so as to allow for a more adequate and fairer burden-sharing of the costs of EU military
operations, thus enabling all Member States to contribute through force generation or financing the supporting costs.
3. Coherence in practice: Members insisted that such strategies should clearly set out the EUs objectives and priorities and the specific

timeframe for implementation and determine what instruments are best suited for action (ranging from inter alia humanitarian and development
aid to diplomatic action and mediation, economic sanctions, and the CSDP). They stressed that the role and contribution from the CSDP
should be part of the initial political analysis and definition of policy objectives. They regretted that, even when strategies are defined, the EU
often does not manage to implement them, and is instead forced to take contingency and emergency action (as was the case in Sahel region,
for which a very comprehensive and well-prepared EU strategy document had been unanimously approved but did not lead to satisfactory
implementation until the situation in Mali deteriorated dramatically). There is a need to improve upstream action by operating a policy shift from
reactive-centric approaches to a more adequate and efficient prevention-focused approach.
Members are convinced that, in cases where crises cannot be avoided, the EU must be able to plan and deploy the appropriate civilian and
military assets, as well as mobilise complementary EU instruments, rapidly and effectively across the whole spectrum of crisis management
operations, including in cases of humanitarian crises. They called on the Member States to commit to unified EU action in third countries and
to make sure that coordination and articulation of actions on the ground are duly concerted with the EU institutions, namely the Commission
and the EEAS. Members regretted in this regard that autonomous action by Member States in third countries, especially post-conflict and
democratising societies, without proper articulation between them and the EU local Delegation has proved damaging to the EUs goals and
interests.
4. Partnerships: Members stressed that a successful comprehensive approach also requires developing partnerships outside the Unions
institutions and Member States, to include other international and multilateral partners, strategic partners, host countries, regional
organisations, civil society actors and the private sector, with due respect for the decision-making autonomy of the EU. They reiterated their
view, in keeping with the purposes of the Lisbon Treaty in enhancing EU foreign policy and the role of the EU in global peace, security and
regulation, that an EU seat in an enlarged UNSC remains a central, long-term goal of the European Union . They, therefore, invited the VP/HR
to take the initiative to develop a common position of the Member States to that end.
It should be noted that the report was subject to a minority opinion tabled by Sabine LÖSING (GUE/NGL, DE) rejecting the option
recommended in the report to merge military/security and humanitarian/development aid. Instead, the minority opinion advocated a European
development policy which initially focused on the eradication of poverty and which must not be used for military purposes.

2013/2146(INI) - 03/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Union adopted by 492 votes to 94, with 28 abstentions, a resolution on the EU comprehensive approach and its implications for
the coherence of EU external action.
The EU in a changing world: Parliament recalled that significant geostrategic changes are taking place, owing in particular to the rise of a
multipolar international scene with new actors pursuing competitive regional and global ambitions, growing interdependency, the rise of
multidimensional asymmetric threats, the refocusing of US security policy towards the Asia-Pacific, the growing struggle over energy and
resource security, the increasingly serious effects of climate change and a severe and long-lasting global financial and economic crisis
affecting all EU Member States. Members stressed that in such a geopolitical climate, a fresh approach is needed in order to shape a new
multipolar world order that is inclusive, credible, just, cooperative, underpinned by respect for human rights, to resolve differences without
recourse to armed conflict.
EU comprehensive approach: state of play in implementing the political framework: Parliament stressed the importance of effective
coordination and coherence in the European Unions external action. It underlined the fact that the Lisbon Treaty provides the framework for
the Union to achieve a more coherent, joined-up and comprehensive approach for the effective pursuit of the Unions external relations,
including by creating the triple-hatted High Representative (HR) of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, who is also Vice-President
of the Commission and Chair of the Foreign Affairs Council, and by establishing a unifying and effective European External Action Service
(EEAS).
In this regard, Parliament regretted that, despite the Lisbon Treaty innovations, lack of progress in the consistency of the Unions external
action persists in areas relating to security, humanitarian matters, development, trade, energy, environment, migration and other global issues.
It is concerned that the Commission often takes a restrictive approach, protecting its own competences in these areas and minimising
coordination functions with the EEAS.
Priority areas for a comprehensive approach: Parliament considered that as a basis for moving from concept to action in the pursuit of a
comprehensive approach, the following four areas must be addressed:
1. Institutional coherence: all relevant institutions (the EEAS and the Commissions relevant services, including ECHO, DEVCO, TRADE and
ELARG, but also Parliament and the Council) should work together to pursue common objectives within an agreed framework designed at EU
level, and mobilising its most relevant instruments, including the CSDP.
This general approach should be supported by the EEAS and promote: i) mediation and dialogue; ii) the principles of humanitarian aid.
Members welcomed in this regard Joint Communication "A comprehensive approach to the European Union against external crises and
conflicts" (JOIN(2013)0030), which represents an opportunity to clarify and operationalise this approach in the new post-Lisbon institutional
setting. Plenary insisted that foreign policy objectives should not be placed in opposition to development principles and principled humanitarian
action, as all three policies are complementary. Parliament recalled that Article 208 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union
(TFEU) establishes the principle of Policy Coherence for Development (PCD), and emphasised the potential for tension between PCD on the
one hand and the comprehensive approach to crisis management outside the EU on the other. It stressed that the main goal of the EUs
development policy is the eradication of poverty and that it is therefore essential that anti-poverty objectives are not marginalised in EU foreign
policy and that the comprehensive approach does not erode the civilian character of development cooperation.
Parliament called for the safeguarding of the humanitarian principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence which are crucial
for both the effectiveness of humanitarian action and the safety of its actors.
Parliament also focused on other related aspects of the comprehensive approach:
the importance of conflict prevention;
joint analysis, joint assessment and planning as well as the clear division of responsibilities in this context.

2. Financial coherence: Parliament recalled its determination to ensure that the Unions external financial instruments for the period 2014-2020
are designed so as to facilitate the pursuit of a comprehensive approach to external relations Union.
It regretted that the lack of ambition in the EU budget for external action for the period 2014-2020 and called for better anticipation of the
funding needed for the implementation of EU strategies. It recalled the need to review the financing mechanism for military CSDP operations
(known as the ATHENA mechanism), so as to allow for a more adequate and fairer burden-sharing of the costs of EU military operations, thus
enabling all Member States to contribute through force generation or financing the supporting costs.
3. Coherence in practice: Parliament insisted that such strategies should clearly set out the EUs objectives and priorities and the specific
timeframe for implementation and determine what instruments are best suited for action (ranging from inter alia humanitarian and development
aid to diplomatic action and mediation, economic sanctions, and the CSDP). It stressed that the role and contribution from the CSDP should be
part of the initial political analysis and definition of policy objectives. It regretted that, even when strategies are defined, the EU often does not
manage to implement them, and is instead forced to take contingency and emergency action (as was the case in Sahel region, for which a
very comprehensive and well-prepared EU strategy document had been unanimously approved but did not lead to satisfactory implementation
until the situation in Mali deteriorated dramatically). There is a need to improve upstream action by operating a policy shift from reactive-centric
approaches to a more adequate and efficient prevention-focused approach.
Members are convinced that, in cases where crises cannot be avoided, the EU must be able to plan and deploy the appropriate civilian and
military assets, as well as mobilise complementary EU instruments, rapidly and effectively across the whole spectrum of crisis management
operations, including in cases of humanitarian crises. They called on the Member States to commit to unified EU action in third countries and
to make sure that coordination and articulation of actions on the ground are duly concerted with the EU institutions, namely the Commission
and the EEAS. Members regretted in this regard that autonomous action by Member States in third countries, especially post-conflict and
democratising societies, without proper articulation between them and the EU local Delegation has proved damaging to the EUs goals and
interests.
4. Partnerships: Parliament stressed that a successful comprehensive approach also requires developing partnerships outside the Unions
institutions and Member States, to include other international and multilateral partners, strategic partners, host countries, regional
organisations, civil society actors and the private sector, with due respect for the decision-making autonomy of the EU. It reiterated its view, in
keeping with the purposes of the Lisbon Treaty in enhancing EU foreign policy and the role of the EU in global peace, security and regulation,
that an EU seat in an enlarged UNSC remains a central, long-term goal of the European Union . Parliament, therefore, invited the VP/HR to
take the initiative to develop a common position of the Member States to that end.

