Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2093(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

European retail action plan for the benefit of all actors

Subject
2.10 Free movement of goods
2.40.01 Right of establishment
2.60.01 Trade restrictions, concerted practices, dominant positions
3.30.25 International information networks and society, internet
3.40.17 Manufactured goods
3.45 Enterprise policy, inter-company cooperation
4.60.02 Consumer information, advertising, labelling
4.60.06 Consumers' economic and legal interests

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Rapporteur

Appointed

GUE/NGL DE JONG Dennis

20/02/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE CORAZZA BILDT Anna
Maria
S&D IRIGOYEN PÉREZ María
ALDE LØKKEGAARD Morten
Verts/ALE RÜHLE Heide
ECR HARBOUR Malcolm
EFD SALVINI Matteo
Committee for opinion

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

PPE CASA David

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI

Legal Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

BARNIER Michel

Appointed

17/04/2013

Key events
31/01/2013

Non-legislative basic document published

10/06/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

05/11/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

14/11/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

COM(2013)0036

Summary

A7-0374/2013

Summary

11/12/2013

Results of vote in Parliament

11/12/2013

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/12/2013

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T7-0580/2013

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2093(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

IMCO/7/12760

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2013)0036

31/01/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE516.620

17/07/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE519.470

11/09/2013

EP

PE516.719

17/10/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0374/2013

14/11/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0580/2013

11/12/2013

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)260

06/05/2014

Committee opinion

EMPL

Summary

2013/2093(INI) - 31/01/2013 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to set up a European Retail Action Plan.
BACKGROUND: Retail and wholesale services, also known as distributive trades, represent 11% of the EUs GDP and account for almost 15%
of the EUs total employment. More than 6 million companies, i.e., 29% of all EU undertakings, are active in this sector. The retail sector is
characterised by a very high share of SMEs, particularly micro companies (more than 95%).
The retail and wholesale sectors have an essential role to play in stimulating growth and job creation under the Europe 2020 strategy: they are
among the key sectors that can drive the transition to both a more sustainable economy and consumption patterns. Efficiency in this sector
has implications for competition, innovation, price trends and competitiveness. However, certain obstacles still prevent the achievement of an
efficient and competitive single retail market.
The bottlenecks identified in the retail sector, which often cut across various policy areas, need to be addressed through a coherent plan to
enhance the sector's economic, social and environmental performance, and to ensure that it fully contributes to the goals of the Europe 2020
Strategy.
Two major challenges exist in the EU retail sector:
1. restrictions on establishment and, more generally, lack of competitiveness in the retail sector, in particular in some Member States,
and
2. a need to lower barriers and reduce operational restrictions.
This Action Plan aims at addressing these key obstacles by setting out a strategy to improve the competitiveness of the retail sector and
enhance the sectors economic, environmental and social performance.
CONTENT: the main aim of the Action Plan is to propose a strategy for achieving a well-functioning Single Market in Retail , thereby
contributing to the EUs territorial and social cohesion - through improved access to more sustainable and competitive retail services.
Addressing the key bottlenecks in achieving the Single Market in Retail has the potential to

bring benefits to all the actors concerned, and to the environment:
Consumers: improved access to quality retail services and products, more competitive prices and better information on quality and
prices, as well as on the environmental characteristics of products, would enhance consumer choice within both bricks and mortar and
e-commerce retail formats.
Businesses: retailers and their suppliers, especially SMEs, would benefit tangibly from the Single Market through the development of a
more predictable legal environment, enabling them to deliver even greater value throughout the supply chain. Similarly, by addressing
unfairness in the supply chain, upstream and downstream players would enjoy more sustainable relationships and would be
encouraged to increase both innovation and investment. Further development of e-commerce will benefit retailers by providing them
with more opportunities to find new markets.
Employees: the retail sector should benefit from more qualified staff and improved working conditions, leading to higher job
satisfaction. Improving employee training would also help provide better job opportunities, especially for the young and less qualified.
The Action Plan comprises 11 concrete actions, forming a coherent, holistic European strategy:
- consumer empowerment: the Commission intends to give consumers more of a vouce by:
1. developing, through dialogue with stakeholders, good-practice guidelines and/or codes of conduct to facilitate consumer access to
transparent and reliable information, making it easier to compare prices, quality and sustainability of goods and services. In particular,
the inclusion of cross-border offers by comparison websites is important for consumers to be able to take full advantage of the Single
Market;
2. proposing European methodologies for measuring and communicating the overall environmental footprint of products and
organisations.
- access to more competitive retail services: the aim is to strengthen freedom of establishment in the retail sector and encourage e-commerce
as a means of underpinning the retail sector. In this context:
1. Member States must remove all remaining instances of non-compliance with unequivocal obligations under the Services Directive
concerning access to, and exercise of, retail activities, including eliminating economic needs tests within the meaning of Article 14(5)
of the Services Directive. The Commission will apply its zero-tolerance policy through infringement procedures, where appropriate;
2. the Commission will: (a) launch a performance check in the retail sector to explore how commercial and spatial planning rules and
plans are applied on the ground by the competent authorities where a potential service provider wishes to set up a small, medium or
large retail outlet; (b) through exchange of best practices, provide for greater clarity regarding the proper balance between freedom of
establishment, spatial/commercial planning, and environmental and social protection.
- developing a more balanced business-to-business food and non-food supply chain: the aim is to encourage distribution channels and to
combat unfair trading practices (UTPs):
1. the Commission will adopt a Green Paper detailing the common features of UTPs in the B2B food and non-food supply chain and
open a consultation the results of which will be available by late spring 2013. The results of the consultation will feed into an impact
assessment of the different options identified to address the issue at EU level.
- developing a more sustainable retail supply chain: by reducing food and packaging waste and making the supply chains more sustainable:
1. the Commission will support retailers to implement actions to reduce food waste without compromising food safety (awareness raising,
communication, facilitating of redistribution to food banks, etc.) e.g., through the Retail Agreement on Waste; and work on developing
a long-term policy on food waste, including a Communication on Sustainable Food to be adopted in 2013;
2. through dialogue with stakeholders, the Commission will define best practices to make supply chains more environmentally-friendly
and sustainable and minimise the energy consumption of retail outlets. The Commission will encourage retailers in the context of
existing fora to apply these best practices.
- developing more innovative solutions, in particular with regard to product labelling and electronic payments:
1. the Commission will launch a retail innovation initiative in 2013 whereby the Commission, with the help of high-level experts, will
explore how to ensure that the retail sector can contribute to, and benefit from, innovative products, services and technologies. On that
basis, the Commission will design concrete actions focused on boosting retail competitiveness, such as bringing research results to
the market faster, integrating the e-commerce and brick-and-mortar environments, new ways of informing consumers about products,
the development of innovation-friendly regulations and standards, etc.;
2. the Commission will examine the feasibility of setting up a dedicated database containing all EU and domestic food labelling rules and
providing a simple way to identify labelling requirements per product;
3. the Commission will take measures to ensure better market integration for card, internet and mobile payments through: (a) revision of
the Payment Services Directive; (b) an enhanced governance model for retail payment services; and, (c) a legislative proposal on
multi-lateral interchange fees for payment cards.
- creating a better working environment: the proposed measures aim at the improved utilisation of available skills, in particular in SMEs, given
the high share of self-employed in the retail sector:
1. the Commission will strengthen cooperation with social partners to create conditions that make it possible to match skills with labour
market needs in the retail sector, particularly by identifying and anticipating skills needs through an EU Sectoral Skills Council, and by
improving retailers' training and reskilling policies.
Conclusion: the 11 concrete actions set out in this Action Plan should be implemented by 2014 in order to achieve a Single Market in Retail. It
is essential that this Action Plan be executed in parallel with other initiatives, in particular those concerning the full implementation of the
Services Directive, the E-Commerce Action Plan, and the on-going initiatives in the payments field.
The Commission will monitor developments and report on the progress in implementing this Action Plan by issuing a report in 2015. This
monitoring will be done on the basis of the ongoing discussions within the EU institutions, with Member States, and with representatives of the
retail sector and other relevant stakeholders through the Group on Retail Competitiveness.

2013/2093(INI) - 14/11/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted the own-initiative report by Cornelis de JONG (GUE/NGL, NL) on the
European Retail Action Plan for the benefit of all actors.
The importance of the retail market: recalling the importance of the retail market and given that it represents 11% of EU GDP and delivers
more than 15 % of all jobs in Europe, Members welcomed the setting-up by the Commission of a European Retail Action Plan. They did,
however, state that the Action Plan should have paid more attention to the effects of the current economic crisis on retail and, in particular, on
smaller, independent shops.
The report called on the Commission and the Member States to give the highest political prominence to the retail sector as a pillar of the
Single Market, including the Digital Single Market, and to lift regulatory, administrative and practical obstacles hampering the start-up of
businesses. According to Members, retail market legislation should be evidence-based, taking into account the needs of the sector.
The retail sector in the current economic crisis: the report urged Member States not to take measures in the context of austerity policies which
undermine consumer confidence and directly harm the interests of the retail sector, such as increasing VAT, reclassifying products and
product rates or raising charges for shops. It reiterated the importance of improving access to finance, in particular for retail and wholesale
trade SMEs.
Supporting independent retailers: Members encouraged local and regional authorities to promote actions aimed at facilitating equal access
and creating a level playing field for the independent retailer, in full respect of free and fair competition, such as:
the encouragement of the adopt-a-shop principle by which larger retailers act as mentors to smaller shops in the same locality, in
particular for new market entrants;
the promotion of groups of independent retailers, including co-operatives, which benefit from mutual assistance and certain economies
of scale, whilst retaining their full independence and;
respect for the right of local and regional authorities to stimulate a climate favourable to small, independent shops, which are typically
established in town centres, by lowering energy rates including for signs illuminated by night and rents via public-private
partnerships, and by introducing business rate discounts on local charges for small businesses and independent retailers.
E-commerce: the report noted that rapid development of e-commerce has delivered significant benefits for consumers and businesses in terms
of innovation, new market opportunities and growth, etc. It encouraged retailers, in view of the social and cultural role of retail, to make the
most of innovative technologies and to develop new business models for their on-line customer base. The Commission is called upon to
propose a strategy to prevent traders from adopting discriminatory policies in their e-commerce practices, thereby ensuring that all European
citizens have unfettered access to cross-border online trade.
Payment systems: Members welcomed the Commission proposal on Multi-Lateral Interchange Fees (MIF) and stressed the importance of
removing card scheme rules which reinforce the anticompetitive effects of the MIF. They urged the Commission to support Member States that
already have transparent, competitive and innovative payment systems and to use them as best practices in further developing a cheaper and
fairer payments market in Europe.
Consumers: the report welcomed the Commissions intention to develop instruments to facilitate consumer access to transparent, easily
understandable, comparable, and reliable information on the prices, quality and sustainability of goods and services. It encouraged the
Commission to set up an easily accessible database containing all EU and national labelling requirements.
Sustainability: Members highlighted the retail sectors responsibility concerning sustainability. They welcomed the fact that retailers and
suppliers have been at the forefront of green responsibility, particularly regarding waste, energy consumption, transport and CO2 reduction.
Voluntary initiatives and commitments have been taken by some retailers and suppliers to reduce food waste.
The report also called on the importance of the proper implementation of existing social and labour legislation. It called for equal treatment for
commercial operators in the internal market in order to combat undeclared work and tax and social fraud.
Unfair trading practices: voluntary initiatives, which already exist in some Member States and are currently also being developed at EU-level
by the High Level Forum for a Better Functioning Food Supply Chain, are to be welcomed. The Commission and business federations are
invited, in this connection, to pursue a constructive and cross-sectoral dialogue in the existing fora, also including the annual Retail Market
Roundtable organised by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection, as the institutional forum aimed at keeping retail
high on the EU political agenda.

2013/2093(INI) - 11/12/2013 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on the European Retail Action Plan for the benefit of all actors, following the Commissions
communication on the same subject.
The importance of the retail market: Parliament welcomed the Commissions Action Plan and recalled the importance of the retail market and
given that it represented 11% of EU GDP and delivered more than 15 % of all jobs in Europe. It did, however, state that the Action Plan should
have paid more attention to the effects of the current economic crisis on retail and, in particular, on smaller, independent shops.
Members called on the Commission and the Member States to give the highest political prominence to the retail sector as a pillar of the Single
Market, including the Digital Single Market, and to lift regulatory, administrative and practical obstacles hampering the start-up of businesses.
The retail sector in the current economic crisis: the resolution urged Member States not to take measures in the context of austerity policies
which would undermine consumer confidence and directly harm the interests of the retail sector, such as increasing VAT, reclassifying
products and product rates or raising charges for shops. It reiterated the importance of improving access to finance, in particular for retail and
wholesale trade SMEs.
With the aim of ensuring better governance, it called on the Commission to operate a zero-tolerance policy towards those Member States

which fail to properly apply internal market rules and to do so, where appropriate, by means of infringement procedures and by speeding up
those procedures using a fast-track approach.
Supporting independent retailers: Parliament encouraged local and regional authorities to promote actions aimed at facilitating equal access
and creating a level playing field for the independent retailer, in full respect of free and fair competition, such as:
the encouragement of the adopt-a-shop principle by which larger retailers act as mentors to smaller shops in the same locality, in
particular for new market entrants;
the promotion of groups of independent retailers, including co-operatives, which benefit from mutual assistance and certain economies
of scale, whilst retaining their full independence and;
respect for the right of local and regional authorities to stimulate a climate favourable to small, independent shops, which are typically
established in town centres, by lowering energy rates including for signs illuminated by night and rents via public-private
partnerships, and by introducing business rate discounts on local charges for small businesses and independent retailers.
Parliament recalled that while a concentration of shops outside city centres can be convenient for some consumers, it can also have negative
environmental effects and can be a challenge for other consumers, in particular for older people, people with reduced mobility. It therefore
called for a balanced approach, taking into account the fact that in many regions the saturation point has already been reached.
Members also stressed the importance of proper enforcement of the Services Directive. They urged Member States to remove barriers to free
movement and to open up their markets in order to stimulate competitiveness and promote diversity among shops.
E-commerce: in the context of the rapid development of e-commerce, the resolution encouraged retailers to make the most of innovative
technologies and to develop new business models for their on-line customer base. The Commission was called upon to propose a strategy to
prevent traders from adopting discriminatory policies in their e-commerce practices, thereby ensuring that all European citizens have
unfettered access to cross-border online trade.
Payment systems: Parliament welcomed the Commission proposal on Multi-Lateral Interchange Fees (MIF) and stressed the importance of
removing card scheme rules which reinforce the anticompetitive effects of the MIF. They urged the Commission to support Member States that
already have transparent, competitive and innovative payment systems and to use them as best practices in further developing a cheaper and
fairer payments market in Europe.
Consumers: Parliament welcomed the Commissions intention to develop instruments to facilitate consumer access to transparent, easily
understandable, comparable, and reliable information on the prices, quality and sustainability of goods and services. It encouraged the
Commission to set up an easily accessible database containing all EU and national labelling requirements.
Sustainability: Members highlighted the retail sectors responsibility concerning sustainability. They welcomed the fact that retailers and
suppliers have been at the forefront of green responsibility, particularly regarding waste, energy consumption, transport and CO2 reduction.
Voluntary initiatives and commitments have been taken by some retailers and suppliers to reduce food waste.
The report also called on the importance of the proper implementation of existing social and labour legislation. It called for equal treatment for
commercial operators in the internal market in order to combat undeclared work and tax and social fraud.
Unfair trading practices (UTPs): voluntary initiatives, which already exist in some Member States and are currently also being developed at
EU-level by the High Level Forum for a Better Functioning Food Supply Chain, were to be welcomed. Parliament should urgently resolve
pending issues relating to its participation in the work of the Forum.
As regards the weaker market players, Parliament suggested the possibility of the appointment of an ombudsman or adjudicator who could
submit complaints about UTPs on their behalf. They called on the Commission to ensure the right of small suppliers to set up groups of
producers without being penalised by national competition authorities, which have assessed the importance of these groups based on national
production alone.
Lastly, Members welcomed the Commissions intention to create a permanent Group on Retail Competitiveness, and underlined its support for
the Retail Market Roundtable organised by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection, as the institutional forum aimed at
keeping retail high on the EU political agenda.

