Procedure file
Basic information
2013/2127(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Financial participation of employees in companies' proceeds

Subject
3.45.03 Financial management of undertakings, business loans, accounting
4.15.05 Industrial restructuring, job losses, redundancies, relocations,
Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF)
4.15.10 Worker information, participation, trade unions, works councils

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Appointed

EMPL Employment and Social Affairs
(Associated committee)

ALDE BENNION Phil

17/04/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE KASTLER Martin
S&D REGNER Evelyn
Verts/ALE LAMBERT Jean
ECR MCINTYRE Anthea
GUE/NGL ZUBER Inês
Cristina

European Commission

Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

ECON Economic and Monetary Affairs
(Associated committee)

PPE BERTOT Fabrizio

18/06/2013

Commission DG

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

ANDOR László

Key events
04/07/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

04/07/2013

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

05/12/2013

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

18/12/2013

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/01/2014

Debate in Parliament

14/01/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

14/01/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/01/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/2127(INI)

A7-0465/2013

Summary

T7-0013/2014

Summary

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/7/13165

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE516.876

29/08/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE521.544

14/10/2013

EP

PE516.888

28/11/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0465/2013

18/12/2013

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0013/2014

14/01/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2014)320

26/05/2014

Committee opinion

ECON

2013/2127(INI) - 18/12/2013 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Phil BENNION (ADLE, UK) on financial participation of
employees in companies proceeds.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, exercising the prerogative of an associated committee in line with Rule 50 of the Rules of
Procedure, were also consulted to give an opinion on the current report.
The Members recalled that employee financial participation (EFP) schemes can offer employees direct financial benefits above and beyond
agreed basic remuneration structures. These schemes mainly take three forms:
profit sharing (cash-based, deferred or in shares),
individual employee share ownership (employee shares or stock options),
employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs).
For a reconciliation of existing EFP schemes without harmonisation: the Members recall that EFP is affected by national taxation rules and it is
not appropriate to develop a comprehensive one size fits all model for EFP at EU level. However, barriers to the adoption of EFP should be
lifted in the European Union, notably the transnational obstacles facing both companies offering schemes to employees in several Member
States, and for employees, for whom double taxation may represent an infringement of the right to freedom of movement.
They emphasise that in some cases it might be useful to bring about the gradual convergence of existing financial participation schemes and
the related national legislation so as to enable employers in future to offer schemes in the same or a similar form in all Member States where
they have employees.
They call for a strengthening of the information on the financial participation schemes in place especially in SMEs as well as greater
transparency in tax matters. The Members particularly stress the need to implement measures preventing double taxation when employees
work in various Member States. Guidelines on the taxation of EFP should therefore be presented by the Commission.
Recommendations: the Members made a series of recommendations calling on the Commission and on Member States to consider
appropriate measures to encourage companies, acting voluntarily, to develop and offer EFP schemes, open to all employees, in association
with social partners. They anticipate the results of the Commissions pilot project on the Promotion of employee ownership and participation.
Fora potential opt-in 29th regime: the Members view with interest a potential opt-in 29th regime as an optional single legal framework open to
employers throughout the EU, which would respect areas of Member State competence on fiscal and labour law, based on a market-based
approach, improved transparency and access to information to facilitate equal implementation in different Member States. This model would
be applicable at the national and/or EU level when needed and not being restricted to cross-border companies.
They encourage the Commission to present an independent impact assessment on such a regime. Following the publication of the
independent impact assessment, the Members call on the Commission to consider developing a set of basic guidelines for successful EFP
schemes encompassing the following elements:
objective-led: companies should determine the objectives of an EFP scheme in order to select the model that is most appropriate for
them;
flexible in operation and voluntary, operating differently in different sectors, companies of different sizes and types and offering
employees a choice about how to benefit from a closer financial relationship with their employer;
additional/complementary to contractual remuneration;

negotiated by social partners;
clear information must be given to employees on the risks and rights attached to opting into an EFP scheme.
Involvement in governance should also be noted with workers enabled to become directly involved in the governance of a company.
In any case, the EFP should not aim to replace the wages of the workers .
Better employee awareness of the advantages of EFP: finally, the Members call on the Commission and the Member States to better organise
information campaigns and to encourage the cross-border transferability of best practice schemes among Member States. They encourage
Member States, in cooperation with social partners, employee ownership
organisations and the Commission, to use existing single information portals one stop shops accessible to employers and employees, or to
develop new ones, in order to explain the benefits and advantages as well as risks of EFP, the national incentives available and the different
models which exist.

2013/2127(INI) - 14/01/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 562 votes to 62, with 60 abstentions, a resolution on financial participation of employees in companies
proceeds.
Parliament recalled that employee financial participation (EFP) schemes can offer employees direct financial benefits above and beyond
agreed basic remuneration structures. These schemes mainly take three forms:
profit sharing (cash-based, deferred or in shares),
individual employee share ownership (employee shares or stock options),
employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs).
For a reconciliation of existing EFP schemes without harmonisation: Parliament recalled that EFP is affected by national taxation rules and it is
not appropriate to develop a comprehensive one size fits all model for EFP at EU level. However, barriers to the adoption of EFP should be
lifted in the European Union, notably the transnational obstacles facing both companies offering schemes to employees in several Member
States, and for employees, for whom double taxation may represent an infringement of the right to freedom of movement.
It emphasised that in some cases it might be useful to bring about the gradual convergence of existing financial participation schemes and the
related national legislation so as to enable employers in future to offer schemes in the same or a similar form in all Member States where they
have employees.
It called for a strengthening of the information on the financial participation schemes in place especially in SMEs as well as greater
transparency in tax matters. Members particularly stressed the need to implement measures preventing double taxation when employees work
in various Member States. Guidelines on the taxation of EFP should therefore be presented by the Commission.
Recommendations: Members made a series of recommendations calling on the Commission and on Member States to consider appropriate
measures to encourage companies, acting voluntarily, to develop and offer EFP schemes, open to all employees, in association with social
partners. They anticipated the results of the Commissions pilot project on the Promotion of employee ownership and participation.
For a potential opt-in 29th regime: Parliament viewed with interest a potential opt-in 29th regime as an optional single legal framework open to
employers throughout the EU, which would respect areas of Member State competence on fiscal and labour law, based on a market-based
approach, improved transparency and access to information to facilitate equal implementation in different Member States. This model would
be applicable at the national and/or EU level when needed and not being restricted to cross-border companies.
It encouraged the Commission to present an independent impact assessment on such a regime. Following the publication of the independent
impact assessment, Members called on the Commission to consider developing a set of basic guidelines for successful EFP schemes
encompassing the following elements:
objective-led: companies should determine the objectives of an EFP scheme in order to select the model that is most appropriate for
them;
flexible in operation and voluntary, operating differently in different sectors, companies of different sizes and types and offering
employees a choice about how to benefit from a closer financial relationship with their employer;
additional/complementary to contractual remuneration;
negotiated by social partners;
clear information must be given to employees on the risks and rights attached to opting into an EFP scheme.
Involvement in governance should also be noted with workers enabled to become directly involved in the governance of a company.
In any case, the EFP should not aim to replace the wages of the workers .
Parliament considered that, in order to promote financial participation for the purpose of creating a new form of company financing and
enabling employees to be more connected to the company that employs them, employers should be given the opportunity to offer employees
share capital subscriptions or specific debt securities (bonds). It took the view that the capital subscriptions should be voluntary for the
employees, acting either as individuals or as a group, as well as for the company.
Better employee awareness of the advantages of EFP: lastly, Parliament called on the Commission and the Member States to better organise
information campaigns and to encourage the cross-border transferability of best practice schemes among Member States. It encouraged
Member States, in cooperation with social partners, employee ownership organisations and the Commission, to use existing single information
portals one stop shops accessible to employers and employees, or to develop new ones, in order to explain the benefits and advantages as
well as risks of EFP, the national incentives available and the different models which exist.

