Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2013/0103(COD)

Awaiting Council 1st reading position / budgetary conciliation
convocation
03/03/2017 Decision to enter into interinstitutional negotiations confirmed
by plenary (Rule 69c)

Protection against dumped or subsidised imports from countries not
members of the European Community
Amending Regulation (EC) No 597/2009
Amending Regulation (EC) No 1225/2009
Subject
6.20.02 Export/import control, trade defence
Legislative priorities
Joint Declaration 2017

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
INTA

Rapporteur

International Trade

Appointed
22/07/2014

FJELLNER Christofer
Shadow rapporteur

MOSCA Alessia Maria

LOONES Sander

LAMBSDORFF
Alexander Graf

SCHOLZ Helmut

JADOT Yannick

BORRELLI David
SALVINI Matteo
Former committee responsible
INTA

International Trade

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Trade

PPE FJELLNER Christofer

25/04/2013

Commissioner
DE GUCHT Karel

Key events
10/04/2013

Legislative proposal published

18/04/2013

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

21/01/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

COM(2013)0192

Summary

27/01/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0053/2014

Summary

04/02/2014

Debate in Parliament

05/02/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

05/02/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0082/2014

Summary

16/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0420/2014

Summary

26/05/2014

Debate in Council

21/11/2014

Debate in Council

28/02/2017

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations after 1st
reading in Parliament

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2013/0103(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EC) No 597/2009
Amending Regulation (EC) No 1225/2009

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 207-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Awaiting Council 1st reading position / budgetary conciliation convocation

Committee dossier

INTA/7/12474

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2013)0192

10/04/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0105

10/04/2013

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2013)0106

10/04/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE522.895

11/11/2013

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE524.779

20/12/2013

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A7-0053/2014

27/01/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st
reading/single reading

T7-0082/2014

05/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T7-0420/2014

16/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)471

09/07/2014

Additional information
National parliaments

IPEX

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Summary

2013/0103(COD) - 10/04/2013 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to update and modernise Unions legislation on protection against dumped imports and subsidised imports from third countries.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the common rules for protection against dumped and subsidised imports from countries which are not members of the
European Union are contained in Council Regulation (EC) No 1225/2009 on protection against dumped imports from countries not members of
the European Community and Council Regulation (EC) No 597/2009 on protection against subsidised imports from countries not members of
the European Community respectively. The Regulations were initially adopted in 1995 following the conclusion of the Uruguay Round. Given
that a number of amendments were made to them since then, the Council decided in 2009 to codify the regulations in the interest of clarity and
rationality.
Following a review launched by the Commission in 2011, it was considered that certain provisions of the Regulations should be amended in
order to improve transparency and predictability, provide for effective measures to fight against retaliation, improve effectiveness and
enforcement and optimise review practice. In addition, certain practices that in recent years have been applied in the context of anti-dumping
and anti-subsidy investigations should be included in the Regulations.
This legislative proposal is issued in parallel with a Communication on the Modernisation of Trade Defence Instruments: Adapting trade
defence instruments to the current needs of the European economy and draft guidelines on four important elements (i.e. Union interest, injury
margin, analogue country and expiry reviews) of the EUs Trade Defence Instruments (TDIs). The draft guidelines are subject to a three-month
public consultation before they are adopted by the Commission.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: taking into account the results of a public consultation, an evaluation study and the Commission's extensive practice
in the use of the instruments, an impact assessment was carried out in autumn 2012. The impact assessment report identified problems in the
functioning of the trade defence instruments and proposed various solutions. The preferred solutions form the basis for this proposal.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 207(2) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: under its legislative proposal, the Commission introduces what it considers to be a series of improvements to the current rules in
relation to anti-dumping and anti-subsidy measures which may be summarised under five main headings:
1. Enhanced transparency and predictability: interested parties, such as importers or users, would be informed two weeks in advance of
the imposition of provisional measures that such measures are going to be imposed. Parties would also be given a guarantee that the
measures will not be imposed within this two-week period. A summary of the basis on which it is intended to impose the measures
would be sent to interested parties and they would have the opportunity to comment on the calculation of the dumping and injury
margins. Calculation errors could then be corrected in advance of the imposition of measures.
Furthermore, when it is decided not to impose provisional measures but to continue the investigation, interested parties would be
informed of the intention not to impose such measures two weeks in advance of the ultimate date for imposition.
1. Threats of retaliation against Union producers: in order to ensure effective measures to fight against retaliation, the proposal would
enable Union producers to rely on the Regulations without fear of retaliation by third parties. Existing provisions, under special
circumstances, provide for the initiation of an investigation without having received a complaint ( ex-officio), where sufficient evidence
of the existence of dumping, countervailable subsidies, injury and causal link exists. Such special circumstances should include threat
of retaliation. Furthermore, when investigations are opened on an ex-officio basis, it is proposed to oblige Union producers to
cooperate in the proceeding.
2. Effectiveness of the instruments: according to the Commission, third countries increasingly interfere in trade of raw materials with a
view to keeping raw materials in those countries for the benefit of domestic downstream users, for instance by imposing export taxes
or operating dual pricing schemes. As a result, the costs of raw materials do not result from the operation of normal market forces
reflecting supply and demand for a given raw material. Such interference creates additional distortions of trade. As a consequence,
Union producers are not only harmed by dumping, but suffer, compared to downstream producers from third countries engaged in
such practices, additional distortions of trade. In order to protect trade adequately, it is proposed to remove the lesser duty rule in
cases of circumvention, or where structural raw material distortions have been found to exist, and subsidisation.
3. Reviews: in order to optimise the review practice, it is proposed that duties collected during the investigation should be reimbursed to
importers, where measures are not extended after the conclusion of an expiry review investigation. This is considered appropriate
given that the conditions required for the continuation of the measures have not been found to exist during the investigation period.
4. Lastly, there are a number of areas where it is proposed to codify certain practices which stem from ECJ or WTO rulings that have
been handed down in recent years. These concern (i) the definition of Union industry, (ii) the consequences for exporting producers
found not to be dumping or to be dumping at de-minimis levels in an original investigation, (iii) dealing with changed circumstances in
a review investigation, (iv) the treatment of related companies in anti-circumvention investigations, (v) the conditions for the
registration of imports, and (vi) the basis for choosing a sample of Union producers.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the proposal has implications for the Union budget. The non-application of the lesser duty rule under certain
circumstances will, in some cases, lead to higher duty levels and is thus revenue enhancing. The reimbursement of duties in cases where
measures are terminated after an expiry review represents an expense for the Union budget. Quantification is, however, very difficult since any
revenue or expense depends on the circumstances of each individual case.
The cost of the upgrading of the SME helpdesk would amount to EUR 130 000 per year.

2013/0103(COD) - 27/01/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading

The Committee on International Trade adopted the report by Christofer FJELLNER (EPP, SE) on the proposal for a regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No 1225/2009 on protection against dumped imports from countries not
members of the European Community and Council Regulation (EC) No 597/2009 on protection against subsidised imports from countries not
members of the European Community
The committee recommended that the Parliaments position adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should amend
the Commission proposal. The key amendments are as follows:
Scope: Members added that the use of any dumped product in connection with the exploration of the Continental Shelf or the Exclusive
Economic Zone of a Member State, or the exploitation of its resources, shall be treated as an import under this Regulation and shall be
charged to duty accordingly, when causing injury to the Union industry.
Definition: Members clarified the notion of a raw material in relation to the concept of structural distortion.
Lesser duty rule not applicable in certain cases: the lesser duty rule shall not apply in anti-dumping cases when it is established that the
exporting country engages in practices that significantly distort the regular course of trade, when the exporting country has an insufficient level
of social and environmental standards or when complainants are SMEs. It shall always apply, however, when structural raw material
distortions are the result of a deliberate choice made by a least developed country to protect its public interest and legitimate development
goals.
Powers of the Commission and consultation of Parliament: the committee added that any document aimed at clarifying the established
practices of the Commission with regard to the application of the Regulation (including the four draft guidelines on the selection of analogue
country, on expiry reviews and the duration of measures, on the injury margin and on the Union interest) should be adopted by the
Commission only after entry into force of the Regulation and proper consultation of the European Parliament and Council and should then fully
reflect the content of the Regulation.
Reimbursement of duties collected under expiry reviews: the Commission proposed to reimburse duties collected under expiry reviews, if
proven that dumping or subsidisation has been terminated, claiming that it would ensure effectiveness. However, the committee said this was
not desirable and deleted the provision in the interests of balance.
Registration: to mitigate the risk of stockpiling, registration of imports ought to take place following the submission of any justified request, and
from the date of initiation when justified by the complaint. The Commission should also have the possibility of ordering registration on its own
initiative.
SME Help Desk: Members felt that SMEs access to the instrument should be facilitated by establishing the SME Help Desk, which will raise
awareness of the instrument.
Time limits:
·

in anti-dumping cases, the duration of investigations should be limited to nine months (rather than 15 months) and those
investigations be concluded within 12 months of initiation of the proceedings.

·

in anti-subsidy cases, the duration of investigations should be limited to nine months (rather than 15 months) and those
investigations should be concluded within 10 months of initiation of the proceedings.

In any event, the provisional duties should be imposed only during a period commencing 60 days after the initiation of the proceedings
until six months after the initiation of the proceedings.
Undertakings and non-confidential information: parties that offer an undertaking shall be required to provide a meaningful non-confidential
version of such undertaking, so that it may be made available to interested parties to the investigation, the European Parliament and the
Council. The parties shall be requested to disclose as much information as possible regarding the content and nature of the undertaking with
due regard to the protection of confidential information. Furthermore, before accepting any such an offer the Commission shall consult the
Union industry with regard to the main features of the undertaking.
The Commission shall ensure the best possible access to information to all interested parties by allowing for an information system whereby
interested parties are notified when new non-confidential information is added to the investigation files. Non-confidential information shall also
be made accessible through a web-based platform.
Lastly, an amendment states that the Commission may, upon receiving a specific reasoned request from an interested party, decide to provide
them with information concerning the volume and import values of those products.
Report: the Commission shall present an annual report on the application and implementation of the Regulation as a part of a trade
defence instrument dialogue between the Commission, the European Parliament and the Council. The report shall include information about
the application of provisional and definitive measures, the termination of investigations without measures, undertakings, reinvestigations,
reviews and verification visits, and the activities of the various bodies responsible for monitoring the implementation of this Regulation and
fulfilment of the obligations arising therefrom.

2013/0103(COD) - 05/02/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st reading/single
reading
The European Parliament adopted amendments to the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending
Council Regulation (EC) No 1225/2009 on protection against dumped imports from countries not members of the European Community and
Council Regulation (EC) No 597/2009 on protection against subsidised imports from countries not members of the European Community.
The matter was referred back to the committee responsible for reconsideration. The vote was postponed to a later date.
Scope: Parliament considered that following the review, certain provisions of the Regulations should be amended in order to improve
transparency and predictability, provide for effective measures to fight against retaliation by third countries, improve effectiveness and

enforcement and optimise review practice.
It added that the use of any dumped product in connection with the exploration of the Continental Shelf or the Exclusive Economic Zone of a
Member State, or the exploitation of its resources, shall be treated as an import under this Regulation and shall be charged to duty
accordingly, when causing injury to the Union industry.
Definition: the text clarified the notion of a raw material in relation to the concept of structural distortion. Parliament considered that a raw
material shall be considered to be subject to structural distortion when its price is not solely the result of a normal operation of market forces
reflecting supply and demand. Such distortions are the outcome of interference from third countries, which includes, inter alia, export taxes,
export restrictions and dual pricing schemes.
Lesser duty rule not applicable in certain cases: the lesser duty rule shall not apply in anti-dumping cases when it is established that the
exporting country engages in practices that significantly distort the regular course of trade, when the exporting country has an insufficient level
of social and environmental standards or when complainants are SMEs.
The sufficient levels of social and environmental standards should be determined on the basis of the ratification and effective implementation
by the third country of Multilateral Environmental Agreements, and protocols thereunder, to which the Union is party any point in time, and of
ILO Conventions which are listed in Annex Ia.
The lesser duty rule shall always apply, however, when structural raw material distortions are the result of a deliberate choice made by a least
developed country to protect its public interest and legitimate development goals.
Powers of the Commission and consultation of Parliament: Parliament added that any document aimed at clarifying the established practices
of the Commission with regard to the application of the Regulation (including the four draft guidelines on the selection of analogue country, on
expiry reviews and the duration of measures, on the injury margin and on the Union interest) should be adopted by the Commission only
after entry into force of the Regulation and proper consultation of the European Parliament and Council and should then fully reflect the
content of the Regulation.
Reimbursement of duties collected under expiry reviews: the Commission proposed to reimburse duties collected under expiry reviews, if
proven that dumping or subsidisation has been terminated, claiming that it would ensure effectiveness. However, Parliament said this was not
desirable and deleted the provision in the interests of balance.
Registration: to mitigate the risk of stockpiling, registration of imports ought to take place following the submission of any justified request, and
from the date of initiation when justified by the complaint. The Commission should also have the possibility of ordering registration on its own
initiative.
SME Help Desk: Parliament felt that SMEs access to the instrument should be facilitated by establishing the SME Help Desk, which would
raise awareness of the instrument.
Time limits:
in anti-dumping cases, the duration of investigations should be limited to nine months and those investigations be concluded within 12
months of initiation of the proceedings.
in anti-subsidy cases, the duration of investigations should be limited to nine months and those investigations should be concluded
within 10 months of initiation of the proceedings.
in any event, the provisional duties should be imposed only during a period commencing 60 days after the initiation of the
proceedings until six months after the initiation of the proceedings.
Complaints may also be submitted jointly by the Union industry, or by any natural or legal person or any association not having legal
personality acting on behalf thereof, and trade unions.
Undertakings and non-confidential information: parties that offer an undertaking shall be required to provide a meaningful non-confidential
version of such undertaking, so that it may be made available to interested parties to the investigation, the European Parliament and the
Council. The parties should be requested to disclose as much information as possible regarding the content and nature of the undertaking with
due regard to the protection of confidential information. Furthermore, before accepting any such an offer the Commission should consult the
Union industry with regard to the main features of the undertaking.
The Commission should ensure the best possible access to information to all interested parties by allowing for an information system whereby
interested parties are notified when new non-confidential information is added to the investigation files. Non-confidential information shall also
be made accessible through a web-based platform.
Lastly, an amendment stated that the Commission may, upon receiving a specific reasoned request from an interested party, decide to provide
them with information concerning the volume and import values of those products.
Report: the Commission shall present an annual report on the application and implementation of the Regulation as a part of a trade
defence instrument dialogue between the Commission, the European Parliament and the Council. The report shall include information about
the application of provisional and definitive measures, the termination of investigations without measures, undertakings, reinvestigations,
reviews and verification visits, and the activities of the various bodies responsible for monitoring the implementation of this Regulation and
fulfilment of the obligations arising therefrom.
The European Parliament may, within one month of the Commission's presentation of the report, invite the Commission to an ad hoc meeting
of its responsible committee to present and explain any issues related to the implementation of this Regulation.

2013/0103(COD) - 16/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 553 votes to 85, with 84 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No 1225/2009 on protection against dumped imports from
countries not members of the European Community and Council Regulation (EC) No 597/2009 on protection against subsidised imports from
countries not members of the European Community.

The report was referred back to the committee during its 5 February 2014 plenary sitting.
Parliament adopted as its position at first reading the text adopted on 5 February 2014 (please refer to the summary of the same day).
Parliament requested in particular that certain provisions of the Regulations should be amended in order to improve transparency and
predictability, provide for effective measures to fight against retaliation by third countries.

2013/0103(COD) - 21/11/2014 Debate in Council
The Council discussed, in the light of a compromise proposed by the presidency, a draft regulation aimed at updating EU instruments for
tackling unfair competition from dumped and subsidised imports.
The discussion confirmed that there were difficulties in the way of the Council reaching an agreement on the proposal. They also confirmed
that delegations remain deeply divided on the proposal regarding the disapplication of the "Lesser Duty Rule" (LDR) : 11 Member States are in
favour, 3 others are also in favour but want more restricted definitions, whereas the remaining 14 are strongly against and want the status quo
to be maintained.
The "Lesser Duty Rule" (LDR) ensures that the duties imposed are not higher than necessary to remove the injury inflicted on the EU industry.
The duty amount is set at the lower level between the dumping margin and the injury level. The Presidency proposal foresees that the
disapplication of the LDR would apply to antidumping cases only.
Other than the "Lesser Duty Rule", discussions continued on a cluster of technical issues (SME Helpdesk, Reimbursement, Duration and
Shipping Clause/pre-disclosure) as well as on "Raw Materials" and "Energy".
The presidency therefore asked the Commission to reflect on the way forward.

