#6: What is Border Control?

#8: What is Schengen?

#14: The "four-tier access-control model"
#12: Border Management: The Big Picture

Frontex at a Glance

#18: The Role of Frontex
#20: Situation Monitoring and Risk Analysis

#22: Joint Operations at the Borders

700 million

#26: Training
travellers crossed the EU’s external borders in 2013.
Of those, only 107 000, or 0.015%, did so outside
of normal border controls

Frontex at a Glance

700 million

travellers crossed the EU’s external borders in 2013.
Of those, only 107 000, or 0.015%, did so outside
of normal border controls

Frontex at a Glance

What is Frontex?

What is Frontex?

Frontex at a Glance

What is Frontex?
The full name of Frontex is the European Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union.
Frontex was established by Council Regulation (EC) 2007/2004 on 26 October, 2004
and has its headquarters in Warsaw, the capital of Poland.

4

www.frontex.europa.eu

Frontex is the EU border control agency. It helps the
countries of Europe manage their borders and keep up
with changing trends in border control.

5

Frontex at a Glance

What is Border Control

What is Border Control

What is
Border Control?

Details of a passport stamp confirming border crossing:

Throughout the ages, civilisations, empires and nations have
marked the boundaries of their territories to control the
passage of people, to collect taxes and to defend their lands.
In the modern world, checks are performed
on all travellers crossing borders to ensure
they meet all the requirements for legal
entry. Border control also helps to combat
cross-border crimes, such as trafficking in
human beings and the smuggling of drugs
and other goods. It prevents the import
of illegal arms, counterfeit medicines and
endangered species, among other things.

There is much more to border
control than meets the eye.

There are three types of border — land, sea
and air (known in border control as green,
blue and white borders, respectively).
Green and blue borders refer to the land
and sea boundaries between officially
recognised Border Crossing Points (BCPs)
on major roads and rail lines or at sea ports
at which all legitimate crossings should
take place. The green or blue borders may
be monitored by modern surveillance
technology or human patrols. The term
‘air borders’ is rather misleading, as the
controls are not at the borders shown on
maps: they are conducted at the passportcontrol booths at international airports.
It is at these border crossing points that
Frontex does much of its work in assisting
the Member States of the European Union
to effectively manage their borders. Border
guards make sure that people crossing the
border have the necessary identification
and the right to enter the country or
territory.
This can be a time-consuming process and
queues are not uncommon at BCPs during
peak travel periods. That is why Frontex
invests a lot of time and effort in seeking
out new technology to improve the border
crossing experience of travellers.
The overwhelming majority of people
crossing borders do so legally and with
legitimate reasons, such as for holidays
or business trips. These travellers want

6

www.frontex.europa.eu

Frontex at a Glance

Entry stamp
Each stamp contains
the abbreviation
of the Member
State or SchengenAssociated Country.

Entry stamps have
square corners and
show a square with an
arrow going in.

A symbol shows which type
of border was crossed: land,
sea, air or railway.

The number on the stamp
identifies the officer
responsible for the decision.

Exit stamp

The date always appears in red
followed by a security code which
changes at least once a month.
Each country has its own security
code, issued by the EU.

Exit stamps have
rounded corners and
show a square with
an arrow coming out.

to get through with a minimum of fuss
and delay. Others, however, try to bypass
border controls either at BCPs by using
false documents or hiding in vehicles, or
between BCPs by crossing green or blue
borders on foot or by boat without being
checked. Modern border management is

The name of the border
crossing point is specified
on the stamp.

all about making the border tight enough
to detect people abusing the system but
fluid enough to let legitimate travellers
through as quickly as possible. This is
a huge task for border authorities, and
one that Frontex was established to help
them achieve.

7

Frontex at a Glance

What is Schengen?

What is Schengen?

Frontex at a Glance

What is Schengen?
The free movement of people is a central achievement of
the EU. In order to advance this freedom the Member States
agreed to create a free-travel area between them. Previously,
crossing multiple borders caused delays and hampered the
movement of people and goods within the Union.
The Schengen Area:
22 EU Member States +
4 Schengen-Associated
Countries = free internal
movement for more than
half a billion people.

Therefore, the Member States decided
to eliminate routine internal border
controls. On 14 June 1985, in the village of
Schengen in Luxembourg, an agreement
was signed by five countries (Luxemburg,
France, the Netherlands, Belgium and
West Germany) that started one of the
most significant changes in the history
of border management: internal border
controls between European countries
were to be removed. The area inside the
resulting external borders was named the
Schengen Area.
The decision to remove internal border
controls was also politically sensitive.
Member States’ citizens valued their
sovereignty — the right of each to control

Not all EU Member
States are in the
Schengen Area:
The UK and Ireland decided to
retain their border controls.
Similarly, not all members of
the Schengen area are in the
EU. These are called SchengenAssociated Countries and are
Iceland, Lichtenstein, Norway
and Switzerland.

8

www.frontex.europa.eu

its own borders — but for the Schengen
Area to work, all its members had to
show trust and solidarity. To cultivate this
spirit, strict rules were laid down for new
countries to join the area.
Before a new country can join, it has to
have its readiness assessed by evaluators
from the other Member States. These
assessments include the quality of its
border controls and visa systems, respect
for human rights, police cooperation with
other countries and protection of personal
data, as well as judicial cooperation with
other member countries.
In 2015, four countries were waiting to
join the Schengen Area: Croatia, Cyprus,
Bulgaria and Romania. After joining, each
member country is evaluated at least
every five years to ensure it maintains
the necessary standards. But the removal
of internal borders did not leave a single
external border. What was left was a series
of separate sea and land external borders,
sometimes with several authorities
having overlapping areas of responsibility.
In all cases, Member States bordering
non-EU countries remain responsible for
controlling those borders. Frontex was
set up to channel the practical solidarity
shown by the EU with the countries most
affected by migratory flows.

The Schengen Area
EU Schengen States
Non-Schengen EU States
Non-EU Schengen States
9

Frontex at a Glance

Schengen Borders Code

Schengen Borders Code
The Schengen Borders Code is a document outlining
the rules and responsibilities for countries within
the Schengen Area.
It requires all participating states to “remove
all and any obstacles to the free movement
of people and goods across borders” within
the area. Thus, road, rail and air passengers
are free from “systematic” passport checks.
The code also prohibits systematic controls
for customs and tax purposes, although
security checks are still allowed and are
carried out at airports, for instance. The
Schengen Borders Code also specifies
the conditions under which permission
may be granted to enter the Schengen
Area by crossing an external border. The
requirements are:
– to possess a valid travel document;
– to possess a valid visa, if required;
– to have a justified purpose for your stay
and to have sufficient funds to support
yourself;
– to not have an alert issued on you in the
Schengen Information System (a database
of missing persons, criminal suspects
and people barred from entering the
Schengen Area, as well as listing
stolen property, including travel
documents, and other identified
law-enforcement threats);
– to not be considered a threat to
public policy, internal security,
public health or the international
relations of EU countries.
It also specifies that airlines
and other carriers must check
that their passengers have the
required travel documents (i.a.

10

www.frontex.europa.eu

Who has their
passport stamped?
- All ‘third-country nationals’
(non-EU nationals) with the
exception of citizens of “European
micro-states” — Andorra,
Monaco and San Marino.

Who is exempt?
- Family members of EU and Schengen
states’ citizens who have a valid
residence permit and are travelling

Citizens of EU countries can travel freely with
their cat, dog or ferret if it has a European pet
passport. This passport is available from any
authorised veterinarian and must contain details
of a valid anti-rabies vaccination. National
rules apply to the issuance of pet passports,
including for other species. The animal requires
an electronic microchip or a readable tattoo with
the same code as in the passport.

You may carry animals or plants – including
parts – when you are travelling in EU countries.
But most EU countries have strict rules on
transporting endangered species or products
derived from them. Some species
require a permit to travel. During
outbreaks of animal diseases,
there may also be local restrictions
on the movement of live animals
and products of animal origin.

together with a European citizen.
- Third-country nationals holding
special permits because they live in
a border area (on the basis of Local
Border Traﬃc Agreements).
- Heads of state and other dignitaries
if the border authority has been
oﬃcially informed of their expected
arrival through diplomatic channels
- Aircraft crews, including pilots.
- Seamen stopping at port (as long
as they do not leave the port area),
including the crews and passengers
of some cruise ships.

passport and visa) before boarding. All
non-EU citizens wishing to enter the
Schengen Area at an external border must
have their passports stamped, although
there are some exceptions (see box). In
exceptional circumstances, if a Member
State believes there is a serious threat
to “public policy or internal security”, the
Schengen Borders Code permits that
country’s authorities to reinstate internal
border controls for a limited period. This
sometimes happens as a reaction to
intense migrant flow or during large-scale
sports events, such as the Olympics and
international football championships, or
high-level political events.
The Schengen Borders Code states that
when performing their duties border
guards must fully respect human dignity
and may not discriminate against
individuals on the grounds of sex, racial or
ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability,
age, or sexual orientation. Schengen
countries are required to deploy
appropriate staff and resources
in sufficient numbers to ensure
a “high and uniform level of
control” at their external
borders. They must ensure that
border guards are properly
trained. EU and SchengenAssociated Countries also
assist each other with the
effective application of
border controls.

11

Frontex at a Glance

Border Management: The Big Picture

Border
Management:
The Big Picture
Historically, border control meant control of the
line between states. But the EU has a wider view of
the issue, called Integrated Border Management (IBM).
The IBM concept reflects the fact that what happens at the border is only a small
part of any journey. To be effective, border management has to cover the whole
process, which starts long before the traveller reaches the border and may continue
long afterwards. Knowledge, and to some extent control, of what happens before the
border, in the country of departure and in countries of transit, as well as what happens
inland once the border has been crossed, is also important. This is only possible if there is
effective cooperation between the large number of people and institutions involved.
To maintain the balance between easing legitimate travel and policing the border,
integrated border management requires all authorities concerned to work together as
effectively as possible. This means cooperation not only between countries of the EU and
Schengen Area but also across the external borders with the authorities of neighbouring
states and countries of origin of travellers. There are three levels of coordination
involved in the IBM concept: between services (border control, customs, police),
between agencies (some countries have several authorities responsible for
different aspects of border control) and between countries, whether within or
beyond the EU/Schengen Area.
Border control — in the form of border checks and border surveillance as
defined in the Schengen Borders Code — is one of the key elements of
IBM and includes relevant risk analysis and intelligence on criminal
groups and their methods. The other elements are: the detection
and investigation of cross-border crime together with other lawenforcement authorities; the four-tier access-control model
(see p. 14-17); inter-agency cooperation (between border
guards, customs, police, national security and others, including
cooperation with authorities in non-EU countries); and
coordination of the Member States' and EU's activities.
By incorporating all these elements, the intention is to have
control over the whole process of entering and staying in the
EU/Schengen Area, not just the process of crossing the border,
which only takes a few seconds in most cases.

12

www.frontex.europa.eu

Border Management: The Big Picture

Frontex at a Glance

Before reaching the border
When travellers arrive at a border crossing they
should already have all the required documents.
These may include a visa in addition to a valid
passport and maybe a work permit or other
supporting documents, depending on the type of
visa presented. All the procedures needed to gain
these documents fall within the scope of IBM and
may involve liaison officers and document experts
from EU/Schengen countries, as well as special
training for officials of Schengen states working in
consular posts overseas. Airlines and other carriers also have an obligation to ensure that passengers have the necessary documents.

Crossing the border
On average, a border guard at an EU airport booth
has just 12 seconds to decide whether someone has
the right to enter. Although the most visible part
of border control, document checks and database
queries at border crossing points only form a tiny
part of the whole IBM process.

After crossing the border
After travellers have entered the EU or Schengen
Area they are still subject to border control. If
they overstay their permitted limit, they may be
subject to a return decision, which is also part
of the integrated border management process.
People found crossing the border without
authorisation are interviewed and assessed
on a case-by-case basis. If they wish to claim
asylum, they are referred to the relevant national
authority. Those without a legal right to stay can
be repatriated under the national laws of
EU/Schengen countries.

13

Border control itself is only one
piece of the puzzle. IBM also
includes the bigger picture at the
EU level, in terms of visa policy,
asylum policy, return operations
for people found staying illegally
and social and foreign policy,
to mention just a few factors.
1

Before people travel to the EU
they need to have all the necessary
documents: passport, visa and
other supporting documents.

2

People-smuggling networks often
provide migrants with false travel
documents that enable them to
enter the EU.

3

Cooperation with countries outside
the EU, or 'third countries', is vital for
effective border management. This
cooperation ranges from the practical
level, between police and other bordercontrol services, to diplomatic and
policy-level relations.

4

5

Tier 1:
Measures in ‘third countries’: activities in countries
outside the EU/Schengen Area, especially countries
of origin and transit. This includes information gathered
by immigration liaison officers of the Member States,
as well as the work of consular staff in issuing visas.

Tier 4:

Tier 2:

3

2

Activities inside the EU/Schengen Area and between EU
and Schengen countries: control measures within the
territory, including detection, investigation and return of
people over-staying the legal duration of their visa.

Cooperation
with neighbouring
countries, i.e. those
countries bordering
the EU/Schengen Area.

Tier 3:
Controls at the external
land, sea and air borders
(border checks and
border surveillance).

8
5

14

www.frontex.europa.eu

10

9

All documents are checked when
a traveller leaves en route to Europe.
This may involve officials from
the Member States, as well as law
enforcement agencies locally, airline
staff and others.
Although the most visible part of border
control is document checks, officers
work to deter and detect offences such
as human trafficking or smuggling of
drugs, weapons, animals, plants and
radioactive materials.

Cooperation with neighbouring
countries is an important element
of effective border management.

7

All travellers arriving at the EU external
border have their documents checked.

8

Border surveillance is carried out between
authorised crossing points at the sea
and land borders. Such surveillance
might involve officers on patrol, specially
trained dogs and specialist surveillance
equipment.

9

Apart from document checks, many
other activities are carried out at
border crossing points. These range
from inspections of animals and animal
products, plants and agricultural
produce to customs.

10

When people stay longer in the EU than
legally entitled they receive a ‘return
decision’ saying they have to leave the EU.

11

If following a return decision by a relevant
authority of an EU country migrants fail
to return to their country of origin, they
might be forcibly repatriated.

12

The situation at all border crossing points
and the green and blue borders between
them is also constantly monitored by the
Member States and Frontex see page 20

6

4

1

6

12
7

11

Frontex at a Glance

The Role of Frontex

The Role of Frontex

Frontex at a Glance

Rapid Response

The Role
of Frontex

When one of the Member States experiences a large and sudden increase in
migratory pressure at its external border it can ask Frontex for the deployment
of a rapid response team to the affected area. Members of such teams are
trained by Frontex and can be deployed at short notice.see page 22

Operational Assistance
When one of the Member States needs assistance managing
a vulnerable border area Frontex strengthens border control there by
deploying border guards and technical equipment
made available by the Member States. Such
assistance coordinated by Frontex is
called a joint operation. see page 22

Research & Development
Frontex keeps up with the latest developments in
new technology in border surveillance, border control
and information management. The agency shares this
information with the border authorities in the Member
States. The aim is to use technology to make legitimate
travel as quick and efficient as possible and enhance
border surveillance at the land and maritime borders.

Combining Resources
Border authorities make some of their border guards and
technical equipment available to Frontex for use in operations at
the external borders. Frontex pools officers specialised in different
areas of border control and equipment ranging from thermo-vision
vans and patrol boats to aircraft.see page 22

see page 28

Analysing Data
In its daily work Frontex gathers and analyses
data on irregular migration and then shares its
findings with the Member States, the European
Commission and other organisations. Its risk
analysis reports identify trends in irregular
migration at the EU's external borders.
see page 20

www.frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu
18

Training
Sharing Information
The Eurosur information sharing platform created by Frontex, which
connects National Coordination Centres in individual countries,
allows sharing information on the situation at the external borders
among the Member States. Frontex uses the same network to
upload updates from its joint operations.see page 21

Creating a common framework for the
training of Europe’s border guards is an
important part of Frontex’s function. Working
together with authorities in the Member States,
Frontex develops training programs in areas ranging
from the use of specialised equipment to combating
trafficking in human beings.see page 26

Joint Returns
Frontex assists countries with the return of people
who have exhausted all legal possibilities of staying in
Europe. When several countries have returnees to be
repatriated to the same country, Frontex coordinates
flights called Joint Return Operations. It also develops
best practices and guidelines in this area to ensure all
rights of the returnees are respected. see page 24

Frontex at a Glance

Situation Monitoring and Risk Analysis

Situation Monitoring and Risk Analysis

Frontex at a Glance

Situation Monitoring
and Risk Analysis
There is more to border control than border
surveillance and checking passports.
In fact, border control cannot just rely
on the document checks at the various
crossing points and border surveillance
between them. Effective border
management also requires an accurate
and timely picture of the external borders
and an analysis of possible threats and
vulnerabilities.
For the management of Europe’s borders
to be consistent, timely information flow
is key. For this reason, much of Frontex's
daily work is related to gathering, analysing
and disseminating information about
the situation at the external borders and
identifying potential risks. While Frontex
risk analysts concentrate on analysing
the past and predicting future trends in
migration, the Frontex Situation Centre’s
(FSC) job is to focus on the present.

20

www.frontex.europa.eu

The FSC maintains the clearest possible
picture of the most recent developments
at EU borders. By constantly monitoring
Frontex’s own operations, media sources
and information from Member States’
border authorities, the FSC keeps the
agency and its partners constantly up
to date through daily reports, bulletins
and alerts. This service is particularly
important during joint operations
and emergency situations. Once this
information arrives at the agency, Frontex
analyses the data and the information
gathered and produces structured
assessments of risks at the borders
related to irregular migration and
cross-border crime.

Frontex also created Eurosur, a framework
that supports Member States by providing
them with quicker access to useful
information about what is happening at
EU borders.
Frontex produces regular risk analysis
reports on trends in irregular migration
and cross-border crime, including new
methods used by criminal groups. It also
estimates likely future developments
along with recommendations for action,
which are then used in the planning of

Frontex joint operations at the external
borders and other activities.
Frontex creates detailed and specific risk
analyses at the request of Member States
and institutions such as the European
Commission to assist decision making
at the national and European level. In
addition, Frontex prepares reports on
specific aspects of border control, such as
combating trafficking in human beings or
the use of false documents.

Frontex at a Glance

Joint Operations at the Borders

Joint Operations at the Borders

Frontex at a Glance

Joint Operations
at the Borders
When there is exceptional migratory
pressure at one of the external
borders, Frontex may assist the
authorities of that country.
In such cases Frontex musters the
resources of all member states willing to
contribute border guards and technical
equipment, and coordinates their
deployment to a specific location – this
maybe at a land or sea border or at any of
the international airports. During a joint
operation officers from Member States
and Schengen-Associated Countries (SAC)
patrol and conduct border checks, always
together with officers from the country
hosting the operation. All joint operations
are carried out according to a clearly
defined and legally binding operational
plan which specifies its objectives and
defines the area and the duration of the
operation. The border guards deployed
by the Member States to Frontexcoordinated joint operations, called guest
officers, and the crews of vessels and
aircraft work under the command of the
hosting country, which has a leading
operational role on the territory of its
state. However, guest officers have full
rights of border guards, including the right
to intercept and detain irregular migrants.
In addition to border surveillance and
border checks, in some operations
Frontex may also deploy screeners who
help to establish the nationalities of
migrants and their protection needs, as
well as debriefers who gather information
voluntarily provided by migrants on

22

www.frontex.europa.eu

the people smuggling networks. The
behaviour of officers serving in joint
operations is subject to a Code of
Conduct, which ensures adherence to
best practices in border control, the
highest professional standards and
respect for the fundamental rights of
all involved.
Most costs of joint operations related
to the deployment of border guards
and technical equipment are covered by
Frontex. Upon completion, every joint
operation is evaluated in terms of its
effectiveness against the objectives set
in the operational plan.
The agency may also dispatch rapid
response teams to assist Member
States facing a situation of urgent and
exceptional pressure at their borders.
Sea operations and
search and rescue
Saving lives at sea is always the first
priority. Consequently, every time a
boat in distress is detected operational
activities coordinated by Frontex are
suspended. The national Search-AndRescue (SAR) coordination centre takes
operational command over, redirecting
vessels and aircraft to the place of
incident. Such SAR operations contribute
to saving thousands of lives every year.

23

Frontex at a Glance

Joint Return Operations

Joint Return Operations

Frontex at a Glance

Joint Return Operations
In addition to border control operations, Frontex
also coordinates joint return operations (JROs).
When a third country national has
exhausted all legal possibilities of staying
in EU territory, either he has overstayed
his visa, his residence permit has run
out or his asylum application has been
rejected, he can be repatriated to his
country of origin on the basis of an
individual return decision ordered by
a judicial process of the Member State
concerned.
In such cases the migrant receives an
official notice to leave the EU country
and if he does not do so voluntarily, he
might be forcibly returned to his country
on board a return flight organised by the
national authorities.

States. However, in situations when
several Member States want to return
migrants to the same country it is more
efficient and cost effective to share the
same flight. Such joint return flights,
which are organised by one of the
Member States, are coordinated and
co-financed by Frontex. First the agency
informs all Member States of
the possibility of using
a joint return flight
to repatriate

Over 96% of return flights are
organised by individual Member

Code of Conduct
and Best Practices
To ensure respect for dignity and rights of the
returnees and the safety of all aboard, Frontex
employees and escorts are subject to the Frontex
Code of Conduct for Return Operations. In
addition, escorts and Frontex employees who
participate in JROs undergo special Frontex
training. Over the years Frontex has also
gathered valuable knowledge on how to organise
returns, which it now shares as best practices
with the member states. These include the
obligatory presence of medical personnel
and interpreters on return flights.

24

www.frontex.europa.eu

migrants to a specific country. Member
States have several weeks to express
interest. Once the list of returnees has
been confirmed, migrants accompanied
by escorting officers fly to the Member

State organising the flight, where they
board a chartered plane. Returnees
accompanied by escorts fly together to
their country of origin, where they are
handed over to the national authorities.

Frontex at a Glance

Training

Training

Training
Diﬀerent countries have diﬀerent needs and
priorities when it comes to border control.
Countries in the Schengen Area have
different types of borders and different
needs when it comes to border
management. For example, Austria and
Hungary have no sea borders, while Malta
and Iceland have no land borders. With
22 Member States and four SchengenAssociated Countries, the Schengen
Area has a diverse range of needs and
approaches to border security. For these
systems to work together some degree
of harmonisation is required, not least in
terms of training. Although the agency
does not replace national training, it
creates a training framework which

allows border guards from different
countries to work effectively together.
This is of particular importance during
joint operations, when having the same
goals, methods and standards, and
compatible terminology is of paramount
importance. These include knowledge
of human rights and its application in
border control, recognition of vulnerable
groups, sensitivity to cultural diversity, and
good social and communication skills, to
mention just a few.
For this reason Frontex, together with the
Member States and other partners, has
created a Common Core Curriculum (CCC)

for all border guards, as well as mid- and
high-level curricula for senior officers.
The CCC consists of a general part and
modules for sea, air and land borders,
and has been translated into various EU
languages. A mid-level course focuses
on European cooper ation, leadership
and management, and fundamental
rights. The European Joint Degree Study
Programme, also developed by Frontex,
is a professionally oriented 1.5-year
master’s programme.
Frontex has also developed a wide range
of training courses for specialist skills in
border control. These include areas as
diverse as language training, countering
trafficking in human beings, detection of
falsified documents and stolen vehicles,
and training in interviewing irregular
migrants to gather information about
people-smuggling networks.

Best practices
One of the ways in which Frontex
helps the Member States to achieve
high and uniform standards in
border management is through the
collection of best practices. The agency
identifies, collects and disseminates
best practices in all areas of border
management. Frontex produces
manuals of best practices in areas as
diverse as escorting returnees on joint
return flights to Automated Border
Control systems and passport checks
at border crossing points. Promotion
of best practices also plays an
important role in the agency's
training activities.

Frontex at a Glance

Partnership
Academies
To help create high and
common standards in border
control in Europe, Frontex
has developed a network
of Partnership Academies.
These are typically police or border guard
academies in individual Member States
which cooperate with Frontex in furthering
its training goals. Frontex develops training
programs and trains the trainers, who in turn
deliver instruction to border guards from
across Europe.
At Partnership Academies border guards
receive both practical and theoretical training
in skills such as sea or mountain survival,
use of night vision goggles, identification
of victims of trafficking in human beings,
detection of forged documents and less
technical but equally important fields, such
as fundamental rights and ethics.

27

Frontex at a Glance

Research & Development

Research & Development

Frontex at a Glance

Research
& Development
Modern technology presents both
opportunities and challenges for
border control.
On the positive side, use
of technology allows
faster and more
efficient passage for
the travellers going
through busy airports.
Facial recognition
technology and
biometric passports can
be harnessed to make life
easier and safer at the border.
On the other hand, the techniques used
by criminal groups to forge or falsify
travel documents are also increasingly
sophisticated and present border guards
with a challenge.
Consequently, border technologies need to
be sufficiently flexible to adapt to changing
circumstances and diverse conditions
across national borders, and meet specific
needs of border guards at land, sea and
air borders. In an EU with no internal
border controls and with common external
borders, another key challenge lies in the
ability of different systems and national
authorities to work together.
Technology is increasingly important in the
two main fields of border management –

28

www.frontex.europa.eu

Automated
Border Control
One of the main areas of
interest of border authorities
is Automated Border
Control (ABC). With the
growing volume of passenger
traﬃc worldwide, ABC gates
are becoming more common
and it is of great importance
that diﬀerent types of gates
are able to read all biometric
passports. Frontex's work
aimed at the harmonisation
of these technologies has fostered better understanding of
how these systems work and
how they can help manage
large passenger ﬂows without
compromising security.

border checks and border surveillance –
and it is part of Frontex's job to help
Member States stay up to date. Frontex
bridges the gap between the world of
industry, research organisations and
scientists and the work of border control
by acting as an interface between the
two. The agency does so by gathering
information on the practical challenges
faced at the border and transmitting it to
those who conduct research in this area.
At the same time, Frontex surveys the
world of research and development and
keeps border guards informed about
relevant new developments.
Frontex participates in the definition and
assessment of research projects focused on
border surveillance funded by the European
Commission. The agency also supports the
application of new systems developed to
facilitate crossing the EU borders by bona
fide travellers, such as ABC.
However, there is more to Frontex‘s
research and development function than
technology. Important social research
subjects, such as ethics in border
management, risk analysis methodology
or how best to tackle corruption, are also
within its remit.

29

Frontex at a Glance

Frontex's Partners

Frontex's Partners

Frontex at a Glance

Frontex's Partners
Frontex builds cooperation with border authorities in
countries located beyond the EU and Schengen Area
and with a wide range of European institutions and
international organisations.
Cooperation with different partners, such
as neighbouring countries, international
organisations and NGOs, is a very important
aspect of effective border management.
Many Member States sign bilateral
agreements with neighbouring countries
that allow operational cooperation at the
border. Frontex also cooperates with border
authorities in third countries; it does so in
line with EU external relations policy and on
the basis of individual bilateral agreements
called working arrangements. In the ten
years of its existence, Frontex has signed
20 working arrangements with countries
in Europe and beyond, including countries
bordering the EU, such as Turkey, and the
Western Balkans, and African countries,
such as Nigeria and Cape Verde. These
agreements provide the framework for
cooperation in the different fields of activity
covered by Frontex – from exchange of
information and cooperation in the area
of risk analysis to training, research and
development and operational cooperation.
Frontex also has ties to law enforcement
agencies, such as Europol and Interpol,
for example in areas such as Trafficking
in Human Beings and drug smuggling.
Ultimately, borders are about people,
including vulnerable groups that need
to be recognised and protected. The
Agency works with the European Asylum
Support Office (EASO), the Office of the

30

www.frontex.europa.eu

UN High Commissioner for Refugees
(UNHCR), the International Organization
for Migration (IOM) and a number
of other organisations. In addition,
Frontex has established close ties with
the International Centre for Migration
Policy Development (ICMPD) in the field
of management of migratory flows.
Frontex's role in the development of the
Eurosur information exchange platform,

Consultative Forum
The Consultative Forum
advises the Management
Board and the Executive
Director on all fundamental
rights matters related to
border control, including
development and
implementation of Frontex's
fundamental rights strategy
and codes of conduct
for border guards. The
Consultative Forum is made
up of nongovernmental
organisations, such as Amnesty
International, European bodies
(including FRA and EASO) and
international organisations,
such as the UNHCR.

which foresees provision of different
services for the Member States (from
detailed weather forecasts to systems
allowing identification of vessels),
requires close partnership with EMSA
(the European Maritime Safety Agency),
EUSC (the European Union Satellite

Centre) and EFCA (The European Fisheries
Control Agency).
Last, but not least, Frontex cooperates
closely with the Fundamental Rights
Agency (FRA) to promote fundamental
rights in all aspects of border management.

31

Frontex at a Glance

Frontex's Management Board

Frontex's Management Board

Frontex at a Glance

Frontex's
Management Board
While the day-to-day management of Frontex is
the responsibility of the Executive Director, Frontex's
Management Board oversees all the activities of the agency.
The Management Board is composed
of two representatives of the European
Commission and representatives of
the heads of the border authorities
of the 26 Member States that are
signatories of the Schengen acquis. These
28 management board members have full
voting rights.
The Board also comprises representatives
from non-Schengen EU Member States
the United Kingdom and Ireland, as well
as Iceland, Lichtenstein, Norway and
Switzerland (countries that are not EU
members but which are associated with
the implementation, application and

development of the Schengen acquis),
who have limited voting rights.
The Board meets five times a year and all
meetings are convened by its Chairperson,
who is elected for a four-year term by the
management board members.
Among other things, the Board
establishes the agency's budget and
verifies its execution, approves annual
and multiannual programmes of work,
ensures transparent decision-making
procedures are in place, and appoints
the Executive and Deputy Executive
Directors.

Financial Accountability
Once the annual Frontex budget has been endorsed by
the Management Board, it is presented to the European
Commission and must be approved by the European
Parliament and the European Council. Frontex is also legally
required to report about each year’s activities and expenses
to the European Parliament, the European Council, the
Commission, the European Economic and Social Committee
and the Court of Auditors. In addition, every year the
European Court of Auditors performs an audit of the final
accounts from the previous year.

32

www.frontex.europa.eu

33

#5: What is Frontex?
#30: Frontex's Partners

#10: Schengen Borders Code

#28: Research & Development

#32: Frontex's Management Board

#24:
Joint Return
Operations

The European Agency for the Management of
Operational Cooperation at the External Borders
of the Member States of the European Union.
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

Copyright (c) 2015 Frontex.
All rights reserved.
ISBN 978-92-95205-12-3 (paperback)
doi: 10.2819/3864
TT-01-14-644-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-03-1 (PDF)
doi: 10.2819/35828
TT-01-14-644-EN-N

