Reg. No 17043

MANAGEMENT BOARD DECISION No 40/2015
of 28 October 2015
adopting recommendations of the Management Board following the
evaluation of Frontex (Article 33)

THE MANAGEMENT BOARD
Having regard to the Frontex Regulation1, in particular Article 33(3) thereof,

Whereas:
(1)

The findings, conclusions and recommendations in the final report of the external evaluation of
Frontex were received on [date] and carefully considered by the Management Board.

(2)

The comments and suggestions to the findings of the evaluation were discussed during the
55th meeting of the Management Board and addressed by a number of Member States in writing.

HAS DECIDED AS FOLLOWS:
Article 1
Object
The recommendations of the Management Board issued following the evaluation of Frontex (Article 33)
annexed hereto are adopted.

Article 2
Entry into force
This decision enters into force on the day of its adoption.
Done in written procedure, 28 October 2015

For the Management Board
[signed]
Ralf Göbel
Chairperson
Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 of 26 October 2004 establishing a European Agency for the Management of
Operation Cooperation at the External Boarders of the Member States of the European Union OJ L 349, 25.11.2004,
p.1, as last amended.
1

Recommendations issued following the evaluation of the European Agency for
the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the
Member States of the European Union (Frontex) approved by the Management
Board on 28 October 2015

Foreword
In line with Article 33 of Regulation (EC) 2007/2004, as amended by Regulations (EC) 863/2007 and
1168/2011 (hereinafter ‘the Regulation’), the Management Board of Frontex commissioned an
independent external evaluation of the implementation of the Regulation. Following a competitive
tender, the study was carried out by a consultant who worked according to terms of reference agreed
by the Management Board and under the guidance of a Steering Committee composed of Board
Members.
The report was forwarded to the members of the Management Board on 29 July 2015 and discussed
during the 55th meeting in 10 September 2015.
The Agency and the Management Board found that the consultants had completed their work in line
with the terms of reference. Notwithstanding some weaknesses in the analysis and evaluation of the
information and views gathered from interested parties, the Management Board has found the
consultant’s work to be a helpful exploration of the current state of affairs, and an acceptable basis
on which to prepare the recommendations set out below.
Based on the experiences since the last amendment of the regulation and taking into account the
results of the external evaluation and the Commission's feasibility study, the Management Board is
of the opinion that:













Frontex’s coordination of Joint Operations was effective as having successfully carried out
its tasks in terms of coordination and the development of operational plans;
Frontex’s activities have been very effective in supporting the coordination and organisation
of Joint Return Operations and that high quality and accurate risk analyses were carried
out on time;
Frontex’s operational activities have positively contributed to the improvement of
integrated management of the external borders of the MSs;
By providing high-quality and up-to-date information on the risks and situation at the external
borders, Frontex has facilitated the application of more effective measures of external
border management;
Through its operational and risk analyses activities, Frontex has contributed to achieving an
efficient, high and uniform level of border control at the EU external borders and has
facilitated the movement of travellers whilst ensuring border security;
The Agency has clearly provided added value to the border management activities of Member
States;
Efficient working practices and procedures are in place in the area of operational
cooperation. The coordination and implementation of JROs and risk analyses activities were
highlighted as particularly good examples;
Cooperation between the Agency and the Member States with regard to operational
activities is generally effective and the establishment of the NFPoCs is contributing to a more
streamlined cooperation;
The Agency has also been particularly effective in the provision of assistance to Member
States’ training of national border guards and has also fulfilled its mandate in the area of
research and development;
Frontex’s activities have contributed to improving the border protection capacity of
Member States, as well as access to relevant technical and human resources for operations
at the external borders, and knowledge and development of technical equipment for
border surveillance and control;
Collaboration with EASO, Europol, EU-LISA and FRA was an important milestone in the work
of the Agency;
1





Frontex has contributed to an improved integration of external border management
through the Agency’s horizontal activities;
Frontex has introduced a number of initiatives to ensure that working practices and
procedures contribute to effective operations; and
The appointment of the Fundamental Rights Officer and the establishment of the
Consultative Forum have contributed to ensuring and promoting the respect of
fundamental rights in the Agency’s activities.

Independently of these findings, that Management Board are convinced that there is room for
improvement in the areas set out below.
Frontex should strengthen its operational response capacities and its capacity to respond to the rapid
developments of migration flows. To this end, the Agency needs sufficient funding and staffing.
Regarding the need for further coordination by Frontex, the Management Board believes that such
need can be identified in the area of Joint Return Operations. The need for further increased
coordination was also recognised for the risk analysis element to management of the external
borders. In this context, the cooperation with third countries is another area where a need for
increased coordination through Frontex can be seen.
The strengthening of the coordination role of Frontex should include further considerations of a
European System of Border Guards, based on a feasibility study, and in line with the share of
competences between the Union and the Member States.
On the basis of these findings and with the aim of finding a remedy for these shortcomings, the
Management Board presents its recommendations below.

2

Recommendations related to changes of the Council Regulation 2007/2004, as
amended by Regulations (EC) 863/2007 and 1168/2011

Recommendation 1 - Enhanced role in the implementation of return operations.
In the context of hot spots and in agreement with the responsible Member State, Frontex should
be enabled to initiate, organise and/or finance return operations to the benefit of only one
Member State. Furthermore, Frontex should be enabled to provide pre-return assistance. This
may require the immediate identification, registration and where appropriate, limitations to free
movement of people obliged to leave the territory of the Member State concerned. The
competent Member State should have the necessary powers to do so. This is also basic
prerequisite for a Frontex coordinated support.
Further explanation:
The Management Board proposes that Frontex should have a stronger role in the field of return operations.
Frontex should further develop its support to MSs and be able to organise return operations within a short
period of time.
To contribute to a quick response and an efficient return policy, Frontex should contract appropriate assets.
As a result the number of illegal migrants that can be returned should increase significantly. To this end,
Frontex should develop its pool of return teams and a monitoring team with regard forced returns.
Frontex should be enabled to provide pre-return assistance (e.g. on the field of acquiring travel documents,
strengthening return capacity of Member States) and initiate return operations in cooperation with the MS
concerned; to this end, enhanced information sharing dedicated to swift return of returnable migrants should
be carried out.
In the context of hot spots, Frontex should be enabled to organise and/or finance return operations to the
benefit of only one Member State (in agreement with this MS).With the support of EEAS, Frontex should
continue to conclude working arrangements with third countries to enhance the implementation of the EU
return policy. In this regard, Frontex’ Liaison Officers deployed in those countries should cooperate with the
local, competent authorities contributing to the identification of illegal migrants and prepare and assist
repatriation operations. Return capacities of third countries should be strengthened. Frontex should make use
of existing capacities and expertise, for example available in the EURINT, ERIN and EURLO Networks.

Recommendation 2 - Rapid Border Intervention Teams
Frontex should be legally enabled to propose a deployment of the Rapid Border Intervention
Teams (RABIT) for a limited period of time, if a Member State faces a situation of urgent and
exceptional pressure. After consultation with the Management Board, the Council and the
Parliament should be informed by the Agency about the outcome of such consultations.
Further explanation:
The Agency shall base its proposal on risk analyses according to Article 4 of the Regulation. In order to use the
rapid intervention mechanism in a more flexible way, Frontex should, based on risk assessment, procure
relevant technical equipment and services. Frontex should explore possibilities to complement a RABIT
mechanism by using the Seconded Guest Officer scheme.

3

Recommendation 3 - Increased responsibilities to support the Hot Spot approach
The tasks and powers of guest officers deployed by Frontex (identifier, debriefer, and screener)
have to be assessed in light of the current Hot Spot approach in Italy and Greece in order to
specify them in the Frontex regulation. The execution of coercive measures, as foreseen in the
Eurodac Regulation has to be clarified and aligned.
Further explanation:
The Hot Spots is an approach related to joint operations. A Hot Spot is understood as a holistic operational
response applicable to areas of significant migratory pressure at external borders. Its main purpose is assisting
a Member State to distinguish migrants in need of international protection and illegal migrants in a form of a
coordinated support from the EU agencies. A swift return of migrants who are not eligible for asylum should
be achieved. For such purpose a systematic identification (including the use of finger prints), screening and
debriefing has to be done. A close cooperation between host Member States’ border guards, Member States’
experts deployed by Frontex, and Member States’ experts deployed by other agencies (EASO, EUROPOL, Eurojust
etc.) is needed.

Recommendation 4 - Cooperation with Third Countries
Frontex should initiate an approach to analyse the potential of illegal migration in the relevant
countries of origin and the transit countries. This will create the basis for needs-based training
and equipment assistance. It will also develop an effective border management scheme. This
applies in particular to EU candidate countries.
Competent authorities of Third Countries could participate in joint border operations and return
operations coordinated by Frontex, provided that certain requirements are met. The role of
Frontex and the status of the Member States’ experts deployed by Frontex in the context of third
country related activities should be clarified.
Further explanation:
The Management Board recommends that the mandate of the Agency related to cooperation with Third
Countries should be further strengthened to better prevent and fight against illegal migration and border
related crime.
Frontex should support the development of effective border management schemes in relevant Third Countries.
In particular, this includes the future development of the coordination points approach and the deployment of
Frontex’ Liaison Officers. Frontex should also enhance capacity building measures, related to integrated border
management.
Frontex should initiate an approach to analyse the potential of illegal migration in the relevant countries of
origin and the transit countries so as to create the basis for needs-based training and equipment assistance.
This will develop an effective border management scheme. Further down this line, Frontex might take part in
training and equipment assistance projects (along the lines of bilateral training and equipment aid provided by
Member States on a bilateral basis) or in the field of CSDP missions of the European Union.
Nevertheless, Frontex main activities and focus should remain on measures of external border control.
Competent authorities of Third Countries could participate in joint border operations and return operations
coordinated by Frontex, provided that certain requirements are met.
The role of Frontex and the status of the Member States’ experts deployed by Frontex in the context of Third
Country related activities should be clarified. Any deployment of Member State’ officers for CSDP missions
outside the EU should be accompanied by consent of a Member State in question.
A flexible approach to finance operational activities in relation to Member States and Third Countries is
required.

4

Recommendation 5 - Monitoring secondary movements
The Management Board proposes that Frontex should be entitled to monitor the movements of
illegal migration across the internal borders of the EU Member States.
Further explanation:
The so called ‘secondary and intra-Schengen movements’ play an increasingly important role in the context of
the management to external borders. A short-term exchange of relevant information is required in order to
enable a holistic assessment and rapid compensatory measures. The common communication network EUROSUR
can be used for this purpose. Furthermore, Frontex has an increasing role in preparation of joint operations
launched by the Council presidency.

Recommendation 6 - Facilitation of financial management
The Management Board recommends abandoning the limitation introduced by the Frontex
Regulation by mentioning grants. Contractual relationships between the Agency and its
beneficiaries could pave the way for a more efficient financial management.
Further explanation:
Taking note of the Agency’s efforts to streamline processes as much as possible and practical consequences for
border services of the Member States in case of late reimbursements, the Management Board recommends
abandoning the limitation introduced by the Frontex Regulation by mentioning grants.
After 10 years of experience going along with a considerable growth in resources, both human and financial,
the Agency should be prepared for a general overhaul of its financial management.
Whereas the Frontex Regulation requires the Agency to (co-)finance its operational activities with grants, this
financial instrument proved not to be appropriate for the tasks of the Agency. Grant schemes lack flexibility,
preparation and reimbursement procedures. They are also lengthy and cumbersome. This impacts negatively
on the budget implementation of the Agency; the reimbursement of grants takes many months after the end
of operational activities, as supporting documents proving the real costs borne need to be collected.
Contractual relationships between the Agency and its beneficiaries could pave the way for a more efficient
financial management. These changes will also have a positive impact on the use of resources. Less staff will
be needed to process claims and could be used for more operational purposes. Changes to the financial
management procedures should also foresee increased, frequent and ad hoc reporting on the use of resources
(e.g. before call for contributions) to the Member States.

Recommendation 7 – Duration of secondment of guest officers (SGOs)
In order to react more flexibly to operational needs and also to ensure continuity of the activities
of each Agency, the Management Board recommends increasing the maximum time for the
secondment of a guest officer to one year and also establishing a minimum duration of
secondment to three months.

Recommendation 8 - Updating EU Integrated Border Management concept
Based on the Council Conclusions from 4-5 December 2006 and the catalogues on external
borders, the Management Board proposes that EU Integrated Border Management concept should
be updated.
Such an update should cover the following issues:

5








Clear definition of the role of Frontex, EU agencies (EEAS, EASO, Europol, EMSA, eu-LISA, CEPOL,
FRA, etc.) and other bodies cooperating in the framework of the EU-Integrated Border Management
concept;
Frontex coordinated cooperation between Member States (Solidarity);
Activities inside the territory of the Schengen States and between Schengen States;
EU inter-agency and national inter-service cooperation (border guards, customs, police, immigration
services, security and other relevant authorities);
Enhanced cooperation with Third Countries; and
The use of new technologies for border control.

Recommendation 9 - A European System of Border Guards (ESBG)
The Management Board proposes that the operational cooperation at the external borders of
the Member States should be further developed.
The future European System of Border Guards should be understood as a system of European
Border Guards Teams and a Technical Equipment Pool.
As part of its coordinating function, the Agency has an important role in this regard. Utilising
the principle of solidarity, this development should enable an improved and more flexible
cooperation between the competent authorities.
The ESBG should consist of the following elements:












The European Border Guards Teams (Guest officers, GOs);
The Upgraded use of Seconded Guest Officers (SGOs);
Clearly defined tasks, powers and responsibilities for SGOs and GOs in the scope of debriefing screening
and identification in hotspots;
Deployment of Rapid Border Intervention Teams to enhance reaction capacity in emergency situations;
The Technical Equipment Pool;
The use of Frontex own/leased/rented technical equipment;
The Hotspot concept (Frontex contribution);
The Eurosur framework;
Frontex-coordinated support in the field of return operations;
Training Teams; and
Common operational standards and code of conducts.

6

