General Report 2014

Table of contents
Foreword from the Chair of the Management Board
& the Executive Director #3
1. Introduction #7
2. Developments at Policy Level #9
3. Development at Agency Level #17
4. Building Capacity #25
5. Transparency and Access to Information #28
6. Fundamental Rights #31
7. I nternal Communication, Ethics and Integrity

#35

8. Summary of Budgetary and Human Resources issues #36
10. Annexes #41
Annex A. List of Management Board Members #41
Annex B. List of Management Board Decisions adopted in 2014 #43
Annex C. Situation at the external borders in 2014 #44
Annex D. List of Joint Operational Activities #47
Annex E. Comparative Analysis of Joint Operational Activities 2014 #53
Annex G. List of Training Projects #56
Annex H. Fundamental Rights Progress Report 2014 #58
Annex I. Annual Report on Access to Documents #66
Annex J. Appropriations 2014 #67
Annex K. Breakdown of staff members1 by entities in Frontex on 31 December #68
Annex L. Breakdown of Temporary Agents in Frontex #69
Abbreviations used in General Report 2014 #70

Frontex · General Report 2014

© Swiss Border Guard,

1

Frontex · General Report 2014

2

Frontex · General Report 2014

Foreword from the Chair
of the Management Board
& the Executive Director
The massive number of migrants arriving at
the EU’s borders kept migration issues in the
headlines throughout 2014. It was the year in
which Frontex, border guard authorities and all
of the Member States were confronted with
more than 280,000 illegal border crossings,
double the previous record number (in 2011,
the year of the Arab Spring). The ongoing conflict in Syria, instability in Iraq connected with
the rise of ISIS and the further break-down of
government structures in Libya, the main departure point for migrants last year, significantly contributed to what is considered to be
the worst refugee crisis since World War Two.
To assist Italy, which took the brunt of the migration wave, Frontex replaced its joint operations
Hermes and Aeneas, which had been underway since 2013, with a larger operation: Triton,
which was launched in November. In the first
two months of Joint Operation Triton, 14,500
people were rescued in the central Mediterranean, including 4,359 with the direct participation of vessels and aircraft co-funded by Frontex.
As Frontex confronted the challenging migration situation in 2014 by assisting Member States at the external borders, it also
recorded many successes in its other core
activities. Among the year’s achievements
were the expansion of the European Border
Guard Team and the introduction of the Opera 2 system to help manage border guards
and technical pools for deployment in Frontex
operations. Frontex and the Member States,
under the auspices of the European Commis-

sion, also drafted the Eurosur Handbook to
ensure the effective implementation of the
system designed to enable better exchange
of information about the situation at the external borders. The Agency also worked on a
couple of important projects focused on air
borders: it launched an initiative aimed at
creating a new Air Border Risk Analysis Network (AB-RAN), which will gather information about potential challenges at airports;
and, throughout the year, Frontex also coordinated Joint Operation VEGA Children at nine
airports to test and evaluate a draft handbook which aims to help detect and protect
minors at risk at air borders.
In Brussels, a new Commission under the
leadership of President Jean-Claude Juncker
highlighted a new migration policy as being
one of the priorities in its strategic guidelines. President Juncker appointed Dimitris
Avramopoulos as the new Commissioner for
Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship, emphasising his role and that of Frontex in tackling the challenges of irregular migration and
cross-border crime.
On the policy front, in May 2014, the European Council and the European Parliament
adopted the Sea Borders Surveillance Regulation laying down the rules for the monitoring of external maritime borders during
joint operations coordinated by Frontex. The
Agency has also been involved in the preparation of the Smart Borders Package and the
Schengen Evaluation mechanism.

3

Frontex · General Report 2014

A milestone in 2014 was the accepting of
the first Consultative Forum Annual Report.
Many of the conclusions drawn have been
implemented since then or are currently being implemented. A highlight of 2014 was the
appointment of a new executive director in
November: Fabrice Leggeri took over as executive director following the departure of Ilkka
Laitinen, who led Frontex from its establishment in 2006 until May 2014. Between June
2014 and December 2014, the Agency was
led by Gil Arias, as interim executive director;
his excellent work is very much appreciated.
Among Frontex’s efforts to build the capacity of European border guards was the Joint
Master’s programme in Strategic Border Management, which successfully underwent a
joint European evaluation. The first Master’s
course will begin in September 2015.
Frontex, which marks its 10th anniversary in
2015, will also receive an independent external evaluation of its activities. The document
will provide an opportunity for Frontex and
EU policy makers to consider its plans going
forward. As the Agency continues to deal with
ongoing emergencies at EU borders, it also
has to find strategic solutions and plans for
its future, in order to create a flexible structure for guarding European borders.

Frontex will, of course, continue to play its
part, bearing in mind that it cannot solve all
of Europe’s challenges at the borders. It will
continue to work closely with the Commission,
the Parliament and Member States, as well as
other EU agencies. It will expand its cooperation with third countries, especially countries
of transit and origin of irregular migration.
This is a challenge which is going to require
a holistic approach from all relevant actors.
We would like to thank all of the employees
of the Agency for their hard work and commitment in 2014. We are convinced that in
2015 and beyond Frontex will remain a place
where its cadre of professionals feels challenged and motivated in a changing world.
We appreciate the excellent cooperation
among Member State representatives in the
management board, as well as the trust and
partnership between the management board,
the Agency and the European Commission.
In 2015, Europe celebrates the 30th anniversary of the Schengen agreement, which gives
citizens the freedom to travel throughout
most of the European Union without ever
stopping at a border crossing. The agreement
has also created a joint responsibility for Member States to protect the external borders,
where Frontex will continue to play a key role.
Ralf Göbel
Chair of the Management Board
&
Fabrice Leggeri
Executive Director

4

Frontex · General Report 2014

5

© Frontex 2014

6

Frontex · General Report 2014

1. Introduction
Mission Statement
Frontex supports, coordinates and develops European border management in line
with the Charter of Fundamental Rights of
the EU and other international obligations.
Frontex supports the Member States* (MS)
to achieve an efficient, high and uniform level
of border control. Frontex coordinates operational measures to jointly respond to exceptional situations at the external borders.
Frontex develops capacities at the Member
State and European level as combined instruments to tackle challenges of migration
flows, and the fight against serious organised
crime and terrorism at the external borders.
Frontex is the trustworthy European Border
Agency, strengthening the European area of
Freedom, Security and Justice by supporting the Member States to keep up with their
responsibilities.

Vision
Frontex applies the concept of Integrated
Border Management and promotes a European border culture based on the full respect,
protection and promotion of fundamental
rights. Frontex applies the concept of Integrated Border Management with a balanced focus on effective border control and
fight against serious crime. The agency uses
effectively all means including enhanced interagency cooperation and cooperation with
Third Countries to fulfil its remit. Frontex
promotes the European border guard culture with the full respect and promotion of

fundamental rights as an integral element.
Special focus is applied to the right to asylum
and international protection and the principle of non-refoulement. Professional staff
and a set of operational and administrative
capabilities enable Frontex to add value to
the European Union.

* The term ‘Member
State’ includes the
Member States of the
European Union and the
Schengen Associated
Countries

Values
Within a team-work focused framework, enabled by open communication, Frontex staff
members share and live the corporate values.
Consequently, they perform their activities
in a highly professional way. Humanity links
Frontex activities with the full respect, protection and promotion of fundamental rights
as an unconditional and integral component
of effective integrated border management
resulting in trust in Frontex.

Purpose of the report
Frontex General Report 2014 takes the Programme of Work 2014 as a reference but does
not aim to report against each and every objective set. It gives the reader a broad overview of activities carried out during 2014, and
additionally highlights individual operational
activities and achievements. This information is then complemented with general financial information and annexes presenting
lists of different types of activity, comparative analysis of joint operations and summaries of budgetary and human resources. Some
information may be repeated between chapters to provide context.

7

© Frontex 2014

© European Union, 2014

8

Frontex · General Report 2014

2. Developments at Policy Level
The year 2014 was marked by the reaction to a
record number of illegal border crossings that
were close to 280 000, almost three times as
high as the year before. A new Commission
in Brussels under the leadership of President
Jean-Claude Juncker made migration one of
its priorities. President Juncker highlighted
the role of Frontex in helping to deal with
the massive wave of migrants and its role in
helping national search and rescue authorities prevent tragedies at sea. Earlier in the
year, the European Council and Parliament
adopted the rules for the surveillance of the
external sea borders in the context of operational cooperation coordinated by Frontex.

with a full and consistent implementation
of the Common European Asylum System.
The new commissioner is working together
with Federica Mogherini, High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and
Vice-President Frans Timmermans on the
migration portfolio, related security issues
and cooperation with Third Countries. Upon
taking office, Commissioner Avramopoulos
has also emphasised the role of Frontex in
helping Europe to manage the massive inflow of migrants.

New Commission

In May 2014, the Council and the European
Parliament adopted Council Regulation (EU)
656/2014 establishing rules for the surveillance of the external sea borders in the context of operational cooperation coordinated
by Frontex. The Regulation, which replaces
Council Decision 2010/252/EU that was annulled by the Court of Justice of the European Union, lays down rules for surveillance
of the external sea borders during joint operations coordinated by Frontex, including the
detection, interception and disembarkation
of persons. It also adopted specific rules on
search and rescue of distressed vessels and
persons on board. The regulation reinforces
the fundamental rights approach to Frontex
operational activities.

President Juncker named a new migration
policy as one of the priorities in his strategic guidelines for the new European Commission, which took office in November. He
called for a strong common asylum policy to
assist people in need, while dealing more robustly with an uncontrolled influx of irregular
migrants, notably through better cooperation with Third Countries.
President Juncker also said he wanted to
boost Frontex’s operational capacity by increasing its budget and enabling it to pool
more resources from Member States. This,
according to the new head of the Commission, would increase the ability of the Agency
to quickly deploy border guards and equipment in Frontex-coordinated joint operations.
The Commission President appointed Dimitris Avramopoulos as the new Commissioner
for Migration, Home Affairs and Citizenship, emphasising his role in tackling irregular migration and cross-border crime, along

Sea Borders Surveillance
Regulation

The Regulation also requires that a Member State hosting a Frontex operation “shall
take into account the general situation in ...
(a) Third Country” whenever the joint operation allows to disembark in, force to enter,
apprehend and hand over persons to a Third
Country with specific focus on the respect of
the principle of non-refoulement.

9

Smart Borders Package
The first examination of the Smart Borders
Package was completed in February 2014,
during which the Council and the European
Parliament voiced technical, operational and
cost concerns, mainly related to the overall feasibility of the new systems proposed
by the Commission in February 2013, and of
some of its features.
The Smart Borders Package aims at harnessing new technologies for the purpose
of accelerating and simplifying, but also reinforcing, border checks for those crossing
the EU external borders. This ‘package’ is in
fact two main regulatory proposals put forward jointly by the Commission.
The package includes a proposal for an Entry/
Exit System. This potential database would
keep a record of the time and place of entry
and exit of third-country nationals travelling
to the EU. It would also replace the current
manual system of stamping passports to calculate the length of the authorised stay of an
individual with a simplified, electronic system.
The data would then be made available to
border control and immigration authorities.
The second component is the Registered
Traveller Programme, which would allow frequent travellers who are not EU citizens to
bypass lengthy passport queues upon arrival.
The stated objective of the Smart Borders
Package is to create a more open and secure
Europe relying on state-of-the-art technologies. Progress on the matter was restricted

10

to studies by the European Commission and
one by the European Parliament.
In order to further assess the technical, organisational and financial impacts of the various possible ways to address these issues, the
Commission is looking into options for implementing the Smart Borders Package. This
exercise consists of two stages comprising of
a Commission-led technical study aimed at
identifying and assessing the most suitable
and promising options and a pilot project,
which will test selected solutions.
The pilot project was entrusted to the European Agency for the Operational Management of large-scale IT Systems in the Area
of Freedom, Security and Justice (eu-LISA)
to verify the feasibility of the options identified in the technical study and validate the
selected concepts for both automated and
manual border controls.

Visas Requirements
On March 17, the European Parliament endorsed the Agreement between the EU and
the Republic of Azerbaijan on the facilitation
of the issuance of visas. As of April 28, Moldova has also been transferred to the list of
Third Countries whose nationals are exempt
from visa requirements.
Two new regulation proposals were launched
by the European Commission on 1 April 2014.
One concerns a Regulation for the establishment of a touring visa and the second concerns a Regulation on the Union Code on
Visas (Visa Code). The aim of both proposals

is to simplify the procedures for those willing to enter to the EU for short stays and to
reduce costs of processing, whilst maintaining the same level of security.

countries such as Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan. Some of them have returned to Europe
radicalised where they might carry out terrorist attacks.

Post Visa Liberalisation
Monitoring Mechanism

To deal with the rising threat, the Commission presented informal recommendations on
checks of travel documents, including use of
the relevant databases at the border crossing
points. It also recommended an improvement
of the technical infrastructure at border crossings, including the increased use of passport
readers, e-gates, and, where relevant, mobile terminals. It also encouraged the use of
advanced passenger data in accordance with
the Council Directive 82/2004 to enable more
targeted checks on incoming flights.

Frontex continued to provide support to the
European Commission on monitoring developments in a number of Third Countries related
to visa liberalisation. In 2014, the Commission
adopted two reports concluding that Colombia and Peru meet the criteria to start negotiating agreements allowing their citizens
visa-free access to the Schengen area. Negotiations with these countries may start in the
first quarter of 2015.

Schengen Evaluation
Mechanism
The Schengen Governance package was
adopted in October 2013 by the European
Parliament and the Council. It includes a regulation on the establishment of an evaluation
and monitoring mechanism to verify the application of the Schengen acquis. Based on
this new legislation, several additional tasks
were implemented starting in 2014.
These include delivery of two risk analyses on
an annual basis: one to the European Commission and the Member States containing
the priorities for the evaluation in the following year and one to the European Commission containing only the priorities for the
implementation of unannounced visits (Frontex experts may participate in the evaluation
visits). The Agency will also continue to reinforce Schengen Evaluation training.

Foreign Fighters
In 2014, Member States have become increasingly concerned by the return of their
own citizens who took part in conflicts in

© Frontex 2014

© Frontex 2014

Frontex · General Report 2014

At international level, the United Nations Security Council (UNSC) adopted Resolution
2178 which requires UN Member States to
criminalise travel abroad for terrorist purposes as well as financing and facilitation of
such travel. A number of Member States had
updated their legal frameworks prior to the
UNSC Resolution to better address the foreign fighters challenge; others are in the process of doing so or considering it.

European Council Guidelines
for the Area of Freedom,
Security and Justice
On 26-27 June 2014 the European Council defined the strategic guidelines for legislative
and operational planning for the coming years
in the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice
(AFSJ). The new priorities are to transpose,
implement and consolidate the legal instruments and policy measures which were set
out in the Stockholm Programme 2010-2014
but also to intensify cooperation, enhance
the role of EU agencies and explore the potential for new technologies.
In addition, the guidelines also call for a renewal
of the Internal Security Strategy by mid-2015
as part of the efforts to promote operational
police cooperation and to prevent and combat serious organised crime, including human
trafficking and smuggling, as well as corruption. Furthermore, the Council Conclusions of
December 2014 on a renewed Internal Security Strategy call for an update of the EU Integrated Border Management (IBM) Concept.
The Internal Security Strategy represents the
EU’s common understanding of the threats it
is facing and its commitment to using all the
resources and expertise available for tackling
them together. It represents a shared agenda
of actions for Member States, EU institutions
and agencies.

12

Frontex contributed to the revision process
of the Internal Security Strategy as part of
the Commission’s public consultation. With
other Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) Agencies, Frontex developed a paper on ‘Priorities
of the network of JHA Agencies in 2015’ in order to provide their input, as key operational
players, to the new Guidelines.

Multiannual Financial
Framework 2014–2020
The Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF),
proposed by the European Commission and
approved by the Council and Parliament, sets
the maximum annual amounts which the EU
may spend in different political fields between
2014 and 2020. In the field of Home Affairs,
EU launched two new funds: the Asylum and
Migration Fund (EUR 3.869 billion) and the Internal Security Fund (ISF) (EUR 4.648 billion).
Each Member State must present its national programme to describe how it plans
to allocate the funds. According to the Regulation on ISF – Borders and Visa, Frontex
must be consulted by the Commission on the
content of the draft national programmes,
and in particular on the activities financed
under operating support. In 2014 Frontex
provided contributions to the consultation
process of the national programmes of 10
Member States that submitted their drafts
to the Commission in 2014.

Cooperation with Third
Countries, EU Agencies and
International Organisations
In February 2014, Frontex concluded a cooperation plan with the competent authorities
in Turkey. The plan sets out concrete actions
for implementation in the coming years, covering a wide range of activities, with emphasis
on risk analysis, information exchange, training
and joint operations. Frontex concluded equiva-

© Frontex 2014

Frontex · General Report 2014

lent cooperation plans with Azerbaijan and Moldova in April and December 2014, respectively.
In 2014 Frontex has paid special attention to
the countries bordering the Mediterranean
Sea, especially considering the humanitarian
aspects of irregular migration along the maritime routes. Following the mandates from
the Management Board to conclude working arrangements, the Agency has undertaken further efforts to renew negotiations
with the authorities in Egypt, Morocco, Senegal and Tunisia.
Frontex is participating in the European Commission-led initiatives within the framework
of the EU Dialogue on Migration, Mobility and
Security, in particular with Tunisia and Morocco, thus establishing and maintaining direct contacts with the competent authorities
of these countries. The mobility partnerships
signed with Morocco and Tunisia set out political objectives and provide for a series of initiatives for effective migration management
including border and security related aspects.
Since March 2014, Frontex has also been engaged with the European Asylum Support
Office (EASO) in a technical assistance project aimed at familiarizing Tunisia and Morocco with the work of both agencies under
the interregional project “Promoting participation of European Neighbourhood Policy
countries in the work of EU agencies”. Activities within the framework of this project are

aimed at providing insight into EU standards
and sharing good practices in regard to effective migration and border management.
Cooperation on risk analysis at regional level
between Frontex and Third Country partners
has proven very efficient, especially under
the Western Balkans Risk Analysis Network
(WB-RAN), where initial steps to engage with
the Kosovo* Border Police were taken up with
the agreement of the network group. The
Eastern European Borders Risk Analysis Network (EB-RAN) with Belarus, Ukraine and
Moldova has been consolidated and consistently produces high quality analytical
products.

* This designation is without
prejudice to positions on status,
and is in line with UNSC 1244 and
the ICJ Opinion on the Kosovo
Declaration of Independence

Concrete results have also been achieved
within the framework of the Africa-Frontex Intelligence Community (AFIC). Practical cooperation and joint efforts between
the Agency and experts from most of West
African countries continued in 2014 and resulted in the publication of the third annual
AFIC risk analysis report.
To enhance cooperation with countries of
origin and transit on the African continent,
Frontex declared its readiness to support the
Rabat and Khartoum Process as far as the activities are covered by its remit. An engagement with Eastern African and Horn of Africa
countries in the framework of AFIC could be
a good way to gradually engage with the
countries in the region.

13

Frontex · General Report 2014

As part of the implementation of the Eurosur framework aimed at improving situational awareness at EU external borders and
increasing reaction capability of border authorities, Frontex worked closely with other
European agencies. Consequently, European
Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA) agreed to
provide Vessel Monitoring System (VMS) data
to Frontex, while EU SatCen will deliver services and information products based on the
analysis of satellite imagery tailored to Frontex’s needs for border surveillance.

In 2014, Frontex contributed to Forced Return
Monitoring (FReM) project ran by the International Centre for Migration Policy Development (ICMPD). Together with eight member
states, the two organisations prepared the
“Framework for a European Pool of Forced
Return Monitors (EPFRM)” and “Guidelines
and Monitoring Tools”.
Frontex worked with the European Asylum
Support Office (EASO) and UNHCR on the
introduction of protection indicators in Operational Plans for Joint Operations and development of a training module on international
law and fundamental rights specially designed
for border guards. EASO and Frontex have also
initiated study visits and discussions to prepare the implementation of an efficient referral mechanism at the EU external borders
for migrants seeking protection in Europe.
The cooperation with the European External Action Service (EEAS) took a new shape
© Frontex 2014

Frontex and Europol agreed on the text of a
new working arrangement that would allow
for the transmission of personal data and ex-

change of information under the framework
of interagency cooperation pursuant to Article 14 of the Frontex Regulation.

© Straz Graniczna, 2014

In October 2014, Frontex held the 22nd International Border Police Conference (IBPC), which
included a higher number of top level representatives of international border guards.
The IBPC, which was organised by Frontex
for the second time, offered an opportunity
for border guard authorities from around the
world to share knowledge and experiences
on various topics related to border management and security.

14

with the approval of the Working Arrangement by the Management Board of Frontex.
Under the agreement, Frontex and the EUled Crisis Management Operations (CMOs)
will cooperate in civilian Common Security
and Defence Policy missions and exchange information for situational awareness and risk
analysis. The two also agreed to jointly build
capacity in Third Countries, especially through
EU funded technical assistance projects.
At the operational level, Frontex continued its
engagement in EU Policy Cycle 2014-2017 and
European Multidisciplinary Platform against
Criminal Threats (EMPACT) that included facilitation of irregular migration and trafficking in
human beings. The Agency also joined the firearms smuggling priority, concentrating its effort
on Western Balkans and Eastern external borders. Frontex participated in Europol’s Operation Archimedes, a practical exercise planned to
dismantle most threatening criminal networks
in Europe. The Agency shared the operational
results from selected ongoing joint operations
with Europol and Member States and contributed to other priority areas such as combatting
property crime, excise goods, drugs trafficking.
Frontex successfully implemented a new activity under the European Patrols Network
(EPN) tailored for EMPACT: working visits in
debriefing sites at the border.
The activity formed part of the EPN Staff Exchange, which enables networking, sharing

of expertise and best practices among the
relevant EU MS staff. It was focused on the
team leaders coordinating the work of debriefing teams in Frontex joint maritime operations. The designated team leader(s) from
one hosting MS had an opportunity to carry
out working visit (lasting approx. one week)
to debriefing sites in sea operation hosted in
another MS. The team leader was integrated
into daily duties, related to coordination of
debriefing activities, and worked under the
supervision and guidance of the local team
leader. Some of the visits were enhanced by
the training on debriefing techniques provided for the visitors and local staff by Frontex.
Six mutual visits of team leaders from host MS
(Spain, Greece, Italy) took place. Two visits of
Spanish and Greek team leaders in Italy took
place in the time of Joint Action Days of EMPACT.
In 2014, Frontex also implemented its first
common project with Interpol, merging the
Frontex’s Reference Manual with Interpol’s
Dial-Doc platform. This project is focused
on technology that makes it easier for border guards to check if a travel document is
fake by comparing it with images of counterfeit documents.
Frontex and eu-LISA signed a working arrangement and concluded a cooperation plan
for 2014. It consisting of four different activities: research and development, training, risk
analysis and administrative topics.

15

© Frontex 2014

16

Frontex · General Report 2014

3. Development at Agency Level
The year 2014 marked a year of changes in
leadership atop Frontex and brought new
challenges with a record number of irregular
migrants crossing the EU borders.
In May, Frontex’s first Executive Director Ilkka
Laitinen stepped down after nine years in office. Deputy Executive Director Gil Arias took
the top post on an interim basis. In November, the Frontex Management Board chose
Fabrice Leggeri to become the Agency’s Executive Director. Mr. Leggeri officially took
office in mid-January 2015 and Mr. Arias resumed his earlier position of Deputy Executive Director.
In 2014, the operational capabilities of Frontex and European Border Guards were tested
with the highest number of illegal border
crossings since Frontex began collecting data
eight years ago. During the year, 280 000
such crossings were detected, twice the previous record set in 2011, the year of the Arab
Spring. The ongoing conflict in Syria, as well
as lack of effective government in Libya -- the
main departure point for migrants in 2014,
significantly contributed to the worst refugee crisis since World War Two.
The European Union’s sea borders took the
brunt of the influx of migrants. In all of 2014,
nearly 218 000 migrants were detected during joint sea operations, or around 600 per
day. This compares to less than 54 000 in
2013. The biggest migration pressure appeared in the Central Mediterranean with
some 170 000 migrants arriving in Italy. Syrians and Eritreans were the two main nationalities making their way from Libya, followed
by nationals of Sub-Saharan countries. The
situation of a de-facto failed state in Libya,
where law enforcement is virtually absent

has created favourable conditions for the
people-smuggling networks to flourish and
operate with impunity.
The number of suspected people smugglers
who were apprehended in maritime operations stood at 1 086, three times the figure from the previous year. The drastic rise
is maritime crossing also resulted in many
deadly accidents involving overloaded and
often unseaworthy migrant boats. In 2014,
across all the Frontex-coordinated joint operations in the Central Mediterranean, more
than 173 500 migrants were saved during
search and rescue operations, the number
4.5 times higher than in 2013.

Increased operational activity
in the Central Mediterranean
To help Italy deal with the rising tide of migrants, Frontex launched Joint Operation
Triton at the beginning of November after receiving an additional budget allocation from
the European Commission. JO Triton was
launched with participation of 18 Member
States, replacing two other operations carried out in Italy since 2013: JO Hermes and
JO Aeneas. As the two earlier operations in
Italy, JO Triton aims at improving the border surveillance and border control through
joint patrols with the assets provided by the
Member States. Its operational area covers
the territorial waters of Italy and Malta, as
well as parts of the search and rescue (SAR)
zones of both states.
Although the key objective of JO Triton is
to support Italian authorities at the external sea borders, the operation also provides
additional search and rescue capacity in the
Central Mediterranean as assets deployed

17

Frontex · General Report 2014

In addition to detecting migrant-smuggling,
maritime operations coordinated by Frontex
uncovered other types of crimes, including
drug trafficking. As a result, 344 suspected
drug traffickers were arrested in connection to smuggling some 43 tonnes of hashish
worth more than EUR 65 million and 35 kg
of cocaine worth EUR 2 million. Most of the
drugs were seized in the Western and Central Mediterranean area.

In November and December, the first two
months of JO Triton, 14 500 people were
saved in SAR operations, including some 4
350 rescued with the direct participation of
vessels and aircraft co-financed by Frontex.

Large merchant vessels used to
smuggle people

European Border Guard Team
and Technical Equipment Pool

In the second half of 2014, Frontex began to
observe a rising number of large merchant
vessels in the Central and Eastern Mediterranean that were being used for smuggling
people. The cargo vessels were usually decommissioned ships bought by smugglers
from scrapyards. They departed from the
Turkish coast and headed for Italy. When approaching Italy, migrants made a distress call
in the middle of the sea, often with a satellite
phone. Several tailored operational actions
were undertaken by Frontex to address this
new method of people smuggling.
© Frontex 2014

To test the preparedness of Frontex and
Member States and their operational effectiveness, Frontex held its annual rapid intervention exercise REX 2014 in November and
December in Croatia, at the borders with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Montenegro. Seventeen Member States and two Third Countries
took part in the exercise deploying a total of
37 guest officers, two observers and various
technical equipment to the operational area.
In order to optimise the use of resources the
exercise was itself a real operational activity
designed to enhance the operational capacity of the Croatian border guard service at its
section of the EU’s external border. The guest
officers were deployed at minimum notice, in
line with the “Rapid” mechanism, and carried
out real border management tasks alongside
their Croatian peers.
At the beginning of 2014 there were approximately 2 500 guest officers in the EBGT pool
and by the end of the year this number grew
to about 3 400 guest officers matching at
least one of the 13 EBGT profiles. With the
minimum number of guest officers required
set at 1 850 by the Frontex Management
Board, the number of EBGT pool members now significantly exceeds operational
requirements, making the quality of pool

18

© Frontex 2014

Cross-Border Crime

in the operation routinely suspend all border control activities to respond to search
and rescue coordination centre (MRCC) requests to assist with distress calls.

members a priority. Consequently, efforts
were concentrated on ensuring that adequate numbers of each individual profile were
available in the pool at all times. In 2014, the
Agency also began to review and revise the
current 13 border guard profiles.

and accuracy of the data relating to the use
of human and technical resources, monitoring
the numbers in the pools and recording their
use in Frontex coordinated activities. Opera
2 is due to be released for use in Frontex operational activities in March 2015.

Technical equipment pool efforts were concentrated on carrying out a pilot project for
the acquisition of border surveillance services, as well as improving the monitoring
and reporting procedures related to the overall minimum number of technical equipment
(OMNTE).

Air Borders-Risk Analysis
Network

Opera 2
Frontex has worked to improve the Opera
operational resources management system,
which is a custom-developed software application used by Frontex staff and Member
States to manage the EBGT and Technical
Equipment pools, as well as the deployment
of resources in almost all types of Frontex coordinated operational activities.
The improvements introduced in Opera 2 will
enable Frontex to manage closely the pools
and the deployment of resources, as well as
to produce accurate and fully up-to-date reports. The flexibility of the application has
been increased and now allows monitoring
of a much wider range of resources. In addition, the new version of the application focuses specifically on improving the quality

Frontex launched an initiative aimed at creating a new Air Borders Risk Analysis Network (AB-RAN). This is meant to create a risk
analysis community, as well as standardised
and structured information exchange relevant for the air borders. Such a community
and information exchange will result in enhanced situation knowledge on the phenomena at the external air borders of the EU and
lead to better risk analysis based planning and
implementation of operational activities at
the air borders. In the short term, the benefit of the network will be a solid foundation
for establishing, common understanding of
the objectives, possibilities as well as limitations of information exchange.

Eurosur
December 2014 was the benchmark for all
Member States to be connected to the European Border Surveillance System (Eurosur).
The system puts in place a common platform
for Member State authorities to exchange information with each other and with Fron-

19

Frontex · General Report 2014

external borders, especially countries of transit and departure of irregular migrants.
In line with Eurosur regulation, Frontex also
developed the methodology for attribution
of impact levels to external border sections
of Member States.

© Frontex 2014

Frontex also created the Analysis Layer Products and Services (ALPS) Catalogue, which
lists, describes and defines the analytical
reports and services to be shared by the
National Coordination Centres (NCCs) and
Frontex within the EUROSUR Analysis Layer.

tex to improve situational awareness at EU
external borders and increase reaction capability in border control.
Frontex and Member States, under the auspices of the Commission, drafted a Eurosur
Handbook with a view to ensure efficient,
harmonised implementation of the system
at EU level. The handbook defines the role
and tasks of Frontex and National Coordination Centres (NCCs), which coordinate and
exchange information among all authorities
with a responsibility for external land and sea
border surveillance at national level, as well
as with the other NCCs and Frontex.
The handbook provides guidelines for reaction
capability, technical and operational guidelines,
recommendations and best practices for implementation and management of Eurosur.
The document also discusses the contents and
form of the National and European Situational
Pictures, which present the overall picture of
situation at the external borders based on information derived from the NCCs and Frontex.
Finally, it covers the Common Pre-frontier Intelligence Picture, which relates to information
and intelligence on the areas beyond the EU

20

Frontex Compatible
Operational Image (FCOI)
Frontex continued testing FCOI within ongoing joint maritime operations in 2014 using Host MS infrastructure, participating MS
air/naval/terrestrial technical equipment deployed in joint operations. Also several tailored workshops have been arranged in order
to test real time motion picture secure transmission via 3G/4G networks.
The core idea of the FCOI is to provide secured transmission of the operational data
from the technical equipment deployed in
the JOs to the Coordination Centres (LCC/
RCC/ICC) in Host MS and Frontex in the real
or close to the real time.

Frontex Fusion Service
In 2014, Frontex gradually delivered the initial operational services via the Frontex Fusion Services (FFS). FFS provided updated and
close to real time situational picture which included information services, such as the satellite-based Vessel Detection Service which
allowed location of small boats at sea.
The core objective of the services is to enhance reaction capability and emergency
response of the national border authorities

Frontex · General Report 2014

at their external borders. Due to the nature
of migration in the Mediterranean Sea, lives
of migrants are often at risk, and practical
examples show that FFS brought significant
added value providing timely information to
MS authorities that allowed more effective
rescue operations and saving lives.

border guards to detect and react to criminal
activities that take place in the transit areas
of Schengen and non-Schengen airports, including Third Country airports.
The operational objective of the second Joint
Operation Alexis 2014 was to enhance document expertise of border guards in charge
of passport control at airports as well as implement gate checks at arrival and departure gates.

Joint return operations (JRO)

Alexis 2014
Joint Operation Alexis 2014 focused on
strengthening the operational capabilities
of EU airports by addressing specific needs
and vulnerabilities at international airports.
Two Alexis operations were implemented
which differed in scope and target.
The operational aim of Joint Operation Alexis I
2014 was to enhance capabilities of EU airport

In total Alexis 2014 took place at 33 airports
with participation of 24 Member States and
six Third Countries. Seventy-five officers were
deployed, including an Interpol expert. As part
of the operation, Frontex organised dedicated
© Frontex 2014

In 2014, Frontex continued testing the socalled collecting joint return operations,
where a charter flight to collect their own
nationals in the EU territory is organised by
a Third Country using its own national escorts. All together four collecting joint return operations were carried out, two to
Albania and two to Georgia. For the purpose of organising such return flights, the
professional standards of Third Countries’
escorts and procedures needed to be harmonised with EU standards. To that end, Frontex has developed “Guidance for Collecting
Joint Return Operations by Air Coordinated
by Frontex” and held training sessions for
the Albanian and Georgian escorts and escort leaders to ensure a harmonised training
level and common standards on the protection and promotion of fundamental rights.
These operations are subject to certain conditions, including the obligation to have an
independent monitor on board. The collecting JRO have proven effective and helped reduce the costs of returning migrants to their
country of origin.

Frontex · General Report 2014

Consultative Forum members and other NonGovernmental Organisations (NGOs) with
field presence in the countries of origin/departure/destination of irregular migration
provided Frontex with information on circumstances on the ground, including migrant
profiles. For example, several organisations
supplied information to risk analysis products,
participated in risk analysis events such tactical meetings where presentations were delivered on the situation in countries of origin
and transit of migrants. They also supported
the risk analysis unit in the preparation of
some weekly operational briefings.

Amid the growing importance of Internet services such as Facebook and Twitter, Frontex
Media Monitoring Team has initiated social
media monitoring activities. The upgrade and
expansion of the media monitoring products
has been introduced by adding the content
retrieved in the social media platforms to a
daily newsletter, internal alerts and responses
to various media information requests. The
main focus is to increase awareness of what
is being said in the social media about Frontex institutional activities and operations, as
well as web discussions on irregular migration and border management issues.

Fundamental rights video

PeDRA

To support the delivery of the fundamental
rights component of the operational briefings, in 2014 the Frontex Fundamental Rights
Officer developed a five-minute video on the
main fundamental rights provisions that have
a particular practical relevance for the work
of border guards. The short video is now part
of the briefing package and is regularly shown
during operational briefings.

In 2014, Frontex PeDRA project was launched
with the aim of using personal data of individuals involved in border-related criminal activities to reduce the risk of exploitation of
vulnerable groups and increasing border security. The project will allow Frontex to create risk analyses, the results of which will
be depersonalised, and Personal Data Packages (PDPs) to be transmitted to Europol on
a case-by-case basis. PeDRA aims to achieve
increased prevention, detections and arrests
of facilitators and traffickers made possible
by a more effective operational response by
Member States and Frontex, and more successful investigations by Europol.

New Monthly Analysis process,
outputs and clients
Frontex set up a new Monthly Analysis process in response to increasing demand for
situation updates and analysis on the general situation at the EU borders, and specific
hot spots. An Analytical Board composed of
senior analysts has been set up to manage
the process which produces three different
analytical products that differ in content
from focus on data overviews to analytical

22

Social Media Monitoring

At the end of 2014 a consultation period
began with a draft notification submitted to the European Data Protection Supervisor who will monitor and evaluate
PeDRA activities from a data protection
perspective.

© Frontex 2014

Contribution to Risk Analysis
Products

interpretation and outlook. The new products are distributed to Frontex partners in
the MS as well as high level fora such as
SCIFA and meetings of the Council working parties.

© Frontex 2014

document training sessions, which were carried out by five document expert training
teams at four EU airports for local staff and
guest officers.

© Frontex 2014

Frontex · General Report 2014

New Headquarters
At the end of 2014, Frontex successfully relocated to the new premises in the Warsaw Spire office complex. The final relocation
did not cause any service disruption for the
Agency as it was carried out during the
Christmas break. Frontex new premises are
designed to meet the technical and organisational requirements of the Agency for its
current activities and for the next ten years.

The new building provides services which
were not available in the previous building,
such as adequate meeting facilities. The move
also helped enhance the Agency’s security
systems, provide a large data centre and expand the Frontex situation centre and joint
analytical room.
The entire process took place over four
months starting in September 2014.

23

© Frontex 2014

24

Frontex · General Report 2014

4. Building Capacity
In 2014, Frontex sought to improve the
mechanism used to acquire resources for
Frontex operational activities. The development and improvement of the technical
equipment and EBGT pools is an ongoing
task that includes the implementation of
seconded guest officer mechanism, revision
of the profiles of EBGT members, improving
the Opera resource management application and carrying out regular Rapid Intervention Exercises (REX).

Seconded Guest Officer (SGO)
Mechanism
As a result of the second SGO Call for Secondment between December 2013 and May 2014,
76 SGOs of various profiles were selected for
deployment in Frontex-coordinated operations. In the first call for secondment, Frontex engaged 69 SGOs creating the pool of
over 170 SGOs
SGOs are border guards from the Member
States seconded to Frontex for a period of
up to six months, during any 12-month period. SGOs are also entered into the European Border Guard Teams pool. Unlike
regular Guest Officers, SGOs can be deployed to multiple locations and operations
during their six-month deployment period,
without the express consent of their national authority.
Two years after the introduction of the SGO
Rules, several practical measures were taken
to improve the SGO mechanism. These include the establishment of an SGO Task Force
which is to improve the decision-making process and make it fully applicable to the specific needs of SGOs.

VEGA Children
In 2014, Frontex coordinated the Joint Operation VEGA Children at nine European airports
with the aim to test, assess and evaluate in
real life implementation of the draft VEGA
Children Handbook, a collection of best practices on the detection and protection of children at risk at air borders. The scope of the
joint operation was to support the processes
of identification of accompanied, separated
and unaccompanied children at risk, the activation of the referral mechanism by the
relevant authorities and disruption of the activities of criminal networks – all following
the standard operational procedures of the
draft handbook. During the joint operation,
39 cases of children at risk were reported
and the referral mechanism was activated
for eight of them.
The handbook will offer practical guidance
to border guards, who often play a key role
in initiating these processes as well as dismantling the related criminal activities. The
draft handbook will be finalised taking into
account the observations and recommendations received by deployed officers and
experts and will be published in the second
quarter of 2015.

Enhancing Border Checks
In 2014, Frontex aimed to build up and improve a portfolio of capacities in border
checks, to increase security and enhance
travel facilitation at the borders through data
collection. The information collected in relation to operational practices for land border
checks was analysed and compiled in an updated version of the ‘Best Practices in border

25

checks at EU land Border Crossing Points’ that
Frontex is to put forward in 2015.
Frontex also launched the process of identifying and collecting best practices for Border
Checks at EU sea ports, which is to harmonise the various existing operational practices
and adapt existing controls to the Reporting
Formalities Directive 2010/65/EU.
As far as the harmonisation process is concerned, 2014 activities continued the identification of best practices for land border
surveillance that support and improve the
current operational practices.

Development of a framework
for building a passenger
analysis capacity in Member
States
Frontex has explored the possible added value
of a Passenger Analysis Model (PAM) to help
Member States that have not yet developed
such a tool to increase their capacity in border control.
Frontex presented the PAM in a workshop in
December and will assess the needs for further work in this area.

European Joint Master’s in
Strategic Border Management
(EJMSBM)
In 2014, the Joint Master’s programme in
Strategic Border Management developed
by Frontex in collaboration with six partner
universities and more than twenty Member
States border guard academies underwent
a special procedure for accreditation: a joint
European evaluation. This procedure will ensure that the programme is in line with all
Consortium Partners’ national requirements
in higher education and that the joint award
is recognised as a master’s award in any education system in Europe and elsewhere.

26

The programme was evaluated based on a
set of criteria and standards defined by the
European Consortium for Accreditation (ECA)
and implemented across EU as part of the accreditation/validation methodology for joint
programmes. The international accreditation
panel was coordinated by the Dutch accreditation agency and was made up of prestigious academics, quality assurance experts
and specialists in specific subject areas from
the UK, the Netherlands, Estonia, Belgium,
Slovenia and Ireland.
Following the documents study and a series
of interviews with representatives of the development groups and the consortium partners the panel accredited the programme
and stated that it would help develop professional competences based on the Sectoral Qualifications Framework for Border
Guarding (SQF).
The first master’s course will begin in September 2015.

Document fraud and
risk assessment
In 2014, Frontex published and disseminated
to both Member States and the European
Commission the “Document Challenge II”
report, which highlighted the strengths and
weaknesses of human and technical capabilities to inspect document authenticity,
discussed operational and technical vulnerabilities, and recommended areas for improvement and countermeasures in order to make
document inspection in the first line of border checks more effective and accurate. The
document was based on data from a 2013 exercise in which 42 experts and seven automated document inspection systems were
challenged to correctly identify genuine and
false travel documents. Portuguese SEF (Foreign Nationals and Border Control Service)
and experts from the UK National Document
Fraud Unit, the Dutch Royal Marechaussee,

© Frontex 2014

Frontex · General Report 2014

and the German Bundeskriminalamt took
part in the challenge.

Sustainable Support for Greece
and Bulgaria
Joint Operation Attica continued in 2014 with
the deployment of screening experts and interpreters from 14 member states.
The aim of JO Attica is to support Greece
and Bulgaria in building return capacity. As
the first step in an effective return process

JO Attica coordinated screening activities at
the Greek/Turkish land and sea borders, in
Athens, at the Bulgarian/Turkish land border and in Sofia, effectively reacting to the
changed routes of migratory flows.
In addition, Frontex advised border authorities in both countries on issues related to
the identification interviews at third country
embassies, the organisation of return flights
(commercial, national and joint return operations), and building of the pool of national
screening experts.

27

Frontex · General Report 2014

5. Transparency and Access
to Information
Providing information to the
public
In 2014, journalists and civil society organisations regularly contacted Frontex to seek
information about Frontex activities, specific
operations and migratory trends. The Agency
provided information, organised interviews
and facilitated media visits to a variety of operational areas mainly in Italy, Greece, Bulgaria, Spain Hungary and Poland. Throughout
the year, Frontex facilitated access to operations for more than 300 media outlets by
taking journalists on board of patrol vessels,
embedding them or arranging interviews
with officers deployed in Frontex-coordinated operations at the EU borders. During
the year more formal media briefings were
held in Brussels and Rome.
The interest of mass-media reached its peak
in the second half of the year with the preparations to and the launch of Joint Operation
Triton in the Central Mediterranean.
In 2014, Frontex deployed for the first time
a Field Press Officer (FPO), whose role is to
assist journalists visiting the operational areas, arranging interviews and helping them to
obtain the necessary photographs and video
material. FPOs will be deployed to Frontexcoordinated operations in crisis situations.

Contacts with researchers
In 2014 there was high demand for information about Frontex activities not only from
the media but also from citizens, researchers and students. The Agency answered more
than 600 requests for information and hosted

28

meetings with individual researchers and student groups. Border guard, police and diplomatic academies continued to include study
visits to Frontex in their curricula. Last year,
Frontex welcomed at its premises almost
500 researchers and students interested in
the Agency’s activities.

Outreach
Frontex further improved its on-line presence making the official website more userfriendly, publishing new content on the
Frontex YouTube channel and actively communicating on the Facebook page of The European Day for Border Guards (ED4BG).
Frontex also produced a short educational
video entitled ‘Operational Cycle’ to explain
joint operations coordinated by the Agency.
European Day for Border Guards, the annual event celebrating border guards from
all Member States and Schengen Associated Countries gathered more than 700
guests, who discussed issues related to search
and rescue at sea, useful technology, Integrated Border Management and contingency
planning.
The ED4BG exhibitors included 39 national
authorities from 28 countries. Border Guard
academies and the Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental Rights and EU-funded
research projects related to border management were also represented.
In 2014, an ‘ED4BG on the road’ interactive
seminar dedicated to risk analysis in border
management was organised in Bucharest.

It was attended by around 100 students
who had the opportunity to learn more on
a given subject and pose questions to Frontex experts. Additionally, the seminar was
live-streamed on the ED4BG website with a
chat function enabling the general public to
participate in the discussion. As part of outreach events, Frontex became one of the
official partners of Planete+ Doc Film Festival, a documentary film festival taking place
in Warsaw. Frontex had its own movie section entitled Borderlands with documentaries dedicated to the topic of trafficking in
human beings. The audience was engaged
in a related debate and had a chance to lis-

ten and talk to representatives of La Strada
Polska, the Polish Border Guard and Frontex.
Frontex representatives also attended a number of meetings and debates organised by
international organisations and NGOs dedicated to the topics of migration and the role
of Frontex – these included meetings in Germany, France, Italy and Netherlands.
Frontex also published a book entitled ‘Twelve
Seconds to Decide’. Addressed to a wider audience, it presents a whole array of Frontex
activities and challenges which it faces using
accessible language and narratives.

© Frontex 2014

29

© Frontex 2014

30

Frontex · General Report 2014

6. Fundamental Rights
Frontex Fundamental Rights
Officer
During 2014, the Fundamental Rights Officer
(FRO) focused her efforts on the establishment of an effective monitoring mechanism
on fundamental rights for Frontex activities.
The Agency has taken considerable steps
to strengthen its reporting and monitoring mechanisms in all incidents taking place
within Frontex coordinated activities, and
especially in relation to allegations of fundamental rights violations. FRO has observed
the internally available procedures designed
to report, monitor and deal with allegations
of violations of fundamental rights within
the Agency and proposed a comprehensive
concept for a monitoring system to ensure
that the current procedures work in a more
coordinated and coherent manner and become more effective.
A comprehensive system that identifies
shortcomings in fundamental rights procedures and practices will result in better information on how fundamental rights are
observed in practice. The commitment of all
Member States, and especially those hosting Frontex coordinated joint operations,
is crucial to ensure that information on the
measures taken is duly communicated to the
relevant Agency staff, including the FRO, via
the established information channels to ensure transparency and accountability of the
activities coordinated by Frontex.
In addition to supporting the overall establishment of the effective monitoring system, FRO performed her own monitoring
and reporting activities. In 2014, FRO visited
selected sea and land operations and also
embarked on Joint Return Operations on a

regular basis. Learning where the shortcomings exist will result in recommendations on
how to address and prepare clear instructions
and guidelines for Frontex-coordinated operations and activities in the future.
In the case of joint return operations, the
observations and best practices identified
during the implementation of the operation aim to enhance the implementation
of fundamental rights during the operations. For instance, adequate consideration of medical conditions of returnees or
risks related to the embarkation of families with children.
Following the adoption of the Sea Borders
Surveillance Regulation, FRO devoted considerable attention to supporting the inclusion
of adequate fundamental rights provisions
during the drafting of the Operational plans
of maritime joint operations.
FRO also contributed to the drafting of the
VEGA Children Handbook, a collection of best
practices on detection and protection of children at risk at air borders, and the pilot implementation of these best practices. This
pilot project was also supported by members of the Consultative Forum. The novelty
of participation of civil society and international organisations experts in joint operations aimed at identifying children at risk
at the borders was one of the landmarks of
the year in terms of strategic development
of operational capacities with a fundamental rights based approach.
In 2014, FRO was also involved in the drafting
of the fundamental rights related aspects of the
Eurosur Handbook, on the possible impact the
system may have on fundamental rights. This

31

Frontex · General Report 2014

work was done in close coordination with the
EU Fundamental Rights Agency (FRA).
It has become a standard practice for FRO
to take part in the regular pre-deployment
briefings provided to participants of Frontexcoordinated joint operations to inform them
about the fundamental rights aspects of the
Agency’s mandate.

FRO and other Frontex experts worked
closely with EASO to ensure more efficient
referral procedures from border guards to asylum authorities in line with the Asylum Procedures Directive from June 2013 (32/2013/EU).

Consultative Forum
The Consultative Forum on Fundamental
Rights (CF) provided its expert support and
© Frontex 2014

In 2014, FRO has participated in the training of Escort Leaders for joint return operations to assess the needs of the monitoring
tools during this type of operations, as well
as to provide feedback on relevant Fundamental Rights aspects. FRO has also supported initiatives to train monitors of forced

return operations on fundamental rights implications of JROs in the framework of the
International Centre for Migration Policy Development (ICMPD) forced return monitoring project “FReM”, financed by the European
Commission.

32

© Frontex 2014

advice in various thematic areas, particularly
on training, operations and strategic planning.
In the area of strategic planning, the CF provided recommendations to the Frontex Preliminary Draft Programme of Work 2015 as
well as the Frontex Strategy and Multi-Annual Plan 2015–2018.
CF members supported Frontex Training Unit
in the development and finalisation of the
Fundamental Rights Module of the Joint Masters’ programme in Strategic Border Management. Most of the CF recommendations are
now reflected in the final adopted version of
the Module. The CF working group on training initiated systematic discussions with the
Frontex Training Unit.
In 2014, Frontex requested CF support in its
operational activities, particularly in the field
of joint return operations. The forum was
also actively engaged in in the revision of internal guidelines for officers participating in
joint operations with a fundamental rights

based approach and provision of information
on the human rights situation in Third Countries. The CF was also invited to contribute
to the drafting process of the Handbook on
VEGA Children as well as the Joint Operation
VEGA Children 2014 that served to test the
operability and usefulness of its provisions.
To better understand the reality of border
control in joint operations, a CF delegation
conducted a visit to the Bulgarian-Turkish
border in September 2014.
The CF published its first annual report in July.
Based on its first year of work, the Consultative Forum presented a proposal to the
Management Board for revision of the Consultative Forum Working Methods. The Management Board adopted amendments on
the number and scope of CF meetings (e.g.
broadening their scope to allow for a more
effective participation of Management Board
representatives) and extended the term of CF
Chairs from one to two years.

33

Frontex · General Report 2014

© Frontex, 2014

34

7. I nternal Communication,
Ethics and Integrity

Fundamental Rights Training
As a result of the close cooperation with both
the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights and the UN High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), as well as with support from the Fundamental Rights Officer,
the concept of the basic fundamental rights
training for Frontex staff has been developed.
This Fundamental Rights training is a requirement stemming from the Frontex Regulation.
Basic two-day fundamental-rights trainings
are mandatory for all Frontex staff. Following the first pilot session, as well as the subsequent three sessions organised in 2013,
additional four sessions took place in 2014.
All the courses were delivered by external
fundamental-rights experts. Altogether, 138
Frontex employees had been trained so far.
The training objectives, are three-fold: knowledge, skills and attitude. Specifically, staff are
expected to understand the basics and principles of fundamental rights, to be able to ap-

ply a human-rights perspective in their field
of work or put them into practice using a “human-rights analysis tool” and consequently
accept them as relevant to their work.

Internal Communication
Information sessions on general interest
topics such as Public Access to Documents,
Anti-Fraud policy and the obligation of non
refoulement in Frontex-coordinated operations were held for all staff throughout the
year. In addition, at Brown Bag Luncheons,
staff members held informal presentations
during which they shared information and
experience on different areas of Frontex activities and provided project updates. These
popular events took place twice a month at
lunch break.
The monthly electronic internal newsletter
FrontexINFORMER continued to be a reference point for Agency developments as well
as a platform for sharing news and information among Frontex staff.

Frontex · General Report 2014

8. Summary of Budgetary
and Human Resources issues
The initial budget of EUR 89.2 million for activities indicated in the 2014 Frontex Programme of Work was based on a year of
zero growth in terms of both financial and
human resources.
The Management Board adopted an amending budget on 22 October 2014 for an additional EUR 4.2 million, hence the final budget
for the year amounted to EUR 93.4 million.
This budget amendment was necessary to re-

inforce the Agency’s capacity to support the
implementation of the Joint Operation Triton. This Frontex-coordinated operation was
agreed upon at the end of September 2014 after a series of consultations between Frontex,
the Italian authorities and DG HOME in response to the intensive migratory flows in the
Central Mediterranean area throughout 2014.
By 31 December 2014, the Agency committed 99% of its appropriations, and used 69%

© Straz Graniczna, 2014

36

of its appropriations for payments. The final
actual utilisation of appropriations for 2014
will be higher as Frontex can make payments
on carryover appropriations until 31 December 2015.

Figure 1 Budget development 2010–2014

120 000
100 000

General Budget

As of 2014, Frontex started the implementation of Activity Based Budgeting (ABB). Core
governance level activities were endorsed
by the Management Board which forms the
basis for the allocation of direct and indirect

Euro thousand

The distribution of the 2014 budget reflects
the importance given to operational activities. There is a 65:35 distribution ratio between operational and administrative titles.

80 000
60 000
40 000
20 000
0

5.2%

27.3%

-24.2%

4.9%

-0.6%

92 847

118 187

89 578

93 950

93 411

2010

2011

2012

2013

Year (% indicate year to year budget change)

2014

Frontex · General Report 2014

Figure 2 Regular budget distribution

21%

14%

65%

Staff

Other Administrative

Operational Activities

Figure 3 ABB distribution

costs. The implementation of the budget
for 2014, based on ABB, indicated that 79%
of the human and financial resources are directly attributable to the core operational
activities. The purpose of ABB is that all resources, both human and financial, which are
needed to implement an activity will be allocated to that activity. The Agency has identified the potential in the ABB approach to
improve its resource utilisation and performance management.

Operational Budget
From the 2014 operational budget amounting to EUR 60.5 million, 77% of the available
funds were committed for joint operations
(land, sea, air borders and return cooperation)
as indicated in the chart below. This allocation of funds is guided by the Frontex Programme of Work as adopted by the Frontex
Management Board. Additionally, the budget
amendment adopted in October 2014 was allocated to reinforce operational activities in
the Central Mediterranean area.

Use of appropriations 2013 carried forward to 2014

21%

By the close of the 2014 financial year, Frontex managed to use to a large extent the

79%

Direct costs

38

Indirect costs

Frontex · General Report 2014

Figure 4 Final Operational Budget Distribution

0.9%

payment appropriations made in 2013. Of
the total amount carried forward from
2013 to 2014, EUR 28.9 million was paid in
2014, while EUR 2.8 million needed to be
cancelled. The main reasons for the cancellations were related to the non-implementation of contracts or due to the fact
that grant beneficiaries requested lower
amounts than estimated at the beginning
of an operational activity. Nevertheless,
the total budget utilisation of the appropriations made available to Frontex in 2013
was 95%.

Procurement
Part of the implementation of the Agency’s
budget relates to the execution of procurement procedures - purchasing products
and services from contractors. It needs
to be emphasised that Frontex is not outsourcing any of its operational activities.
At the end of 2014, the Agency moved to
new premises, which resulted in many procurement procedures for ICT equipment
or furniture for the Agency’s new premises. Overall, 1 087 procurement procedures were carried out in 2014 either by
launching tenders or using Framework contracts concluded by the Agency or by the
Commission.

0.7%
12.0%

1.6%
7.9%

8.2%
46.9%

4.2%

14.0%

3.6%

Land Borders

Return co-operation

Training &
Research & Development

Sea borders

Risk analysis & Frontex
Situation Centre

Pooled Resources

Air borders

EUROSUR

Misc. operational activities
Supporting operational
activities

Figure 5 Procurement procedures

1%
5%
26%

1%
32%

33%

2%

Open tenders

Procedures under framework
contracts

Negotiated procedures
with 3 candidates

Other (contracts with/of EU institutions
and other procedures)

Negotiated procedures
with 1 candidates
Exceptional negotiated
procedures

Payment against invoice
(below 1000 EUR)

39

Frontex · General Report 2014

Human Resources
Recruitment
Similar to other EU Agencies and Institutions,
Frontex committed to apply the 5% reduction
objective over five years (2014-2018 inclusive)
to the number of temporary agents employed
at the Agency. Despite the requested reduction, recruitment within the Agency remains
high mostly due to a high volume in the rotation of the staff.
There were 46 new staff members recruited
in 2014. Thirty recruitment procedures were
launched, of which 13 will be finalised in 2015.
The procedure for the selection of the Frontex Executive Director was finalised by the
Management Board Decision No 25/2014 on
26 November 2014, appointing Fabrice Leggeri as the new Executive Director.
Breakdown tables of staff members by Frontex entities and the number of temporary
agents, contract agents and seconded national experts are attached as Annex K and
Annex L.

40

In areas where additional support was
needed, an external company continued to
provide interim services. In 2014, 14 interim
employees worked for the Agency on short
term contracts.
Staff Development and Training
In 2014, the staff members were provided
with possible to attend:
n	EU language courses (20 sessions),
n	fundamental rights training (4 sessions),
n	training on self-assessment in the context
of annual appraisal exercise (6 sessions).
Sixty-seven other training courses were organised, including 60 specific courses ranging
from training on biometrics to EU civil service law and EU public procurement reform.
As a result of the 2014 Reclassification Exercise, 15 temporary agents were reclassified
to higher grade and are included in the figures under Annex L.

Frontex · General Report 2014

10. Annexes
Annex A. List of Management Board
Members
Country

Name

Position/Rank

Institution

Austria

Mr Robert Strondl

Head of Department of
Operational Affairs
Major General

Ministry of the Interior

Belgium

Mr Herbert Veyt

Director of Operations
Chief Commissioner

Federal Police

Bulgaria

Mr Zaharin Penov

Director General
General Commissioner

Chief Directorate Border Police

Croatia

Mr Zlatko Sokolar

Head of Border Police
Directorate

Ministry of Interior

Cyprus

Mr Glykerios Leontiou

Commander of Aliens and
Immigration Unit
Superintendent A

Cyprus Police

Mr Tomáš Tuhý
replaced by

Deputy Police President
Colonel

Mr Martin Vondrášek

Deputy Police President
Colonel

Mr Richard Østerlund la Cour

Chief Superintendent

Danish National Police

Mr Rando Kruusmaa

Deputy Director General
Lieutenant Colonel

Police and Border Guard Board

Czech
Republic
Denmark
Estonia

Police Presidium of the Czech
Republic

Mr Matti Möttönen
replaced by

Deputy Chief of the Finnish
Border Guard
Rear Admiral

Mr. Ilkka Laitinen

Brigadier General

Mr François Lucas
replaced by

Director of Immigration

Mr Benoît Brocart

Director of immigration

Germany

Mr Ralf Göbel

Chairman of the Frontex
Management Board Deputy
Director General

Greece

Mr Alexandros Denekos
replaced by

Director of Aliens Division
Police Brigadier General

Mr Alexandros Soukoulis

Police Brigadier General

Hungary

Mr Zsolt Halmosi

Director General
in charge of policing
Major General

Hungarian National Police

Ireland

Mr John O'Driscoll

Head of Bureau
Detective Chief Superintendent

Garda National Immigration
Bureau (GNIB)

Italy

Mr Giovanni Pinto

Central Director of Central
Directorate for Immigration &
Border Police

Ministry of Interior

Latvia

Mr Normunds Garbars

Chief of the State Border Guard
General

State Border Guard

Lithuania

Mr Vainius Butinas

Commander of the State Border
Guard Service

State Border Guard Service

Finland

France

Finnish Border Guard

Ministry of Interior
Federal Ministry of Interior
Directorate General of the
Federal Police Matters
Hellenic Police

41

Frontex · General Report 2014

Country

Name

Position/Rank

Institution

Luxembourg

Mr Thierry Fehr

Director

National Airport Police Unit

Malta

Mr Neville Xuereb

Superintendent

Malta Police Force,
Special Branch

Netherlands

Mr J.A.J Hans Leijtens

Commander
Lieutenant General

Royal Netherlands
Marechaussee

Poland

Mr Dominik Tracz

Commander-in-Chief
of Border Guard
Major General

Polish Border Guard

Portugal

Mr Manuel Jarmela Palos

National Director

Aliens and Border Service

Romania

Mr Ioan Buda

General Inspector

General Inspectorate of
Romanian Border Police

Slovakia

Mr Ľudovít Bíró

Director

Border and Aliens Police
Bureau, Presidium of Police
Force

Slovenia

Mr Marko Gaŝperlin

Deputy Chairman of the Frontex
Management Board
Assistant Director
Senior Police Superintendent

Ministry of the Interior
General Police Directorate

Spain

Mr Emilio Baos Arrabal

General Commissioner

National Police Force

Sweden

Mr Sören Clerton

Deputy Commissioner
Head of Division

National Bureau of
Investigation/Central Border
Management Division

UK

Mr Paul Morgan

Director for the South and
Europe

Border Force (Home Office)

Iceland

Ms Sigrídur Björk Gudjónsdóttir
replaced by

District Commissioner

Mr Ólafur Helgi Kjartansson

District Commissioner

Mr Stein Ulrich
replaced by

Senior Adviser

Mr Jan Eirik Thomassen

Assistant National Police
Commissioner

Switzerland

Mr Héribert Wider

Lieutenant Colonel

Swiss Border Guard

Lichtenstein

Mr Mario Büchel
replaced by

Head of Security and Traffic
Division

National Police

Mr Uwe Langenbahn

Deputy Chief

Mr Stefano Manservisi
replaced by

Director General

Mr Matthias Ruete

Director General

Ms Belinda Pyke

Director - Migration and Borders

Norway

European
Commission

42

Sudurnes Police District

National Police Directorate

Directorate General Home
Affairs, European Commission

Frontex · General Report 2014

Annex B. List of Management Board
Decisions adopted in 2014
01

Decision of MB on the Frontex Financial Regulation

08 January 2014

02

Decision of MB on the adoption of Programme of Work 2014 and the Budget 2014

14 February 2014

03

Decision of MB on the Public Access to Documents

19 February 2014

04

Decision of MB on IE request to participate in and contribute financially to operation
activities coordinated by Frontex

19 March 2014

05

Decision of MB on UK request to participate in and contribute financially to operation
activities coordinated by Frontex

19 March 2014

06

Decision of MB adopting rules relating to the technical equipment, including Overall
Minimum Number of Technical Equipment (OMNTE) to be deployed for Frontex
coordinated operational activities in 2015

26 March 2014

07

Decision of MB adopting Frontex General Report 2013

27 March 2014

08

Decision of MB on the adoption of the Frontex’s Strategy and Multi Annual Plan 2015-2018

10 April 2014

09

Decision of MB on the adoption of the Unit Costs for Operational Activities

07 May 2014

10

Decision of MB on the adoption of the Multi Annual Staff Policy Plan 2015-2017

20 May 2014

11

Decision of MB on the adoption of MB’s analysis and assessment of the Annual Activity
Report 2013

20 May 2014

12

Decision of MB on applying by analogy certain Commission’s Staff Implementing Rules

21 May 2014

13

Decision of MB on the presentation of the Consultative Forum Annual Report 2013

23 June 2014

14

Decision of MB on the adoption of the MB ‘s opinion on the final accounts for 2013

26 June 2014

15

Decision of MB on the Amendment of Frontex Programme of Work (N1) And Frontex
Budget 2014 (N1)

17 July 2014

16

Decision of MB on the Implementing rules to the Frontex Financial Regulation

19 August 2014

17

Decision of MB on the approval of the DED report to the MB on the use of power to give
internal instructions on non-classified sensitive information

26 August 2014

18

Decision of MB authorising the request for derogations and non-application of certain EC
implementing rules to the staff regulations

11 September 2014

19

Decision of MB on the revision of the working methods of the Frontex Consultative Forum
and the modalities for the transmission of information to the Frontex Consultative Forum

24 September 2014

20

Decision of MB on the adoption of the dates planned for the MB meetings in 2015.

24 September 2014

21

Decision of MB on designation of the reporting officers for Executive Management’s annual
appraisals

25 September 2014

22

Decision of MB on granting differential allowance to Mr Gil Arias Fernandez for the period
of his temporary assignment to the post of Executive Director

25 September 2014

23

Decision of MB authorising to request for derogations from the European Commission
implementing rules on working time

25 September 2014

24

Decision of MB on the amendment of Frontex Programme of Work 2014 (N2) and Frontex
Budget 2014 (N2)

22 October 2014

25

Decision of MB on the appointment of the Executive Director

26 November 2014

26

Decision of MB on the establishment of a permanent MB working group on budget and
accounts

27 November 2014

43

Frontex · General Report 2014

Annex C. Situation at the external
borders in 2014
Detections of illegal border-crossing reached
a new record of more than 280 000 in 2014.
This was twice as much as the previous high
of 140 000 detections in 2011, the year of the
Arab Spring. This unprecedented number of
migrants crossing the EU external border illegally mainly had its roots in the civil war
in Syria and instability in other countries in
the region, including the emergence of the
militant organisation known as the Islamic
State. In addition the crisis in Iraq and lack
of effective government in Libya have created the region’s worst refugee crisis since
the Second World War.
This unprecedented number of migrants detected on the external borders of the EU had
several implications for border control authorities and EU internal security:
1) Most of detections of irregular migrants
were reported as part of search and rescue operations in the Central Mediterranean area. In 2014, border control authorities
saved the lives of thousands of people. Not
all could be helped, unfortunately, as facilitators have increasingly used unsafe, overcrowded boats, stretching to the limit the
capacities of search and rescue operations
of the EU coastal states.
2) The surging demand for crossing to the EU
has also created new modus operandi. Since
September, Frontex has monitored an increasing use of large cargo ships to transport
migrants directly from the Turkish coast to
Italy. This multi-million euro business for organised crime groups is likely to be replicated
in the Central Mediterranean area. Another
worrying trend has been the increasing de-

44

liberate attempts to involve merchant ships
in rescuing migrants. This has prompted the
International Maritime Organization (IMO) to
voice concerns of the shipping industry over
its involvement in rescue operations.
3) With a record number of migrants crossing the border illegally, most resources were
devoted to their immediate care, and not towards screening and obtaining basic information like their nationality. Consequently,
upon arrival in the EU, many migrants continued their journey to other Member States,
increasing the movements of persons staying illegally within the EU.

Entry points
The increase in the number of illegal bordercrossing in 2014 was not evenly distributed
along all border sections. Three areas can be
identified as the major entry points:
1) The Central Mediterranean: In the annual
total for 2014, detections of illegal bordercrossing on the Central Mediterranean route
accounted for the largest percentage of all
detections (170 664, or 60% of the total).
This represented a fourfold increase in detections compared to 2013. Most migrants
departed from Libya where facilitators continue to take advantage of the lack of law
enforcement capacities to prevent departures. The peak in detections was reached in
June, but detections for the last months of
the year continue to be much higher than in
previous years, suggesting that many more
migrants could arrive in the spring.

Frontex · General Report 2014

2) Detections on the Eastern Mediterranean
route also increased, from about 25 000 in
2013 to nearly 51 000 in 2014. In contrast to
2013, when detections were split between
land and sea border, nearly 85% of the detections were reported from the Aegean Sea
(around 43 000). This sharp increase in the
Aegean Sea meant that migrants departed
from a larger number of areas than in previous years and arrived in a larger number of
islands, stretching capacity of surveillance.
Indeed, in many cases, many were not detected while sailing, but once they had already reached the land.
3) For the second year in a row, detections
in the Western Balkans increased significantly from 6 391 in 2012 to 19 951 in 2013 to
43 357 in 2014. This brought the Western Balkan route on par with detections in the Aegean Sea. While the Western Balkans route
includes several border sections virtually all
detections (97%) were reported at the green
border between Hungary and Serbia.
Elsewhere along the external borders, there
have been episodes of high pressure, but at
a smaller scale. Detections increased by 15%
in the Western Mediterranean area (7 842
compared to 6 838 in 2013), mostly at the
land border in Melilla (Spanish enclave in Morocco). Circular migration between Albania
and Greece remained stable with about 8
800 detections in 2014. A similar stable trend
was reported from the Eastern land border
with 1 275 detections.

Main nationalities
In terms of nationalities, Syrians (79 169) represented 28% of the total number of irregular migrants who arrived in the EU in 2014.
They were also the top nationality for other
indicators, in particular asylum applications,
reflecting the dire situation in Syria and the
desperate plight of Syrian asylum seekers.
However, the vast majority of Syrians did not

apply for asylum in the Member States of entry (mostly Italy and Greece) but primarily in
Germany and Sweden.
The detections of Eritreans also reached a
record level (more than 34 600, compared
to 11 300 in 2013). They were mostly arriving through Libya on the Central Mediterranean route. Like Syrians, they did not apply
for asylum in the Member States of entry, but
rather continue to other Member States. According to findings gathered by Frontex joint
debriefing teams, many of the Eritreans had
lived for some time in Libya but decided to
leave for Italy because of the violence they
were facing. Other Eritreans claimed they
had been deported from Israel in April 2014,
when the authorities there did not renew
their permit of stay.
Detections of Afghans sharply increased to
around 22 000 from about 9 500 in 2013. Afghans were detected on the Eastern Mediterranean route (mostly crossing the Eastern
Aegean Sea to Greece), and then once again
on the Western Balkan route at the Hungarian-Serbian land border (totalling 8 342).
Detections of citizens from Kosovo crossing
the land border illegally between Serbia and
Hungary sharply increased to total more than
22 000 detections in 2014 (compared to 6 129
in 2013). This trend has been at least partially
linked with rumours among Kosovo population that France’s decision to remove Kosovo from the national list of safe countries
will make it more straightforward to obtain
asylum in this Member States.

Other indicators
Among the other indicators, the strongest
increase in terms of percentage and volume
was reported to EASO for asylum applications, reaching about 650 000 applications at
the EU level (up 40%). As with illegal bordercrossing, the top nationalities were Syrians

45

Frontex · General Report 2014

and Eritreans, as indeed many entered the
EU to escape violence in their country of origin. However, in most cases they did not apply for asylum in the Member States of entry,
but in other EU countries.

number of Russians of Chechen origin applying for asylum in Poland and Germany after
being refused entry. This modus operandi was
not used so much in 2014 due to successful
media campaigns in Chechnya.

There were 441 780 detections of illegal stays
in the EU, which represents an increasing
trend compared to the year before and recent reporting periods. However, the actual
trend is difficult to establish due to specific
reporting requirements in various Member
States that bias the data.

Detections of facilitators increased by 41% to
about 10 000, mostly due to increased detections in Spain and Greece. Italy reported a stable number of facilitators compared to 2013.

There was a steady trend of 161 309 thirdcountry nationals effectively returned to
countries outside the EU. In terms of nationalities, there is a striking difference between the nationality detected crossing the
border illegally or staying illegally in the EU,
and the nationality effectively returned. Most
effective returns concerned Albania nationals,
followed by citizens of Pakistan and Ukraine.
Member States reported a total of 115 061 refusals of entry at the external borders of the
EU, a decrease of 11% compared to last year.
The decrease is due to the fact that 2013 was
a record year, following the exceptionally large

46

Detections of fraudulent documents remained relatively stable, with 9 400 detections reported to Frontex. As in the previous
year, this number appears very low compared
to the multi-million flow of passengers on
entries into the EU.
Detections of clandestine entry in vehicles increased strongly from 599 in 2013 to 3059 in
2014. The increase was mostly due to a tenfold increase in detections reported from the
Bulgarian border crossings along the land border with Turkey. The increase started in August, possibly as an indirect consequence of
enhanced measures at the green border that
might have caused a partial displacement of
the flow from green border to border crossing
points, by way of clandestine entries

Frontex · General Report 2014

Annex D. List of Joint Operational
Activities
Air Borders
Name of the Project

Operational area

Lenght

Participating MS and TC

JO VEGA Children 2014

9 Participating airports: Amsterdam,
Brussels, Frankfurt, Geneva, Lisbon,
Madrid, Bucharest, Porto, Zurich

63 days

8 Member States: Belgium, Switzerland,
Germany,Spain, Netherlands, Portugal,
Romania, Ireland International
Organizations: International
Organization for Migration – IOM,
United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees – UNHCR.
Non-Governmental Organizations:
Caritas Austria, Terre des Hommes and
Croatian Law Centre.

JO Focal Points 2014 Air
– Regular

28 EU Focal Points Air activated:
Amsterdam, Arlanda, Athens,
Bergamo, Brussels, Budapest, Paris
Charles de Gaulle, Dusseldorf,
Rome Fiumicino, Frankfurt,
Geneva, Helsinki, Ljubljana, Lisbon,
Lyon, Madrid, Marseille, Munich,
Milano Malpensa, Nice, Orly,
Bucharest, Prague, Riga, Vienna,
Vilnius, Warsaw, Zurich Airports

352 days
24 Member States: Austria, Belgium,
(permanent Bulgaria, Switzerland, Czech Republic,
operation) Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Finland,
France, Hungary, Spain, Greece, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia,
Slovakia, Sweden
6 Third Countries: Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Serbia,
Moldova and Turkey

5 Coordination Point airports
activated: Skopje, Tirana, Sarajevo,
Belgrade, and Chisinau Airports
JO Focal Points 2014 Air
– Intermediate Managers

20 EU Focal Points Air activated:
Amsterdam, Athens, Brussels,
Bucharest, Dusseldorf, Frankfurt,
Helsinki, Lisbon, Madrid, Milano
Malpensa, Munich, Paris Charles
de Gaulle, Paris Orly, Prague, Riga,
Rome Fiumicino, Vienna, Vilnius,
Warsaw, Zurich

280 days
(permanent
operational
concept)

3 Third Countries: Cape Verde, Georgia,
Ukraine

1 Coordination Point airport
activated: Tbilisi
PP Flight Tracking

8 EU Interbational Airports: Vienna,
Brussels, Dusseldorf, Rome
Fiumicino, Milan Malpensa,
Ljubljana, Zurich, Amsterdam
3 Third Country Airports: Tirana,
Belgrade and Skopje

24 Member States: Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Germany, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Iceland,
Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Spain, Slovenia,
Sweden, Switzerland

70 days

Member States: Austria, Belgium,
Switzerland, Germany, The
Netherlands, Italy, Slovenia and
Sweden
Third Countries: Albania, the Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and
Serbia

47

Frontex · General Report 2014

Name of the Project

Operational area

JO Alexis 2014

33 EU International airports:
Amsterdam, Athens, Barcelona,
Bergamo, Bratislava, Brussels,
Budapest, Bucharest,
Coppenhagen, Paris Charles de
Gaulle, Paris Orly, Geneva, Lyon,
Prague, Sofia, Cologne, Dusseldorf,
Geneva, Helsinki, Ljubljana,
Lisbon, Madrid, Marseille, Milano
Malpensa, Porto, Riga, Roma
Fiumicino, Tallinn, Timisoara,
Stuttgart, Vienna, Vilnius, Warsaw

124
operational
days

9 EU International Airports: Lisbon,
Milan Malpensa, Stockholm,
Vienna, Madrid, Lisbon, Bergamo,
Athens, Paris Charles de Gaulle

149
operational
days

JO Pegasus 2014

Lenght

Participating MS and TC
24 Member States: Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Germany,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France,
Greece, Hungary, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Switzerland, United
Kingdom
6 Third Countries: Albania, Bosnia and
Hercegovina, Macedonia, Moldova,
Georgia, Ukraine
11 Member States: Austria, Estonia,
Greece, Spain, Romania, Latvia, The
Netherlands, Italy, France, Sweden,
Portugal

Land Borders
Name of the Project

Operational area

Lenght

Participating MS and TC

JO Focal Points 2013
(extension)

Bulgaria, Croatia, Greece, Hungary,
Poland and Romania

90
operational
days

19 Member States: Austria, Bulgaria,
Switzerland, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Germany, Estonia, Finland, France,
Hungary, Greece, Lithuania, the
Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia

JO Focal Points 2014 Land

Bulgaria, Croatia, Estonia, Finland,
Greece, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Norway, Poland, Romania and
Slovakia

275
operational
days

25 Member States: Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Switzerland, Croatia, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Germany, Estonia,
Finland, France, Hungary, Greece, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Slovenia , Slovakia, Spain, Sweden
6 Third Countries: Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Serbia,
Moldova, and Ukraine

48

JO Coordination Points
2014

designated border crossing points/
Hosting Third Countries Albania,
the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Moldova, Ukraine

255
operational
days

12 Member States: Austria, Croatia,
Estonia, Finland, France, Hungary,
Latvia, the Netherlands, Poland,
Romania, Slovenia, Switzerland

JO Poseidon Land 2013
(extension)

Greece and Bulgaria

85
operational
days

15 Member States: Austria, Bulgaria,
Switzerland, Estonia, Finland, Greece,
Lithuania, the Netherlands, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Slovenia , Spain,
United Kingdom

Frontex · General Report 2014

Name of the Project

Operational area

Lenght

JO Poseidon Land 2014

Greece and Bulgaria

281
operational
days

Participating MS and TC
25 Member States: Austria, Belgium,
Bulgaria, Switzerland, Croatia,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Germany,
Estonia, Finland, France, Hungary,
Greece, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, the United Kingdom
1 Third Country: Moldova

JO Flexible Operational
Activities 2014

Hungary, Croatia, Poland

171
operational
days

18 Member States: Austria, Bulgaria,
Switzerland, Croatia, Czech Republic,
Germany, Estonia, Finland, France,
Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Spain
4 Third Countries: Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Serbia, Moldova

JO Rex 2014

Croatia

20
operational
days

17 Member States: Austria, Bulgaria,
Switzerland, Denmark, Germany,
Estonia, Finland, France, Latvia,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden
2 Third Countries: Albania, Bosnia and
Herzegovina

Sea Borders
Name of the Project

Operational area

Lenght

Participating MS and TC

JO EPN Triton 2014

Central Mediterranean

61 days

Host MS: Italy
18 Member States: Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, Greece,
Iceland,Lithuania, Malta, Netherland,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, United
Kingdom

JO EPN Hera 2014

Atlantic region

92 days

Host MS: Spain
1 Member State: France

JO EPN Indalo 2014

Western Mediterranean

151 days

Host MS: Spain
9 Member States: Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, France, Greece, Italy, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia
1 Third Country: Moroccan Observer
based on bi-lateral agreement with
Spain

49

Frontex · General Report 2014

Name of the Project

Operational area

Lenght

Participating MS and TC

JO EPN Minerva 2014

Western Mediterranean (seaports)

40 days

Host MS: Spain
15 Member States: Belgium, Bulgaria,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia,
Finland, France, Italy, Netherlands,
Norway, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia,
Sweden, Switzerland
1 Third Country: Ukraine Moroccan
Observer based on bi-lateral
agreement with Spain

JO EPN Hermes 2013

Central Mediterranean

120 days

Host MS: Italy
11 Member States: Belgium, Denmark,
Finland, France, Italy, Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain,
Sweden

JO EPN Hermes 2014

Central Mediterranean

184 days

Host MS: Italy
19 Member States: Austria, Belgium,
Denmark, France, Germany, Greece,
Iceland,Lithuania, Malta, Netherland,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, United
Kingdom, Czech Republic
2 Third Countries: Turkey, Moldova

JO EPN Aeneas 2013/ 2014

Central Mediterranean

273 days

Host MS: Italy
15 Member States: Belgium, Denmark,
Estonia, France, Germany, Greece,
Lithuania, Netherland, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland;
3 Third Countries: Albania, Georgia,
Turkey

JO Poseidon Sea 2013/2014 Eastern Mediterranean

365 days

Host MS: Greece
20 Member States: Austria, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom
2 Third Countries: Albania, Georgia

JO Focal Points Sea 2014

EPN General

Border Crossing Points in 9 MS:
Romania, Bulgaria, Spain, Portugal,
Slovenia, Croatia, Lithuania,
Finland and Estonia

178 days

EPN General activities: EPN
Common Patrols/ EPN ALPHA &
FOXTROT AREA 3 rounds, Frontex
Compatible Operational Image,
Frontex Positioning System and
tailored meetings/workshops

365 days

19 Member States: Austria, Bulgaria,
Belgium, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania,
Netherlands, Norway, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Czech
Republic, Spain, Sweden

1829 days
in total

50

Host MS: Portugal, Spain, Slovenia,
Croatia, Finland, Estonia, Lithuania,
Bulgaria, Romania

all MS

Frontex · General Report 2014

Returns
Name of
the Project Operational area

Lenght

Participating MS and TC

365 days

Host MS: Greece and Bulgaria

Austria, Denmark, Estonia, France,
Italy, Latvia, the Netherlands,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, United Kingdom

Return Operations Sector
JO Attica
2014

GR – external land and sea
borders and Athens
BG – external land border and
Sofia

Joint Return Operations
No.

Destination(s)

Organising country

Participating states (with returnees)

Total no. of returnees

1

Nigeria

Italy

IT, MT, GR

42

2

Pakistan

Greece

GR, ES

41

3

FYR of Macedonia

Germany

DE, SE

80

4

Nigeria

UK

UK, BG, DK, DE, IS, NL, ES, SE

62

5

Serbia

Germany

DE, SE

67

6

Albania (TC)

France

FR, BE, ES

48

7

Pakistan

Greece

GR, ES

50

8

Georgia

Spain

ES, FR, AT, GR, PL, SE

27

9

Colombia & Dominican Rep.

Spain

ES, GR

96

10

Kosovo

Austria

AT, FI, SE, DE, FR, HU, SK

45

11

Pakistan

Greece

GR, FR, HU, PL, SE

32

12

Nigeria

Italy

IT, BG, DK, ES, FI, FR, GR, LT, NO, SE

50

13

Serbia & FYR of Macedonia

Spain

ES, FR, DE

29

14

Bosnia i Herzegovina & Albania

Germany

DE, SE, FR, FI, ES

74

15

Serbia

Germany

DE, SE

65

16

Nigeria

The Netherlands

NL, NO, SE, FR, PL, BG, DE, RO, ES, MT

43

17

Kosovo

Austria

AT, FI, FR, DE, HU, SE

71

18

Nigeria

Italy

IT, BG, FR, DE, NO, MT, PT, CH

50

19

DRC

Belgium

BE, FR, LU

20

20

Kosovo

Sweden

SE, NO, HU, DE.

44

21

Albania (TC)

France

FR, BE, FI

51

22

Pakistan

Spain

ES, FR, BG, BE, LT, MT, SE

27

23

Ecuador & Colombia

Spain

ES, BG

94

24

Nigeria

Austria

AT, FR, DE, FI, CH, GR, DK, SK, NO, MT

26

25

Serbia & FYR of Macedonia

Germany

DE, LU

42

26

Albania & Georgia

Spain

ES, FR, GR, SE, NO

44

27

Nigeria

Italy

IT, BG, FI, GR, NO, PL

45

28

Kosovo

Hungary

HU, DE, FI

70

29

Pakistan

Greece

GR, BG, LT

43

30

Kosovo

Sweden

SE, DE, FR, HU

76

31

Georgia (TC)

Switzerland

CH, FR, DE, DK, PL

15

32

Bosnia i Herzegovina & Serbia

Germany

DE, SE, LU

60

33

Nigeria

The Netherlands

NL, DK, SE, FI, PT, CH, NO, DE, BG, MT, BE, ES

41

34

Albania

Sweden

SE, FI, DE, BE, FR, ES

60

35

DRC

Belgium

BE, FI, RO

23

36

Kosovo

Hungary

HU, AT, DE, FR

69

37

Serbia & Albania

Germany

SE, DE

54

38

Georgia (TC)

France

FR, DK, DE, LT, NL, PL

18

39

Kosovo

Austria

AT, HU

50

51

Frontex · General Report 2014

Joint Return Operations
No.

Destination(s)

Organising country

Participating states (with returnees)

Total no. of returnees

40

Pakistan

Spain

ES, BG, PL

26

41

Serbia

Sweden

SE, DE

56

42

Albania & Georgia

Austria

AT, ES, FR, DE, FI, LT

75

43

Nigeria

Norway

NO, DK, FI, GR, ES, PT, SE, CH

47

44

Russia

Poland

PL, CH

42

45

Kosovo

Hungary

HU, FI, DE

Sum of returnees in 2014

52

81

2271

Frontex · General Report 2014

Annex E. Comparative Analysis
of Joint Operational Activities 2014
At Air Borders
The number of officer-days of air border joint
operations increased from 5 988 officer-days
in 2013 to 6 703 in 2014 despite a slight reduction in the budget, mainly due to the
continuous deployment of SGOs in the operational areas.
Six joint activities were carried out for a total of 1 038 operational days, while in 2013
the air border operational activities were implemented under the umbrella of three large
scale joint operations for a total of 680 operational days.
The number of deployed officers fell 8% (241
in 2013 versus 222 in 2014), but the duration
of deployments was extended especially in
the case of SGOs.
The number of participating MS/SAC remained very high (28) and additional eight
Third Countries took part in joint operations.
The budget of Air Border Sector was decreased to EUR 2 200 000 EUR from EUR
2 255 000 in 2013.

At Land Borders
In 2014, seven joint activities (including REX)
were carried out at external land borders for
a total of 1 177 operational days, while in 2013
eight joint activities (REX included) took place
for a total of 1 061 operational days.
The number of deployed officer rose to 1 008
from 984 in 2013 and the average duration of

deployments was extended, especially in the
case of SGO deployment.
The number of hosting MS/SAC remained the
same (12); the number of participating MS/
SAC remained very high (28 in 2014 compared
to 27 in 2013) as well as the level of participation of TC (four in 2014 and five in 2013).
In 2014, the budget of Land Border Sector
was EUR 7 480 000, or 2.2% lower than in
2013 (EUR 7 641 900).
The area of gravity was partly on the GreekTurkish and Bulgarian-Turkish land borders,
where the Joint Operation Poseidon Land 2013
extension and Poseidon Land 2014 were implemented continuously throughout the year
and partly on the Hungarian–Serbian and
Croatian–Serbian land borders, where Joint
Operations Focal Points Land, Flexible Operational Activities were implemented. Operational activities at those border sections
were mainly focused on specialised green
border surveillance and debriefing activities.
The deployment of additional Hellenic Police officers along the Greek–Turkish land
border, in the framework of national operation “Aspida” (shield) launched as from August 2012, continued in 2014. The Bulgarian
authorities implemented a similar large scale
special operation (as from November 2013),
leading to a sharp decrease of the detections
in the area. Comparing data collected during the course of 2013 and 2014, a 54% decrease in the number of apprehension was
reported in the operational area of Poseidon Land in 2014 compared to 2013. While
the Greek authorities reported an increase

53

Frontex · General Report 2014

of 93% in the number of apprehended migrants in their area, irregular migration pressure decreased in the Bulgarian operational
area by roughly 66% in comparison with the
previous year. The displacement of irregular migrants towards Greek territory can be
linked to the extension of the Bulgarian special police operation, the further extension of
the Integrated Border Surveillance System
(IBSS) and the completion of the engineering technical obstacle (ETO) at the Bulgarian–Turkish border.

At Sea Borders
Aiming to facilitate interoperability and flexible response to the irregular migration phenomena and cross-border crime, eight joint
maritime operations and seven tailored activities, as well as coordination of national
patrolling in predefined European Patrol Network (EPN) areas were implemented in 2014.
The number of operational days in sea operations in 2014 increased by 8% (1 829 in 2014
versus 1 689 in 2013), due to activation of EPNTriton in the Central Mediterranean area.
In 2014, Frontex significantly increased its
budget for sea operation. The scale of Frontex-financed technical means’ deployment
was 60 % higher compared with previous
year (43 006 patrolling hours versus 26 590).
This corresponded to the increased number of guest officers deployed in maritime
operations.
Deployed experts performed 50% more operational officer-days (some 20 000 compared
to 13 352). In addition, during the maritime
joint operations, crew members performed
33 767 operational officer-days (27,300 in
2013). The increase was a result of more intensive patrolling activities.
The number of participating EU MS/SAC in
joint sea operations stood at 28, as in the pre-

54

vious year. There were also six Third Countries involved in sea operations in 2014, one
more than in 2013.
With regard to financing of the operation
activities, the budget for the year 2014 was
EUR 28 383 700 compared to previous year
allocation of EUR 28 885 000. This budget
was however complimented by 6 800 000
EUR from the 2013 budget which was dedicated to extensions of sea operations in 2014.
In total, 217 776 migrants (some 600 migrants per day) were intercepted during the
joint sea operations in 2014 in contrast to
53 758, or about 147 per day, in 2013. The migration pressure in Central Mediterranean
areas represented main part of the overall
flows via sea borders – approx. 170 000 migrants arrived to Italy during sea operations
in 2014. Furthermore, 1 086 suspected facilitators were apprehended during the joint
maritime operations – three times the previous year’s tally of 357.
For the second year in a row, there was a
five-fold increase in migration flows in the
Central Mediterranean, where the risk of fatalities was also considerably high due to use
of unseaworthy overloaded boats.
In the area covered by JO Poseidon Sea, the
number of migrants increased more than
four-fold compared with previous year (approx. 45 000 in 2014 versus 10 815 in 2013).
Assets taking part in Frontex-coordinated operations rescued 173 543 migrants, nearly four
times the number from the previous year, or
475 people per day, on average.
During the maritime joint operations some
other types of cross-border crime, including
drug trafficking were detected.
Some 43 tonnes of hashish worth more than
EUR 65 million and 35 kg of cocaine worth

Frontex · General Report 2014

2 million were seized and 344 suspected drug
traffickers were arrested.

For the year 2014, the budget of Return Operations Sector was increased by 1.76%.

Most of the drugs were seized in the Western and Central Mediterranean area.

Focal Points

Moreover, twenty-four million contraband
cigarettes worth EUR 2.8 million were also
seized and seven cases of possible sea pollution and two cases of possible illegal fishing were detected.

Return Operations
Frontex organised 45 joint return operations
(JROs) in 2014 with a total of 2 271 returnees
compared to 39 JROs with 2 152 returnees
in 2013. Even though four flights to African
countries were cancelled due to the Ebola
outbreak, this was still the largest number of
operations and returnees since 2006.
Fourteen Member States took the role of a
JRO organiser in 2014. Greece and Hungary
organised the JROs for the first time. The top
five destination countries of joint returns in
2014 were Nigeria, Kosovo, Albania, Serbia
and Pakistan, together making up 37 of the
45 joint return operations.
In 2014, one joint operation (JO Attica) lasting all year round was carried out, as in the
previous year. The number of Member States
participating in the JO remains unchanged,
while the number of deployed officers fell
40%. However, the duration of deployments
was extended due to the new concept of SGO
deployments. The number of deployed interpreters was increased by 61%, covering more
operational locations.

The Focal Points Concept continued to serve
as a platform at air, sea and land external borders for the further development of cooperation between EU Member States and also
for the cooperation with Third Countries by
deployment of border guards to provide operational support and to gather experience
and best practices.
Furthermore, the concept supported the implementation of other regional and local joint
operations launched in the same operational
areas and enabled the reinforcement of border sections affected by irregular migration.
During JO Focal Points 2014 Air – Regular
Officers Member States and Third Countries deployed and hosted 65 officers in total at different airports within and outside
the European Union, including deployment
of seven observers from six Third Countries,
five EU officers as advisors deployed at Non
EU airports. Moreover, four Frontex Seconded
Guest Officers were deployed at number of
EU airports to support the local authorities
with expertise.
During JO Focal Points 2014 Land – 12 MS
hosted the Focal Points at the BCPs and 24 MS
were participating. In total there were 173 officers deployed for 8 788 officer-days.
During JO Focal Points 2014 Sea – 9 MS hosted
the Focal Points at the seaport border crossing points and 19 MS participated. In total,
37 officers were deployed for 1,153 officer-days.

55

Frontex · General Report 2014

Annex G. List of Training Projects
PROJECTS
Project
ref. number
2014/TRU/2

Project title / Type of event

Number of
participants

Number of
man-days

European Joint Masters in Strategic Border Management
Other activities

2014/TRU/4

Number
of events
8

310

1 033

Curricula for Mid-Level Border Guard Education
Training
Other activities

2

36

432

12

149

554

2014/TRU/19 Development and certification of training experts
Training

1

18

54

Other activities

4

21

70

2014/TRU/20 Profile training for Maritime Border Surveillance Officers
Training

1

8

16

Other activities

3

21

58

ACTIVITIES / BUSINESS AS USUAL
BaU ref.
number
2014/TRU/1

BaU title / Type of event

Other activities

2013/TRU/5

2014/TRU/6

2014/TRU/7

56

Number of
man-days

13

165

1 400

9

150

509

SQF for Border Guards and Educational Standards in line
with Bologna / Copenhagen principles
Training

3

66

308

Other activities

7

49

104

Air Crew Training
Training

2

16

48

Other activities

3

34

60

Training

6

202

2 047

Other activities

5

10

36

8

57

506

Training and certification of EUBG canine team instructors

Falsified documents detection training
Training

2014/TRU/8

Number of
participants

Common Core Curriculum for EUBG basic training
Training

2014/TRU/3

Number
of events

Training for Schengen Evaluators
Training

3

88

343

Other activities

6

58

112

Frontex · General Report 2014

BaU ref.
number
2014/TRU/9

BaU title / Type of event

Number
of events

Number of
participants

Number of
man-days

Training in the field of return operations
Training

6

96

416

Other activities

4

23

70

4

10

79

23

206

533

2013/TRU/10 Detection of stolen vehicles training
Other activities
2014/TRU/11 Training tools for EBGT and Schengen Borders Code
Other activities
2014/TRU/12 Second-line Airport Officers’ Profile Training
Training

4

81

738

Other activities

3

29

41

2014/TRU/13 Training in English communication for Border Guards
Training

5

88

243

Other activities

3

15

45

Training

9

157

1 183

Other activities

6

44

96

Training

5

108

324

Other activities

6

43

74

4

6

19

2014/TRU/14 Profile trainings for Intelligence Professionals

2014/TRU/16 Fundamental rights and anti-trafficking in human beings

2014/TRU/17 Training Unit ICT platform
Other activities
2014/TRU/18 Training Support Network
Training
Other activities

SUMMARY

1

32

97

10

204

306

Total
number
of events
189

Total
number of
participants
2 600

Total
number of
man-days
11 954

57

Frontex · General Report 2014

Annex H. Fundamental Rights Progress
Report 2014
Introduction

Joint Operations

Art. 1, paragraph 2 of the Frontex amended
Regulation explicitly indicates that the
Agency, when implementing its mandate,
shall always act in full compliance with the
EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, relevant
obligations and principles of international
law. The Frontex Fundamental Rights Strategy, adopted in March 2011, together with its
Action Plan, refer to the Fundamental Rights
Progress Report (Par 37 and Action 18, respectively). Following the structure of the
strategy, the current Progress Report aims
to provide an overview of the current state
of play and progress made by Frontex in 2014
as regards the implementation of the Fundamental Rights Strategy and Action Plan
in particular in the areas of joint operations,
Risk Analysis and Capacity Building.

1. O
 perational Plans, Operational
Briefings, Reporting system

Article 1 paragraph 2 of the Frontex Regulation further states that the Agency shall take
into consideration the reports of the Consultative Forum in accordance to Art. 26(a)
of the Regulation. The Consultative Forum
prepares a specific annual and public report
of its activities. The very first CF Annual Report covering its activities and strategic recommendations in 2013 was published on 28
July 2014.
The present Progress Report covers the period from January to December 2014.

58

Specific sections on “Fundamental rights in
Frontex coordinated activities” and the “Code
of Conduct” were introduced in the Handbooks of the Operational Plans for all Frontexcoordinated joint operations. The Handbooks
were developed for each type of operation
(land, sea, air, return). The standard text related to Fundamental Rights has been established in cooperation with FRO and the
Legal Affairs Unit.
All participants in Frontex coordinated joint
operations and activities are introduced to
the importance of fundamental rights issues during Operational Briefings, organised
by Frontex and the Host Member States and
delivered to guest officers before their actual
deployment to the operational areas. During
the briefings, guest officers receive information on the fundamental rights principles that
apply to all Frontex coordinated activities and
the obligation to promote and protect fundamental rights, including the principle of
non-refoulement, in line with relevant international and European law. To support the
delivery of the fundamental rights component of the operational briefings, in 2014 the
Frontex Fundamental Rights Officer developed a 5-minute video on the main fundamental rights provisions that have a particular
practical relevance for the work of border
guards. This video is now part of the briefing package and is regularly shown during
operational briefings.

Frontex · General Report 2014

The national component of operational briefings, delivered by the national authorities is
mostly focused on the reporting mechanism
on incidents, including those related to fundamental rights. As mandated in the Code of
Conduct annexed to the Operational Plans,
all participants in Frontex coordinated operational activities have the obligation to report any allegation of fundamental rights
violations occurring in the context of joint
operations according to the Serious Incident
Report mechanism.
In the course of 2014, Frontex has further
strengthened the cooperation – already
started in 2013 – with international organisations such as UNHCR and FRA to deliver
part of the fundamental rights session during pre-deployment briefings. Experts from
those organisations have been invited to provide the guest officers with a specific briefing
on fundamental rights including right to international protection, the principle of nonrefoulement, identification and referral to
relevant authorities of vulnerable groups such
as victims of trafficking and unaccompanied
minors, both from a theoretical and practical/operational perspective. For instance, in
2014, such practice has been implemented in
the framework of joint operations at sea in
Greece, Italy and Spain.
2. I mplementation of the new
EU Regulation 656/2014/EU
Frontex paid special attention to the implementation of the new EU Regulation establishing rules for the surveillance of the
external sea borders in the context of operational cooperation coordinated by the
European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders
of the Member States of the European Union
focusing on its strong fundamental rights obligations. Namely, amendments were introduced to Annex 3 of operational plans (Rules
of Engagement) and to the tailored Mission

Report of the Technical Equipment (for Host
and contributing MS Vessels).
The Regulation also requires an “assessment
of the general situation in a third country”
whenever the joint operation allows for the
disembarkation, or any other form of handing
over apprehend persons to a Third Country.
In 2014, such a possibility was only theoretically foreseen for the joint operations carried out in Spain and Greece.
3. Joint Return Operations (JROs)
At the start of each deployment period, JO
Attica 2014 provides screening experts and
interpreters with an on-the-spot briefing,
during which specific reference is made to
Fundamental Rights in Frontex activities.
The briefing includes relevant information
and specific guidance and the video from the
Fundamental Rights Officer. All participants
in Frontex activities are advised on how to
manage vulnerable migrants and refer requests for international protection. In addition, all participants in Frontex activities are
informed of the need and obligation to report concerns or allegations, including possible allegation of fundamental rights violations
occurring in Frontex coordinated joint operations, and the reporting method to be used
in these cases – the Serious Incident Reporting mechanism.
Monitoring of JROs: art. 8.6 of the Return
Directive obliges Member States to put in
place an effective monitoring system, however, there is not a unified enforced monitoring system in Member States. Frontex
efforts were directed to ensure an increase
in the percentage of physically monitored
flights in the framework of Frontex coordinated return flights. The Agency also holds
observer status within the ICMPD-led “FReM”
project which established and trained a pool
of European monitors. On 22 October 2014,
the European Ombudsman launched a new

59

Frontex · General Report 2014

Own-Initiative Enquiry on Joint Return Operations coordinated by Frontex with focus on
two main aspects: i) the monitoring of JROS
and ii) conditions and treatment of migrants.
Frontex’s answer was sent in January 2015.
A new concept of Collecting Joint Return
Operations (CJROs) was further developed
for two destinations (Albania and Georgia)
based on some Member States’ experiences
with such type of operations organised at
national level. Escorts from the two selected
destination countries were trained by Frontex to ensure a harmonised training level and
common standards and on the protection
and promotion of fundamental rights. These
operations are subject to certain conditions,
such as the obligation to have an independent monitor on board.
During two medical seminars organised in
2014, five police medical doctors from Member States with experience in JROs developed
guidelines for medical precautionary measures for JROs and escorts to become an integral part of various Frontex trainings in the
field of returns. The aim is to improve and
optimise escorts’ awareness and capacity to
perform their duties safely. Medical doctors
also developed a “fit-to-travel” form that reflects adequate fundamental rights standards
and requirements of the Code of Conduct for
Joint Return Operations.
4. Joint Operation VEGA Children 2014
During the VEGA Children Pilot Project conducted in 2013 Frontex, representatives of
Member States, International and Non-Governmental Organisations members of the
Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental
Rights and the Frontex Fundamental Rights
Officer provided expert support to the drafting of the draft VEGA Children Handbook, a
collection of best practices on detection and
protection of children at risk on the move at
air borders.

60

In 2014, Frontex coordinated the Joint Operation VEGA Children at nine European airports
with the aim to test, assess and evaluate
the draft Handbook in real life implementation. The scope of the joint operation was
to support the key processes of identification of accompanied, separated and unaccompanied children on the move at risk, the
activation of the referral mechanism by the
relevant authorities and disruption the activities of criminal networks, following the
standard operational procedures of the draft
VEGA Children Handbook. The Handbook offers specific guidance to border guards, who
often play a key role in initiating these processes and dismantling the related criminal activities.
Experts from the Consultative Forum were
deployed at the selected EU airports to support with their expertise the work of the local
border guard authorities and offices deployed
by Frontex. Their main role was to observe,
advise and assist the deployed officers during the application of standard operational
procedures for the identification of children
at risk at external air border controls. In this
framework, the joint operation provided a
unique opportunity to enhance mutual exchange of professional knowledge with civil
society and international organisations and
to collect best practices to be implemented in
future activities to ensure greater protection
of vulnerable children as well as effectively
disrupt the activities of criminal networks.
The draft Handbook will be published in the
second quarter of 2015.
5. Participation of partner organisations
in operational activities
In November 2014, the Fundamental Rights
Agency (FRA) published two reports on the
fundamental rights situation at air and land
border crossing points. The reports complement and earlier FRA report on the situation

Frontex · General Report 2014

at the EU’s southern sea borders. Frontex has
taken note of the contents as well as the recommendations illustrated in those reports.
The Agency will work on the follow up to
such reports in 2015 together with FRA and
other relevant partners.

Media monitoring: information collected from
open sources raises awareness among staff
and Member States about potential cases of
violations of fundamental rights, allowing the
Fundamental Rights Officer and operational
staff to take appropriate action.

a) Risk Analysis

Serious Incident reporting: the SIR procedure is the official reporting mechanism to
inform and report on serious incidents involving also cases of alleged violations of
fundamental rights, in the frame of Frontex
coordinated joint operations. The mechanism foresees initial reporting and follow-up
measures, namely through the appointment
of a SIR coordinator (Frontex Fundamental
Rights Officer) who ensures collection of all
necessary information and proposes measures aimed at addressing the incident.

In 2014, efforts to mainstream fundamental rights aspects into risk analysis activities
and products were concentrated on three
main areas.
The procedure for debriefing interviews
with migrants was improved, with the inclusion of information on the possibility for
migrants to reveal and report fundamental
rights violations.
Consultative Forum members and other
NGOs with field presence in the countries
of origin/departure/destination had the opportunity to provide information on circumstances on the ground, including migrant
profiles, available for various risk analysis
purposes. For instance, organisations provided specific written contributions to risk
analysis products, participated in risk analysis events such “tactical meetings” where
information was provided on the situation
in countries of origin and transit of refugees
and migrants (the Jesuit Refugee Service and
UNHCR), supported the risk analysis unit in
the preparation of some weekly operational
briefings (UNHCR).
The Handbook on Risk Profiles on Victims in
Trafficking in Human Beings was updated.
b) Frontex Situation Centre (FSC)
Fundamental rights are an integral part in the
overall situation monitoring activities and in
the Eurosur framework. This engagement is
reflected in some concrete activities.

Frontex Fusion Services (FFS): during 2014
Frontex gradually delivered the initial operational services provided via the Frontex Fusion Services (FFS). The core objective of the
services provided to Frontex and the Member
States is to enhance reaction capability and
emergency response of the national border
authorities. In provision of FFS brought significant added value in provision of information
to MS Authorities that helped conduct more
effective search and rescue operations at sea.
The Eurosur Handbook includes a dedicated
chapter on fundamental rights as well as a
part on fundamental rights in the chapter on
monitoring and reporting activities, where
fundamental rights principles are linked to all
main areas of Eurosur Framework and connected best practices are outlined.
Eurosur Training: the standard curriculum of
the trainings delivered to the Eurosur community includes a fundamental rights session,
More detailed topics related to fundamental
rights, as described in the Eurosur Handbook
can be discussed and further integrated into
the daily activities.

61

Frontex · General Report 2014

Capacity Building

E-learning tools on fundamental rights

The principles of fundamental rights and international protection are fully integrated
into all Frontex training activities. In 2014
several new training programmes and products with fundamental rights aspects have
been developed and launched. Previously developed programmes and products also continued to be implemented. Specific activities
with focus on fundamental rights carried out
in 2014 include:

The development of e-learning tools on fundamental rights has been initiated and will
continue in 2015.

Training of trainers on Fundamental
Rights and Anti-Trafficking in Human
Beings

Fundamental rights and ethics are integral to
every aspect of border guarding learning and
practice. This is the reason why Fundamental Rights learning is playing an important
role within the framework of the European
Joint Master’s in Strategic Border Management. The Master’s has a dedicated Module
on Fundamental Rights and Ethics in European Border Management of 5 ECTS credits
(140 hours of learning) that aims to equip the
students with the knowledge, skills and competences necessary to integrate the respect,
promotion and fulfilment of fundamental
rights and ethics when taking strategic decisions and considering their implications on
border management. The students will obtain knowledge on fundamental rights and
ethics as reflected in European and international legal frameworks as well as emanating from relevant jurisprudence and case law.
The module will enable the learners to make
strategic decisions and to review current institutional structures and policies in a manner
that is respectful of fundamental rights and
ethics. This module is one of the foundation
modules for the whole Master’s Programme.

The training of national trainers is based on
the methodology developed in the Fundamental Rights Trainers’ Manual and the Anti-Trafficking in Human Beings Trainers’ Manual. Two
train-the-trainers courses have been organised for Member States (MSs) and Schengen
Associated Countries (SAC) and one course for
Working Arrangement Countries (WACs) on
Fundamental Rights for border guards, while
two train-the-trainers courses for MS have
been organised on Anti-trafficking in Human
Beings. Experts from the partnership organisations such as the European Asylum Support Office (EASO), the United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in
Europe (OSCE), the International Organisation
for Migration (IOM) and the Office of the High
Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) all
contributed to the training courses.
The participants are trained on the content
of the two manuals as well as on how to design a training programme and apply relevant
methodologies and participatory approach
in trainings on fundamental rights and antitrafficking in human beings. The use of creative, interactive teaching methods helped
to ensure the active and committed involvement of participants.

62

An e-learning assessment on anti-trafficking
in human beings has been developed and will
be launched in 2015.
European Joint Master’s in Strategic
Border Management

Furthermore, Fundamental Rights learning
is integrated throughout the entire Master’s programme, in all the other nine modules of the programme, where fundamental
rights and ethical considerations are taken
into account when approaching the strategic developments within the border guard

Frontex · General Report 2014

organisations, the change management plans,
the aspects related to Innovation and Technology in Border Security, Cooperation in
Border Management, Risk and Threat Management, the Global Context of Border Security etc.
The Master’s curriculum was reviewed by the
Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental
Rights which provided a valuable contribution to its content and approach to learning.
Sectoral Qualifications Framework for
Border Guarding
The programme contains a guide to integrate Fundamental Rights into all border
guard learning, with a view to assist Member States in integrating fundamental rights
aspects into all training courses. The guide
aims to supports curriculum developers with
writing and assessing learning outcomes related to fundamental rights that become increasingly more specific and are suitable for
programmes and course curricula.
In 2014 the project focused on the development of a manual and a course concept for
training developers that include practical and
theoretical lessons on how to integrate fundamental rights learning outcomes into all
courses and curricula in border guard area.
Three training courses were delivered in 2014.
European Border Guard Teams (EBGT)
profile trainings
A dedicated session related to fundamental
rights and international protection is delivered in each profile training for EBGT members (Profile training for Debriefing experts,
Profile training for Screening experts, Profile training for Second-Line Interview experts and Second-Line Airport Officers profile
trainings). The topics covered are: fundamental rights in the work of border guards,
international protection, identification of vul-

nerable persons, access to the EU and nonrefoulement principles, risk factors when
interviewing persons with disadvantages,
serious incidents reporting. All topics are presented from a legal and more prominently
from a practical point of view, bearing in
mind the perspective of EBGT members and
guest officers.
The development of a new profile training
- EBGT Land Border Surveillance Training has been initiated in 2014 and will continue
in 2015. The content of the training will have
a practical and interdisciplinary approach and
will focus on aspects like communication, detection of cases of irregular migration / Trafficking in Human Beings, lawful measures of
border guards, first aid, reporting in a Joint
Operation, use of coercive force, etc.
Curricula for mid-level Border Guard
education (MLC)
The new course “Operational Training for
EU Mid-management in Border Guarding”
was developed in 2014 by EU MS experts in
line with SQF level 6, as a common education programme for mid to high-level officers of agencies responsible for border security
in the European Union. It includes four distinct modules, of which one is dedicated to
Fundamental Rights topics: Introduction to
Fundamental Rights, Risks of Infringing Fundamental Rights, Fundamental Rights Awareness Visit, Review of Fundamental Rights
Awareness Visit, Violations of Fundamental Rights, Characteristics of a Fundamental
Rights-compliant Operational Manager, Future of Fundamental Rights in Border Guards’
activities.
At the same time, all other three modules
include relevant fundamental rights issues
among their topics.

63

Frontex · General Report 2014

Fundamental Rights Training for
Frontex staff
As a result of the close cooperation with both
the European Union Agency for Fundamental rights (FRA) and the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) as well as with
support from FRO, the concept of the basic
fundamental rights training for Frontex staff
has been developed. This concept derives
from Frontex Fundamental Rights Strategy.

participating in the exchanges had the opportunity to deepen their knowledge on fundamental rights issues. In the CCC Teachers’
Mobility programme the participating border guard teachers had the opportunity to
observe how the respect of fundamental
rights in Frontex joint operations work in the
hosting Focal Points and to exchange experience on fundamental rights training with
their counterparts in the hosting Partnership Academies.

Basic two-day fundamental-rights trainings
are mandatory for all Frontex staff. Following the first pilot session as well as the subsequent three sessions organised in 2013,
additional four sessions took place in 2014.
All trainings had been delivered by two external experts in fundamental rights. Altogether 138 Frontex staff members had been
trained so far. Further training sessions will
take place in 2015.

Fundamental Rights aspects are also part
of these training activities carried out in the
course of 2014: trainings in the area of joint
return operations such as trainings for Escort
Leaders, the Joint European Cross Border Cooperation Study Module; development of the
Schengen Borders Code E-learning Tool and
Training Manual for Schengen Evaluators, the
Mid-level English Language tool developed
for Border Guards at Airports.

The training objectives, in terms of learner
outcomes, are three-fold: knowledge, skills
and attitude. Specifically, staff are expected
to understand the basics and principles of
human rights, to be able to apply a humanrights perspective in their field of work or
put them into practice using a “human-rights
analysis tool” and finally to accept them as
relevant to their work.

Frontex also translated the book “Hope in
my Heart, Freedom on my Mind” into English, published on the open market also under the title “Paradise Denied”. The book tells
the real life story of Zekarias Kebraeb, a young
Eritrean who fled his country in search of a
better life in Europe and eventually was allowed to remain in Germany. The book raises
awareness about the situation of irregular
migrants, their views and their needs when
in contact with public authorities. The book
will be used in the context of training activities for European border guards carried out
by Frontex.

Other training initiatives
The Common Core Curriculum (CCC) Interoperability Assessment Programme (IAP) aims
to assess the interoperability of border guard
forces in Europe. Special attention is devoted
to the promotion and protection of fundamental rights. The evaluation of the CCC-IAP
directed to border guard students in EU MSs,
SAC and WACs addressed several a number
of questions on fundamental rights. The programme will continue over the first quarter
of 2015. Also in the framework of the CCC
Students’ Exchange programme, students

64

External Relations with Third
Countries
All Frontex cooperation activities with authorities of Third Countries have been guided
by the principle of the full respect for fundamental rights and its active promotion. In
2014 the Agency has started a revision process of working arrangements to enhance

Frontex · General Report 2014

the focus on the respect and promotion of
fundamental rights and principles in the operational cooperation with Third Countries.
Frontex and the European Asylum Support
Office (EASO) are undertaking an 18-month
project entitled “Promoting the participation
of Jordan in the work of EASO as well as the
participation of Morocco and Tunisia in the
work of EASO and Frontex”. Led and coordinated by EASO and funded by the European Neighbourhood Partnership Instrument
(ENPI), the project falls under the responsibility of the EU Directorate-General Development and Cooperation (DG DEVCO). The
project aims to promote the participation of
the three countries in the work of the agencies; EASO alone will implement measures in
Jordan, while EASO and Frontex will jointly
be involved in activities in Morocco and Tunisia. A component of the project includes a
workshop to be held in these countries on
how the Agency respects and promotes fundamental rights.
Frontex is also running the EU funded Eastern
Partnership (EaP) – IBM – Capacity Building
Project, which aims to ensure border security and to facilitate legitimate movements
of persons and goods in the region, while ensuring that the fight against corruption and
respect for human rights will be given the
necessary attention throughout the project.
It has three components entailing: 1) capacity building in support in national training

curricula in the state training institutions, 2)
specialised trainings including operational
capacity building and 3) cross cutting issues
characterised by specific horizontal initiatives. This will pay special attention to the
good governance principles, focusing notably on ownership, sustainability, integrity,
transparency, anti-corruption, interagency
cooperation as well as respect and protection of fundamental rights, according to EU
and international standards and best practices. As such, these initiatives will be performed through