CODE OF
CONDUCT

for joint return
operations
coordinated
by frontex

Code of Conduct
for joint return operations
coordinated by frontex

1

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders
of the Member States of the European Union
Rondo ONZ 1
00-124 Warsaw, Poland
Telephone +48 22 205 95 00
Fax +48 22 205 95 01
www.frontex.europa.eu

PART I

3

4

chapter i

INTRODUCTION

Article 1

Scope and subject matter
This Code sets out common principles and main procedures to be observed in the joint return operations
of Member States coordinated by Frontex (hereinafter “JRO”).

Article 2

Relation with Frontex Code of Conduct and
other relevant texts
1. This Code complements the provisions of the Code
of Conduct for all persons participating in Frontex
activities1 and builds upon the Common Guidelines on security provisions by air annexed to Decision 2004/573/EC2 (hereinafter “Annex of Decision
2004/573/EC”) which shall – in accordance with
Article 8(5) of the Return Directive 2008/115/EC3

1
2

3

Decision of the Frontex Executive Director No 24/2011 of 21 March 2011.
Council Decision 2004/573/EC of 29 April 2004 on the organisation of joint
flights for removals from the territory of two or more Member States of
third-country nationals who are subjects of individual removal orders,
OJ L 261 of 6.8.2004.
Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of
16 December 2008 on common standards and procedures in Member
States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals, OJ L 348 of
24.12.2008.

5

(hereinafter “Return Directive”) – be taken into
account in each case of removal by air.
2. Technical and detailed instructions for the practical
implementation of Frontex coordinated JROs are
included in separate and relevant Best Practices
for operations developed and updated by Frontex
together with the authorities of Member States.

Article 3

Definitions
For the purpose of this Code, the following definitions apply:
a) The term “Member State” (hereinafter “MS”) means
a Member State of the European Union or a Country associated with the implementation, application and development of the Schengen acquis.
b) The term “Organising Member State” (hereinafter
“OMS”) means the MS which is responsible for the
organisation of a JRO.
c) The term “Participating Member State” (hereinafter “PMS”) refers to the MS which participates in a
JRO organised by the Organising Member State.
d) The term “returnee” means a third-country national who is subject to a return decision.
e) The term “participant” means any person, including
escorts, monitors, interpreters and medical staff,
taking part in a JRO, other than the returnee.
f) The term “escort(s)” refers to the security personnel, including persons employed by private
contractor, responsible for accompanying the returnees, in particular during their transportation
out of the Member State.
g) The term “escort leader” means the escorts who
are, in accordance with the instructions given, in
charge of managing a national group of escorts

6

h)

i)

j)

k)

l)

4

during a JRO. Each organising and participating
MS appoints its escort leader.
The term “head of operation” means the person
appointed by the OMS as having the overall responsibility for a JRO. Where no particular person
is appointed, the escort leader of the OMS is to be
considered as the head of the JRO.
The term “back-up team” means a group of escorts – usually provided by the OMS – acting as
support to the escorts of both OMS and PMSs.
The term “monitors” refers to persons who monitor the JRO in accordance with the effective monitoring system established by MSs pursuant to
­Article 8(6) of the Return Directive.
The term “fit-to-travel” refers to a returnee’s medical condition4 , which allows the person to travel
safely.
The term “pre-departure phase” means, according
to the Annex of Decision 2004/573/EC, the period
starting with transportation to the airport.

Both physical and mental.

7

chapter ii

GENERAL PRINCIPLES

Article 4

Respect for Fundamental Rights
1. JROs are to be conducted in a humane manner
and in compliance with fundamental rights as enshrined in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights
and in other relevant international instruments, in
particular the principles of human dignity, the right
to life, the principle of non-refoulement, the right to
asylum, the prohibition of torture and of inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment, the right
to liberty and security, the rights of the child, the
rights to the protection of personal data and nondiscrimination, and the right to respect for private
and family life.
2. JROs are to be conducted without discrimination
on any grounds such as sex, race, colour, ethnic or
social origin, genetic features, language, religion
or belief, political or any other opinion, membership of a national minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual orientation.
3. While respecting the dignity of the returnees, their
safety as well as the safety of the other participants and of the crew members are paramount
during the JRO. The JRO must be interrupted or
terminated in case:
a. its continuation would be considered unsafe
by the flight captain, the Head of Operation

8

or F
­ rontex, in close liaison, in accordance with
point 3.1.d of the Annex of Decision 2004/573/
EC and Article 3(1a) of the Frontex Regulation;
b. of violations of fundamental rights of a serious
or persistent nature in accordance with Article 3(1a) of the Frontex Regulation5 .

Article 5

Cooperation with returnees
1. The competent authorities of the MSs as well as
the other participants, taking into account individual risk assessments, shall seek cooperation with
each returnee at all stages of the JRO in order to
avoid, or limit to the minimum extent necessary,
the use of force.
2. The competent authorities of the MSs are expected
to give sufficient and clear information to the returnees about the JRO, including the possibility to
lodge a complaint concerning alleged ill-treatment
during the operation.

Article 6

Use of Coercive measures
1. Coercive measures may be used only when strictly
necessary on returnees who refuse or resist removal, or in response to an immediate and serious risk of the returnee escaping, causing injury to
herself/himself or to a third party, or causing damage to property.
5

Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 of 26 October 2004 establishing a
European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the
External Borders of the Member States of the European Union as amended
by Regulation (EU) No 1168/2011 of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 25 October 2011, OJ L 304 of 22.11.2011.

9

2. The use of coercive measures must be proportional, not exceeding reasonable force, and with
due respect to the returnee’s rights, dignity and
his/her physical integrity.
3. Coercive measures likely to compromise or
threaten the possibility of the returnees to breathe
normally, must not be used.
4. The OMS and Frontex decide on a list of authorised
restraints in advance of the JRO. This list must be
distributed to the relevant PMSs prior to the JRO.
The use of sedatives to facilitate the removal is forbidden without prejudice to emergency measures
to ensure flight security.
5. No PMS is required to use coercive measures not
allowed under its national legislation even if those
measures are accepted by the OMS and Frontex
for that particular JRO.

10

chapter iii

ORGANISATION OF THE REMOVAL

Article 7

Fitness to travel and medical examination
1. The returnees are to be removed only as long as
they are “fit-to-travel” at the time of the JRO. The
OMS must refuse the participation in a JRO of a
returnee who is not fit-to-travel.
2. In a reasonable time prior to the JRO, the authorities of the MSs are required to provide a medical examination of a returnee, subject to his/her
agreement, when he/she has a known medical
condition or where medical treatment is required.
3. Relevant PMSs inform the OMS in advance about
any medical condition of a returnee which would
need special care and attention.
4. The processing of medical information must be
carried out in line with applicable and relevant
personal data protection legislation.

Article 8

Escorts

1. While escorts are primarily and individually responsible for their actions in their work, the authorities
of the MSs have the overall responsibility in accordance with general principles of state responsibility (e.g. for damages or for investigating and

11

sanctioning actions of escorts acting under their
instructions, according to Article 17 of this Code),
irrespective of whether the escorts are State employees or employed by a private contractor.
2. The number of escorts is determined in accordance
with an appropriate risk assessment by each MS
taking part in a JRO, and in consultation, if necessary, with Frontex, OMS and the relevant PMS.
3. Escorts are carefully selected and trained taking
into account their particular functions in the JRO.
4. The appropriate back-up team of escorts is provided by the OMS in order to give assistance to
escorts (both OMS and PMSs) during the JRO.
PMSs may also provide their own back-up team
if deemed necessary.

Article 9

Identification
The participants should be identifiable and fully distinguishable from returnees. For this purpose official
vests, armbands, badges or some other distinguishing
signs are required to be worn while on duty.

Article 10

Recording
1. Photographing, filming or any other form of recording during a JRO is possible only when specifically agreed between the OMS, PMSs, Frontex
and the company operating the means of transport, and in compliance with applicable data protection legislation.
2. The JRO should be fully documented by the OMS
and the PMS(s) according to their national requirements, in particular with respect to any significant

12

incidents that occur or any coercive measures used
in the course of the operation.

Article 11

Medical staff and interpreters
1. During a JRO, at least one medical doctor should
be present.
2. The OMS provides appropriate medical staff and,
depending on an assessment of the returnees’
needs and escorts’ language skills, suitable interpreters during the JRO.
3. If necessary, the PMS(s) may also provide its own
medical staff for the JRO.

Article 12

Presence of external representatives during
the Joint Return Operation
1. The OMS informs the PMS(s) when external representatives (e.g. Embassies/Ministries/International
Organisations/NGOs) are intending to be present
during a JRO.
2. When external representatives from the PMS(s) intend to be present during a JRO, the PMS(s) should
obtain agreement in advance from the OMS.

13

chapter iv

MONITORING SYSTEM

Article 13

Scope and Nature
1. The monitoring of JROs aims to gather information
and ensure they are conducted in a humane manner and in compliance with fundamental rights as
stated in Article 4 of this Code.
2. The monitoring system established in accordance
with Article 8(6) of the Return Directive must be
effective and involve monitoring by organisations/
bodies independent from the authorities enforcing
return. Pursuant to the principle set forth in the
Frontex Fundamental Rights Strategy6, MSs taking part in a JRO are required to ensure that they
have in place an effective forced return monitoring system. Failing to meet this condition could ultimately lead to postponement or cancellation of
the participation of the respective MS.
3. The monitoring of JROs, in accordance with
­Article 9(1b) of the Frontex Regulation, should be
carried out on the basis of objective and transparent criteria and cover the whole JRO, from the
pre-departure phase until the hand-over of the
returnees in the country of return or back to the
country of departure.
6

14

Frontex Fundamental Rights Strategy, endorsed by the Frontex
Management Board on 31 March 2011.

Article 14

Monitors
1. The assigned monitors are responsible according
to their applicable obligations.
2. In order to ensure an effective monitoring system,
monitors must have access to all relevant information concerning the JRO, including:
a. timely communication of the date and time of
the JRO, the country(ies) of return and necessary travel documents, the number and origin
of returnees particularly including any forms
of vulnerability, e.g. pregnant women, families
with children, elderly people, persons with disabilities or with a medical condition;
b. access to returnees, unless prevailing risk assessment prescribes otherwise;
c. unimpeded access to all areas used for the JRO.
3. Monitors may observe the briefings prior to the
JRO as well as participate in the debriefings where
they may provide a brief account of the main
­findings.
4. Monitors may inform the head of operation and/
or the escort leader(s) of any perceived irregularities but may not interfere with the planned execution of the JRO.
5. When feasible and subject to prior agreement
between the MSs concerned, monitors may also
monitor on behalf of other MSs taking part in the
JRO.
6. Unless contrary to national rules and procedures,
the report(s) of the monitors is (are) sent to Frontex in a timely manner after the end of a JRO and
their observations are included in the Final Return
Operation Report to be delivered to Frontex.

15

chapter v

FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 15

Information on this Code
1. All participants in the JRO, prior to their engagement in the operation, are required to get
acquainted with the content of this Code and fundamental rights through appropriate training.
2. Frontex will ensure that the content of this Code
is communicated to the national authorities of the
countries of return.

Article 16

Reporting
Any participant in the JRO who has reasons to believe that a violation of this Code or of fundamental
rights has occurred is required to report it to Frontex
via the appropriate channels, for example via Frontex Serious Incident Reporting system.

Article 17

Investigation procedure and Right to be
informed
1. If the violation was committed by a person assigned by a MS, the facts must be communicated

16

to the competent national authority concerned
that provides for an effective and independent investigation.
2. The authorities of the MS are expected to inform
Frontex of the conduct and results of the investigation.
3. The Frontex Executive Director may request information on the conduct and results of the investigation and may decide to inform the Management
Board accordingly.
4. The returnee may request information and should
be informed of the measures taken and his/her
possible right to compensation.

Article 18

Sanctions
1. In accordance with Article 9 of the Frontex Regulation, Frontex’ financial support to MSs for the JRO
is conditional upon full respect of the EU Charter
of Fundamental Rights.
2. In the case of violation of this Code by a Frontex
staff member, the Frontex Executive Director takes
appropriate measures in accordance with the relevant applicable rules.

17

PART II

19

20

Warsaw 07.10.2013
Decision of the Executive Director
No 2013/67 on
CODE OF CONDUCT FOR JOINT RETURN
OPERATIONS COORDINATED BY FRONTEX

THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR,
Having regard to the Frontex Regulation1, in particular Article 25(3), read together with Article 9(1a)
thereof,
WHEREAS:
(1) Pursuant to Article 9(1a) of the Frontex Regulation, Frontex has developed a Code of Conduct for
the return of illegally present third-country nationals which applies during all joint return operations coordinated by Frontex (hereinafter “the
Code”).
(2) The Code aims at describing common standardised procedures regarding the organisation of joint
return operations, and assures return in a humane
manner and with full respect for fundamental
rights. The Code is applicable to all participants
taking part in joint return operations coordinated
by Frontex and must be respected by them. Any
financial support from Frontex for a joint return
operation is conditional upon the full respect of
the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union2.

1
2

Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004 of 26 October 2004 (OJ L 349,
25.11.2004), as last amended.
Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, 2000/C 364/01.

21

(3) The provisions of the Code of Conduct for joint
return operations coordinated by Frontex reflect
the principles contained in the Charter of Fundamental Rights, Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on common standards
and procedures in Member States for returning
illegally staying third-country nationals 3 , Council Decision of 29 April 2004 on the organisation
of joint flights for removals from the territory of
two or more Member States, of third-country
nationals who are subjects of individual removal
orders 4 , Council of Europe’s Twenty guidelines
on forced return5 , United Nations Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law
Enforcement Officials6 , United Nations Code of
Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials 7, Frontex Fundamental Rights Strategy and its Action
Plan 8 and Frontex Code of Conduct for all persons p
­ articipating in Frontex activities9 , Council
Decision 2004/573/EC of 29 April 2004 on the organisation of joint flights for removals from the
territory of two or more Member States of thirdcountry nationals who are subjects of individual
removal orders.

3

4

5
6

7
8
9

22

Directive 2008/115/EC of the European Parliament and the Council of 16
December 2008 on common standards and procedures in Member States
for returning illegally staying third-country nationals.
Council Decision 2004/573 of 29 April 2004 on the organisation of joint
flights for removals from the territory of two or more Member States,
of third-country nationals who are subjects of individual removal orders.
Twenty Guidelines on forced return of the Council of Europe, September
2005.
United Nations Basic Principles on the Use of Force and Firearms by Law
Enforcement Officials, adopted by the 8th United Nations Congress on
the Prevention of Crime and the Treatment of Offenders, Havana, Cuba,
27 August to 7 September 1990
United Nations Code of Conduct for Law Enforcement Officials, adopted
by General Assembly resolution 34/169 of 17 December 1979.
Endorsed by the Management Board on 31 March 2011 and 21 September
2011 respectively.
Decision of the Frontex Executive Director No 24/2011 of 21 March 2011.

(4) Frontex mandate includes the responsibility for
providing the necessary assistance and, at the request of the participating Member States, ensuring the coordination or the organisation of joint
return operations of Member States.
(5) In accordance with Article 9(1) of the Frontex Regulation, Frontex is not empowered to enter into
the merits of return decisions taken by the Member States. Therefore, it is up to the Member States
concerned to ensure that the legal situation of
each of the returnees for which they are responsible allows for the return.
(6) Pursuant to Article 26a of the Frontex Regulation
the content of the Code was consulted with the
Frontex Consultative Forum.

HAS DECIDED AS FOLLOWS:

Article 1
The Code contained in the Annex to this Decision is
hereby adopted.

Article 2
A copy of the Code is annexed to all plans referring
to the joint return operations coordinated by Frontex. A copy of the Code is delivered to all participants
taking part in the joint return operations coordinated
by Frontex prior to the operation.

Article 3
The Code is regularly reviewed on the basis of experience gained through its operational application, and
further developed where necessary.

23

Article 4
This Decision and its Annex enter into force on the
day following its signature.

Done at Warsaw, 07.10.2013

[signed]
Ilkka Laitinen
Executive Director

24

Rondo ONZ 1, 00-124 Warsaw, Poland
Telephone +48 22 205 95 00, Fax +48 22 205 95 01
www.frontex.europa.eu

Ron
Te
ww

