General
Report
2015

General Report 2015

The European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6, 00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu
Print version:
OPOCE Catalogue number: TT-AE-16-001-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-56-7
ISSN 2314-940X
doi:10.2819/2924

Online version:
TT-AE-16-001-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-57-4
ISSN 2314-940X
doi:10.2819/638557

© Frontex, 2016
All rights reserved. Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
Cover photo © European Union, 2015. All rights reserved.

2 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Table of contents
List of abbreviations used 5
Foreword 6
1. Introduction 9
2. Developments 10
2.1.	The situation at the external borders in 2015 10
2.2.	Developments at the Policy Level 13
2.3.	Developments at the Agency Level 17
2.3.1. Highlights 17
2.3.2. Situational Awareness 22
2.3.3. Supporting Response 24
2.3.4. Emergency Response 28
2.3.5. Development 30
2.3.6. Organisation 33
3.	Summary of budgetary, staff and organisational issues 39
3.1. Budgetary Developments 39
3.2. General Budget 40
3.3. Use of appropriations from 2014 carried forward to 2015 41
3.4. Procurement 41
3.5. Organisational changes 41
3.6. Recruitment 42
3.7.	Staff Development and Training 42
Annexes 43
List of Management Board Members 44
List of Management Board Decision 46
List of Joint Operational Activities 48
Joint Return Operations 50
Comparative Analysis of Joint Operational Activities 52
Training Activities 54
Fundamental Rights Progress Report 2015 56
Introduction 56
Operations 56
Risk Analysis 57
The Frontex Situation Centre (FSC) 58
Capacity Building 58
Research and development activities 61
Other fundamental rights issues 61
Annual Report on Access to Documents 62
Appropriations 2015 63
Breakdown of Staff by Unit as on 31 December 2015 64
Breakdown of Temporary Agents as on 31 December 2015 64

3 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

4 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

List of abbreviations used
BCP border crossing point
CF Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental Rights
CSDP Common Security and Defence Policy
EASO European Asylum Support Office
EB-RAN Eastern European Borders Risk Analysis Network
EBGT European Border Guard Teams
ECA European Consortium for Accreditation in higher education
ED4BG European Day for Border Guards
EDF-RAN European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network
EES entry/exit system
EFS EUROSUR Fusion Services
EMPACT European Multidisciplinary Platform Against Criminal Threats
EMSA European Maritime Safety Agency
ESP European Situational Picture
eu-LISA	
the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale
IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice
EUROSUR European Border Surveillance System
EURTF EU Regional Task Force
EU SatCen European Union Satellite Centre
FRA EU Agency for Fundamental Rights
FRAN Frontex Risk Analysis Network
FRO Fundamental Rights Officer
ICMPD International Centre for Migration Policy Development
IOM International Organization for Migration
JO joint operation
JORA Joint Operations Reporting Application
JRO joint return operations
MS Member State
OMNTE Overall Minimum Numbers of Technical Equipment
OPA Optional Piloted Aircraft
PNR passenger name record
RPAS Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
RTP registered traveller programme
SAC Schengen Associated Country
SAR search and rescue
SGO Seconded Guest Officers
SQF Sectoral Qualifications Framework for Border Guarding
TEP Technical Equipment Pool
UNHCR the Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
WB-RAN Western Balkans Risk Analysis Network
WCO World Customs Organization

5 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Foreword

The year 2015, when Frontex celebrated
its tenth anniversary, also represented
the most challenging time the Agency
has experienced since its creation. Several factors made last year a real stress
test for the Agency and the Schengen
Area, stretching the limit of national
and EU actors’ capacities.
The first and foremost factor were the
1.8 Million irregular border crossings registered last year which in net migration
terms corresponded to approximately 1
Million people who reached the EU Member States or Schengen Associated Countries . This was compounded by the fact
that the mixed migratory pressure was
geographically focused on particular and
very exposed sections of the EU external borders of some EU Member States,
namely Italy and Greece. Finally, the
foreign fighter phenomena and difficulties for border management authorities
to detect them in order to prevent exit
or entry has increased the complexity of
the situation by adding a major internal
security threat to the migration including asylum management challenges.
The Agency’s response is to be put
fully into the context of the EU Political
Response to these challenges, which was
marked in particular by the so-called hotspot approach developed by the European
Commission. The EU had to work last
year in crisis mode at political and operational level, which also meant boosting
operational actors such as Frontex. The
strategy was to address the migration
and asylum management challenges at
the EU external borders hence the importance of strengthening Frontex along
with other EU operational actors such
as the European Asylum Support Office
(EASO) and Europol.

6 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

The first priority was to increase our
search and rescue capacity following the
tragic events during spring 2015, where
hundreds of people lost their lives in the
Central Mediterranean Sea. The Agency
responded quickly after a decision of the
EU budgetary authority allowing it to triple the funds devoted to the two main
Maritime Joint Operations in the Central Mediterranean and Aegean Sea.
This was reflected in the Operational
Plans and translated into a significant
increase of deployed assets, for instance,
in Joint Operations Triton and Poseidon, the number of assets deployed tripled. Frontex deployed 15 vessels along
with several helicopters and planes in
Italy, and 17 vessels along with aerial
means in Greece. Last year, the Agency
contributed to the saving of more than
250,000 people at sea. While initially
the public’s attention was focused on the
Central Mediterranean due to the tragic
events, the Agency remained vigilant on
other areas, in particular the Greek external borders, and followed a flexible
approach allowing it to immediately increase its presence and shift resources to
the Aegean Sea.

However, the most important novelty last year was the enlargement of the
scope of the Agency’s support to national
authorities in the identification and registration, including fingerprinting of
migrants at the hotspot areas. This demanded a massive increase of guest officers on the ground for processing the
large number of migrants in the Greek Islands. From May-June, the Agency managed to expand its presence in Greece
and Italy by deploying over 1000 officers representing a huge increase compared to approximately 350, which was
the average number of guest officers deployed during the first months in 2015.
The larger presence of law enforcement officers deployed through Frontex
Joint Operations also supported the performance of mandatory security checks
against the Schengen Information System at the hotspots. The objective was
not only to support migration management efforts including pre-return and return activities, but also to contribute to
internal security, in particular after the

terror attacks in Paris in November 2015.
The signature of the Agreement on Operational Cooperation between Frontex and
Europol in Brussels on the 4th December
2015 paved the way for the processing and
transmission to Europol of personal data
of suspects of cross-border crime in particular for migrant smuggling.
Frontex has also concluded an agree-

migration flows. Frontex also launched
a pilot project and finally concluded a
framework contract for the acquisition
of aerial surveillance services to complete the range of capabilities for implementing its Joint Operations. The Agency
has also enhanced its training portfolio in particular with the launching of
the European Joint Master’s in Strategic

ment with CSDP Mission EUNAVFOR
Med for operational coordination and
exchange of information regarding maritime surveillance in the Central Mediterranean Sea. This was the first time
that Frontex cooperated so closely, including the exchange of liaison officers
with a Military Mission aiming at dismantling the smuggling business model.
This increased demand for reinforcing the inter-agency cooperation on the
ground was complemented with the creation of EU Regional Task Forces (EURTF),
first in Catania and later in Piraeus.
Frontex via the EURTF did not only provide administrative support to partners
such as EASO, Europol, Eurojust, European Union Agency for Fundamental
Rights (FRA) and EUNAVFOR Med; but
also supported their cooperation with
the national counterparts which are also
part of the EURTF.
However, the Agency has not only
acted as crisis response mechanism, but
also as capacity building actor and some
new strands of work and activities were
launched last year. For instance, the Eurodac (fingerprint) registration pilot in
the Greek Islands which was conducted
together with eu-LISA and EASO and
which led to improvements in the business processes and the capacities put in
place by the host Member States for the
identification and registration of mixed

Border Management. Finally the Agency
also prepared the ground and signed
the grant Agreement for its most important technical assistance project so
far, namely the IPA II funded Regional
Programme for Protection-Sensitive Migration Management in the Western Balkans and Turkey.
In conclusion, 2015 was a year with
important changes which started in January with the Agency moving to its new
premises in Plac Europejski, Warsaw
and ended with the European Commission Proposal in December establishing a European Border and Coast Guard.
This proposal, which is being currently
in the legislative process, will further
strengthen the mandate and resources
of the Agency.

We at Frontex, including the Management Board and the Agency’s management and staff, have already started
preparations for the implementation of
the new tasks, since there is no time to
waste when it comes to reinforcing further the management of the EU external
borders and consolidating the Schengen
Area’s Governance.

Marko Gašperlin
Chair of the Management Board
&

Fabrice Leggeri
Executive Director

7 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

8 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

1. Introduction

Mission
Frontex supports, coordinates and develops European border management in line
with the Treaties, including the Charter
of Fundamental Rights of the EU, and
other international obligations. Frontex supports the Member States in order
that they can achieve an efficient, high
and uniform level of border control in accordance with the relevant EU Acquis, in
particular the Schengen Borders Code.
Frontex coordinates operational and EU
measures to jointly respond to exceptional situations at the external borders.
Frontex develops capacities of Member
States and at the European level as combined instruments to tackle challenges,
focusing on migration flows but also contributing to fighting cross-border crime
and terrorism at the external borders.

Vision
Frontex is the trustworthy European Border Agency, strengthening the European
area in terms of Freedom, Security and
Justice. Frontex supports the Members
States in order that they can fulfil their
responsibilities by providing operational
solidarity, especially to those facing disproportionate pressures at their external
borders. Frontex utilises the concept of
Integrated Border Management, with a
balanced focus on effective border control and the fight against cross-border
crime. The Agency uses effectively all
means available, including enhanced
inter-agency cooperation and cooperation with non-EU and third countries, to
fulfil its remit. Frontex promotes European border guard culture, with the full
respect and promotion of fundamental
rights as an integral element thereof.
Special focus is applied to the right to
© The Swiss Border Guard

asylum and international protection and
the principle of non-refoulement. Frontex builds capacities and capabilities in
the Member States, aiming to develop
a functioning European System for Border Guards. Professional staff and a set
of operational and administrative capabilities enable Frontex to add value to the
European Union. Frontex is the preferred
provider of operational support and expertise on border management to Member States, the Commission and other
EU Agencies.

Values
Within a teamwork-focused framework,
enabled by open communication, Frontex’s staff members share and live the
corporate values. Consequently, they perform their activities in a highly professional way. Humanity links Frontex’s
activities with the promotion of and respect for fundamental rights as an unconditional and integral component of
effective integrated border management,
resulting in trust in Frontex.

Purpose of the report
The Frontex General Report 2015 takes
the Programme of Work 2015 as a reference but does not aim to report against
each and every objective set. It gives the
reader a broad overview of activities carried out during 2015, and additionally
highlights individual operational activities and achievements. This information
is then complemented with general financial information and annexes presenting
lists of different types of activity, comparative analysis of joint operations and
summaries of budgetary and human resources. Some information is repeated between chapters so as to provide context.

9 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

2. Developments

2.1. The situation at the external borders
in 2015
In 2015, Member States reported more
than 1 820 000 detections of illegal border-crossing along the external borders.
This never-before-seen figure was more

1 000 000 persons can be provided, based
on the assumption that all migrants first
detected irregularly crossing into Greece
were then detected for a second time en-

than six times the number of detections
reported in 2014, which was itself an unprecedented year, with record monthly
averages observed since April 2014.
2015 began with extremely high levels for the month of January (more than
20 000 detections, against the 2009–2014
January average of 4 700 detections),
and each subsequent month set a new
monthly record. A turning point was
reached in July, with more than 100 000
detections, coinciding with a change in
the law of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia enabling migrants to
transit the country legally but requiring
them to either leave the country within
72 hours or claim asylum. That resulted
in a further increase of the flow, and
throughout the summer-months scenes
of chaos from the border areas spoke of
a situation that seemed to be out of control. In September, public authorities
ordered the supply of bus and train services in Western Balkan countries and
in some Member States, but the flow
continued to grow until October. From
November onwards, the situation eased
a little, but the EU total for December,
at more than 220 000 detections, was
still much higher than the figure for
the whole 2013.
There is no EU system capable of tracing people’s movements within the EU
following illegal border-crossing. Therefore it is not possible to establish the
number of persons who have illegally
crossed two sections of the external borders of the EU. Only an estimate of about

tering from the Western Balkans.
The largest number of detections of illegal border-crossing was reported on the
Eastern Mediterranean route (885 386),
mostly between Turkey and the Greek islands in the Eastern Aegean Sea. However, few applied for asylum in Greece,
instead leaving Greece at the border with
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and continuing through the Western Balkans, initially at the Hungarian
border with Serbia, where they applied
for asylum and then continued to their
final destination in the EU. From midSeptember, the flow shifted towards the
Croatian border with Serbia, following
the building of a temporary technical obstacle in Hungary and the establishing
of transit areas for immediate processing of asylum applicants with the possibility of return to Serbia.
In contrast, on the Central Mediterranean route the number of detections
of illegal border-crossing was about
154 000, a slight decrease compared to
last year, but this figure remains larger
than the total number of detections recorded for the EU as a whole in 2011, the
year of the ‘Arab Spring’ (141 051). The
drop is due to a decrease in the number of Syrians detected (about 40 000 in
2014, and 7 448 in 2015) after a shift towards the Eastern Mediterranean route.
On the Western Mediterranean route
the cooperation between Spain and Morocco is the key in maintaining detections on the land route between Morocco
and Spain at a relatively low level. As

10 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

© European Union

a result, sub-Saharan migrants opting
to take the sea route towards Spain increasingly tend to depart from Libya, as
the likelihood of being returned to their
country of origin after reaching Italy is,
for some nationalities, lower than that
of being returned from Spain.
On the Western African route, which
connects Senegal, Mauritania and Morocco with the Spanish Canary Islands
after a dangerous journey in the Atlantic
Ocean, the numbers remain negligible,
despite an increasing trend for departures from Morocco. This low number
is attributed to the joint surveillance activities and the effective return of those
detected irregularly crossing the border.

On the eastern land border a new
route emerged at the land borders of
Norway and Finland with the Russian
Federation (referred to as the Arctic
route). The main targeted border crossing point (BCP) was the Norwegian BCP
at Storskog, which registered an unusually high number of applications for
asylum in 2015 (more than 6 200). The
situation at Norwegian-Russian border
eased in December, when the Russian
Federation resumed its practice of preventing the exit of travellers not in possession of an adequate travel document
to continue to the EU.
Regarding Finland, the phenomenon
started in September 2015 and expanded

in particular in December when irregular migration to the Storskog BCP in
Norway was stopped. The phenomena at
the two most northern BCPs in Finland
(Salla and Raja-Jooseppi) is continuing.
In 2015, 694 irregular migrants arrived
at the Salla and Raja-Jooseppi BCPs from
the Russian Federation.
Persons stating they are coming from
Syria (600 767) and Afghanistan (267 485)
represented the highest shares of migrants irregularly entering the EU in
2015. While Syrians undeniably constitute the largest proportion of migrants,
their exact number is difficult to establish, due to the fact that many other
migrants also claim to be from Syria in

order to speed up their journey. Establishing the identity of a large number of
poorly documented migrants is one of
the main challenges border control authorities are confronted with.
Since 2014, the number of detected
Western Africans has been steadily increasing, reaching more than 64 000
detections in 2015, nearly 85% of whom
were on the Central Mediterranean
route. This is a growing trend that needs
to be addressed. In contrast to Eastern
Africans, who tend to apply for asylum
in other Member States, Western Africans do apply for asylum in Italy and in
fact account for the largest share of asylum applicants in that country.

11 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

While Greece and Italy have been under particularly intense pressure as the
two main entry points, reporting several thousand arrivals per day, largescale inflows of migrants have been a
new experience for several other Member States. The main challenges include
the widening of the surveillance areas,
the growing need for search and rescue
interventions, the lack of both facilities to receive and accommodate thousands of persons over a short time and
expertise in detecting non-typical travel
documents, difficulties in addressing
fraudulent declaration of nationality

The Paris attacks on 13 November 2015
clearly demonstrated that irregular flows
can be used by terrorists to enter the EU.
Two of the terrorists involved had previously irregularly entered via Leros and
had been registered by the Greek authorities, presenting fraudulent Syrian
documents in order to speed up their
registration process.
As the vast majority of migrants arrive undocumented, screening activities are essential to properly verify their
declaration of nationality. False declarations of nationality are common among
nationals who are unlikely to obtain asy-

or age, and the non-systematic entry
of finger-printing into the Eurodacsystem1. Last, but not least, the registration at the borders should take into
account the risks to internal security
more thoroughly.

lum in the EU or who are liable to be
returned to their country of origin or
transit, or who perceive an advantage
in speeding up their journey. With large
numbers of arrivals remaining essentially doubtful for a variety of reasons,
false identification documents, no identification documents, concerns over the
validity of claimed nationality, etc., and
with no thorough check nor any penalty
for those making such false declarations,
there is a risk that some persons repre-

1

The Eurodac system enables European
Union (EU) countries to help identify
asylum applicants and persons who have
been apprehended in connection with an
irregular crossing of an external border
of the Union.

12 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

senting a security threat for the EU will
take advantage of this situation.
The unprecedented number of detections of illegal border-crossing has also
led to a surge in violent incidents along
the EU’s external borders. Motivated by
profit, people smugglers increasingly put
migrants’ lives at risk and even threaten
border guards in order to recover boats or
escape apprehension. Large numbers of
people crossing the border in groups has
led to violence requiring public order policing, i.e. a task for which border control authorities are neither adequately
equipped nor trained.
It is dauntingly difficult to estimate
fatalities among migrants irregularly
crossing the border, because it is not possible to keep an accurate count of missing persons. Frontex does not record such
data and can only report the number of
bodies recovered during joint operations.
In 2015, 470 dead bodies were reported
in the Mediterranean area, an increase
of 112% compared to 2014. According to
IOM estimates, more than 3 770 persons
went missing or died in the Mediterranean area in 2015.

© European Union

2.2. Developments at the Policy Level
2015 saw the unfortunate situation of
thousands of migrants putting their lives
in peril to cross the Mediterranean and
the Aegean seas. Extremely high migratory pressure at the external EU borders
started in January and each subsequent
month set a new monthly record of persons coming to the EU in an irregular way.
In May, the European Commission,
with a view to addressing the crisis situation in the Mediterranean, as well as
the medium- to long-term priorities to
shape the EU migration management
policy, presented a European Agenda
on Migration.
The agenda was built upon four pillars:
reducing the incentives for irregular migration; saving lives and securing the borders; strengthening the common asylum
policy; and developing a new policy on legal migration. Following this logic, during
2015 three comprehensive implementing

packages were prepared. Some elements
addressed acute needs of the Member
States; some have been the subject of legislative proceedings by the European Parliament and the European Council.

The Border Package
In December 2015, the European Commission presented a set of measures
aimed at securing the EU’s borders,
managing migration more effectively
and improving the internal security of
the European Union, while safeguarding the principle of free movement of
persons. The proposals will now pass
through the ordinary legislative procedure and be negotiated by the European
Parliament and the Council of the EU
over the course of 2016. The package of
proposals and reports encompasses five
important elements.

(i) A European Border and Coast
Guard Agency
The European Commission released a
draft proposal for a Regulation on a European Border and Coast Guard and repealing Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004,
Regulation (EC) No 863/2007 and Council Decision 2005/267/EC.
This proposal would significantly reinforce the mandate of Frontex in the
fields of external border management
and return. Frontex would be renamed,
to reflect its new mandate, as the European Border and Coast Guard Agency.
The Regulation would establish a European Border and Coast Guard combining the independent resources of the
European Border and Coast Guard Agency
(‘the Agency’) and the Member State authorities responsible for border management. The European Border and Coast
Guard would share responsibility for implementing an integrated border management approach, as well as ensuring

13 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

the effective application of strong common border management standards and
providing operational support and intervention where necessary to promptly
respond to emerging crises at the external border.
The proposal tabled by the European
Commission not only strengthens the Integrated Border Management, but it also
improves the governance of the EU’s external borders by giving new powers to
the Agency and reinforcing its autonomy
regarding operational capacity.
The new rules proposed also set up a
complaints mechanism for the Agency,

in order not to hamper the fluidity of
movement”.

(v) The eighth bi-annual report on
the Schengen area

(iii) A European travel document for
the return of illegally staying thirdcountry nationals

A bi-annual Commission report presents
an overview on the functioning of Schengen to EU institutions twice a year. It
addresses two major challenges faced
in the Schengen area: the refugee crisis
and the terrorist threat. The report underlines that an essential prerequisite in
addressing effectively the current crisis
is strengthened protection of the EU’s
external borders.

providing an opportunity for persons
who feel that they have been subject to
a violation of fundamental rights in the
course of operational engagement by the
Agency to file a complaint.

countries to take back their nationals illegally staying in the EU, and increase
the application of existing readmission
agreements.

The proposal aims to create an improved
EU standard travel document for the expulsion of third-country nationals. This
new document would have improved security features and replace the model
which has been used since 1994. The
new proposal aims to improve the effectiveness of negotiations with third

(iv) EUROSUR Handbook
(ii) Schengen Borders Code Revision
The Commission’s proposal responded to
an explicit request in the Council conclusions of 9 and 20 November 2015 which
invited the Commission to “present a
proposal for a targeted revision of the
Schengen Borders Code to provide for
systematic controls of EU nationals, including the verification of biometric information, against relevant databases at
external borders of the Schengen area,
making full use of technical solutions

14 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

The Commission Recommendation
adopting the Practical Handbook for
implementing and managing the European Border Surveillance System was
presented as a part of the border package. Making this handbook ready was
possible thanks to the collective work of
the Member States, Frontex and the European Commission experts.

© Frontex

The EU Action Plan against
migrant smuggling (2015–2020)
In May 2015, the Commission issued this
EU Action Plan to set out the unambiguous actions necessary to implement the
European Agenda on Security and the
European Agenda on Migration. This
document highlights and indicates the
specific tasks aimed to efficiently tackle
the criminal networks facilitating irregular migration.

The EU Action Plan on Returns
In September, the European Commission presented the Action Plan on Returns to the European Parliament and
the Council. The plan defines immediate
and mid-term measures to be taken by
Member States (i) to enhance voluntary
return, (ii) to strengthen the implementation of the Return Directive (2008/115/
EC), (iii) to improve information sharing,
(iv) to strengthen the role and mandate
of Frontex in return operations, and finally (v) to create an integrated system
of return management. In parallel, the
Commission adopted a Return Handbook, which offers competent national
authorities practical instructions when
carrying out returns of those migrants
who do not have the right to stay in the
European Union.

A Common European List of
Safe Countries of Origin
The European Commission’s proposal for
a regulation aims at creating a Europewide list of safe countries of origin, allowing swifter processing of individual
asylum applications from candidates
originating from countries considered
to be safe. The proposal would also sanction faster returns if the individual assessment of an application confirms no
right of asylum. Following discussions
with, and the current practices of, the
Member States, the Commission proposed adding Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Kosovo, Montenegro, Serbia, and Turkey to the EU’s list of safe
countries of origin.

The EU Passenger Name Record
Directive
This having initially been proposed by
the European Commission in 2011, in
early December 2015 the European Parliament and the Council reached an agreement on a compromise text of an EU
directive regulating the use of passenger name record (PNR) data for the prevention, detection, investigation and
prosecution of terrorist offences and serious crime. The directive aims to regulate both the transfer of PNR data of
passengers on international flights from
airlines to Member States and the processing of that data by the competent authorities. The directive establishes that
PNR data collected may only be processed
for the prevention, detection, investigation and prosecution of terrorist offences
and serious crime.

The Smart Borders Package
In 2013, the Commission initially presented its ‘Smart Borders Package’ including proposals for three regulations:
a regulation establishing an entry/exit
system (EES), a regulation establishing
a registered traveller programme (RTP),
and a regulation amending the Schen-

© European Union

gen Borders Code in order to incorporate
the functioning of these two systems.
Due to a number of technical and budgetary questions raised by the European
Parliament and the Council, on the request of the European Commission euLISA2 launched a feasibility study and a
pilot project to test the technical possibilities for the two proposals. The pilotproject report was delivered in late 2015
and, along with the feasibility study conducted in 2014, it will now feed into the
European Commission’s revised Regulation proposals to be presented in March
2016. The Smart Borders package will aim
at improving the management of external borders by restraining irregular migration whilst facilitating the crossing
of those borders by pre-vetted frequent
travellers.

2

Strengthened Cooperation with
Europol
In 2015, Frontex and Europol signed an
Agreement on Operational Cooperation
to enhance their cooperation on combating cross-border criminal activities
by exchanging operational information,
further developing the cooperation in
the field of risk analysis and the fight
against cross border crime, and joint
planning of operational activities. Under the new agreement Frontex can send
personal data regarding suspected criminals to Europol. The transfer of personal
data from Frontex to Europol is limited
to information about people suspected
of being involved in cross-border criminal activities gathered by the Member
States during Frontex-coordinated operational activities.

The European Agency for the operational
management of large-scale IT systems in
the area of freedom, security and justice

15 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Cooperation with Third-Country
Partners
As a result of a Frontex Management
Board decision taken during 2015, Frontex can send its first liaison officer to a
partner third country. Due to the migratory situation on the Eastern Mediterranean route of migration, and the
history of good cooperation, priority has
been given to Turkey. The Frontex Liaison
Officer will be responsible for the facilitation of operational cooperation with
Turkish border management authorities and will contribute to the EU-Turkey action plan in the field of migration.
In the sequence of the implementation of the “Joint EASO-Frontex Technical Assistance project (under the ENPI
Programme3) to familiarise Moroccan
and Tunisian authorities with the work
3

The European Neighbourhood and
Partnership Instrument aims at
reinforcing cooperation between the
European Union (EU) and partner
country regions located along the shores
of the Mediterranean Sea.

16 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

of the Agencies”, an important step was
taken with the Moroccan authorities
towards the creation of a working arrangement. Between 2006, when the
Management Board mandated Frontex to
negotiate a working arrangement with
Morocco, and the end of 2015 both parties agreed on the text of an arrangement that is ready to be signed in 2016.
New prospects for closer cooperation
with Kosovo4 resulted from the adoption, during the September session of
the Management Board, of a mandate
for Frontex to negotiate a working arrangement with the competent border
authorities of that country.
In 2015, Frontex continued the implementation of the Eastern Partnership
Integrated Border Management Capacity Building Project in six Eastern Partnership countries: Armenia, Azerbaijan,
Belarus, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine.

4

This designation is without prejudice to
positions on status, and is in line with
UNSCR 1244 and the ICJ Opinion on the
Kosovo declaration of independence

The main aim of the project, run in cooperation with the WCO, the IOM and
the ICMPD, is to ensure border security and to facilitate legitimate movements of persons and goods in the region
while safeguarding the fight against
corruption.
Striving to enhance its involvement in
technical assistance projects for border
authorities in partner third countries,
Frontex signed a grant agreement with
the European Commission with regard
to the implementation of the “Regional
support to protection-sensitive migration management in the Western Balkans and Turkey” project for the years
2016 to 2018. This project, better known
as ‘IPA II’, is coordinated by Frontex,
while implementing partners include
the EASO, the IOM and the UNHCR.
A sister agreement will be led by the
IOM, with Frontex having an advisory
role, focusing on enhancing the exchange of non-personal information in
the region and contributing to the establishment of assisted voluntary mechanisms in the beneficiary countries.

© Frontex

2.3. D
 evelopments at the Agency Level
2.3.1. Highlights
A difficult year at the blue
borders
2015 was marked by an unprecedented
increase in irregular sea border crossings
into the territory of the Member States of
the EU, in particular in the Eastern and
Central Mediterranean area. Migrants
were incoming, in huge numbers, in
overloaded and/or unseaworthy boats
regardless of the weather conditions,
which triggered the need for search and
rescue activities.
Following the extraordinary European
Council on migration of 23 April 2015,
Frontex’s budget for maritime operations
hosted by Italy and Greece was almost tripled, to EUR 70.4 million, resulting in a
higher volume of operational activities.

Frontex proved capable of extending
its maritime operations to a new scale.
In the most intense operational period,
up to 1 000 officers from the Member
States were performing border control
duties in operational areas under Joint
Operations EPN-Poseidon and EPN-Triton. Altogether, the maritime and aerial
assets deployed to Frontex-coordinated
joint maritime operations delivered more
than 81 000 patrolling hours, double the
number in 2014. Their surveillance activities contributed to the rescue of more
than 254 000 persons in distress at sea,
on average almost 700 persons per day.
As a token of recognition for this endeavour undertaken by the seamen and
aircraft crews, Frontex and the Hellenic
Coast Guard were awarded the Lloyd’s
List Shipping Award 2015 for special
achievement in the area of safety.

The Hotspot concept and an EU
Regional Task Force
As part of the immediate action to assist
Member States facing emergency situations at their external borders, the EU
put forward the development of a Hotspot concept and the establishing of EU
Regional Task Forces (EURTF) in Greece
and Italy. Frontex was called on to operationalise and implement the two.
Within a few months, both the Hotspots
and the EU Regional Task Force were up
and running. That took a major logistical
effort to install mobile offices equipped
with all the necessary ICT equipment,
especially on the relevant islands.
Hotspots provide a platform for EU
agencies (the EASO, Frontex, Europol
and Eurojust) to support Member State
facing high migratory pressure of mixed
migratory flows in an integrated manner, while the EU Regional Task Force
(EURTF) serves as a coordination platform for the implementation thereof.

17 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Each EU agency leads its own business area (modules), while Frontex acts
additionally as a service provider for the
others, putting in place all of the instruments needed to perform daily duties.
The two existing EURTFs are located in
Piraeus (Greece) and Catania (Italy).
The existence of EURTFs provides the
basis for the coordination of the work
of different deployed teams and facilitates situation monitoring and the exchange of information between them
and the relevant national authorities of
the Member State hosting the EURTFs.
By the end of 2015, four Hotspots were
operational or ready to be launched: one
in Greece (on Lesbos) and three in Italy
(Lampedusa, Trapani and Pozallo). Experts and technical resources deployed
by the Member States within the joint
maritime operations hosted by Greece
and Italy contributed to the implemen-

18 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

tation of the Hotspot approach by supporting several activities:
▪▪ sea border surveillance activities;
▪▪ search and rescue of persons in distress;
▪▪ land coastal patrolling and transportation of migrants;
▪▪ screening of persons with the aim of
establishing their nationality, and
checking of identification or travel
documents;
▪▪ identification (including fingerprinting) and registration of persons;
▪▪ referral of persons in need of protection;
▪▪ return of persons whose asylum applications were refused at the end of
the asylum process or other persons
who did not have the right to remain
in the EU;
▪▪ collection of information for risk analysis purposes.

Enhanced civil-military
cooperation in the Central
Mediterranean
2015 was a year when Frontex had to
demonstrate its capability to interlink
border management operations with the
military activities performed by the EU
military partners.
In April, the European Council urged
all EU actors to mobilise their efforts to
prevent loss of life taking place in the
Central Mediterranean, and to address
the root causes of the human emergency
via cooperation with countries of origin
and transit. One of the elements listed
as a response to the situation was fighting human smugglers and traffickers
who exploit desperate people.
As part of the European Union’s
comprehensive response to this difficult situation, in June 2015 a European

Frontex’s multi-purpose
operations went beyond
stakeholder expectations
Frontex supports the Member States in
addressing cross-border crime and the
implementation of Coast Guard functions while carrying out joint maritime
operations. In addition to detection of
migrant smuggling, joint maritime
operations coordinated by Frontex supported the MS’ efforts in Coast Guard
functions to uncover other types of
crimes, including drug trafficking.
Some 106 tonnes of hashish, worth
more than EUR 160 million, plus 10.3 kg
of cocaine, 11.3 kg of heroin and 5.4 kg
marijuana, worth a total of EUR 1.3 million, were seized (compared to 43 tonnes
of hashish, worth more than EUR 65 million, and 35 kg of cocaine, worth EUR 2

© Frontex

Union military operation against human
smugglers, code-named Sophia,5 was
launched in the Central Mediterranean.
The aim of this operation is to identify,
board, seize and divert vessels suspected
of being used for human smuggling or
trafficking on the high seas.
Througout 2015, Frontex was coordinating Joint Operation Triton in the Central Mediterranean. It was a natural step
for Frontex and the EU military forces
to streamline cooperation and operating procedures. In an exchange of letters Frontex’s Executive Director and the
Commander of Operation Sophia agreed
on the modalities of cooperation and
the division of responsibilities between
border-control and military operations.

5

Initially Operation Sophia was called
Operation EU NAVFOR MED

million, seized in 2014) and 239 suspected
drug traffickers were arrested. Most of
the drugs were seized in the Western and
Central Mediterranean areas.
Moreover, 336 million contraband
cigarettes, worth EUR 38 million, were
also seized (compared to 24 million cigarettes, worth EUR 2.8 million, in 2014)
and seven cases of possible illegal fishing and one case of possible sea pollution
were detected and reported. Moreover,
vessels suspected of transporting large
amounts of weapons and ammunition
were seized by the Host MS’ authorities
during JO EPN Poseidon Sea 2015.
To sum up, Frontex has been the largest EU operational actor in the maritime
sector, operating continuously in a vast
operational area starting in the Atlantic
Ocean and covering the whole Mediterranean Sea, with a significant allocation
of approximately EUR 70 million for joint
maritime activities and other related
services in 2015; and it has managed to
achieve significant results.

Modern Day Slavery: Trafficking
in Human Beings
One of Frontex’s priorities for 2015 was the
fight against serious crime, implemented
within the framework of the European
Multidisciplinary Platform Against Criminal Threats (EMPACT). Frontex took part
in 23 operational actions focused on three
areas: the faciliation of illegal immigration, trafficking in human beings and illicit firearms trafficking.

A great example of such activity coordinated by Frontex was Joint Operation VEGA Children 2015. The aim of
that operation was to identify and detect vulnerable children on the move at
the EU’s external air borders and to refer them to the appropriate welfare and
protection institutions, by applying the
standard operational procedures outlined
in a publication titled “VEGA Handbook:
Children at airports”, which was published by Frontex in 2015.
The scope of the Joint operation was
to enhance the exchange of professional
knowledge with international organisations and other key stakeholders, to collect best practices to be implemented in
future activities, and to disrupt the activities of criminal networks.
With the support of the Frontex Fundamental Rights Officer and the Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental
Rights, joint operational teams composed of border guards and experts from
international organisations and NGOs
were deployed to 12 international airports in Member States.
To raise awareness and explain the
concept of VEGA Children, two public
seminars were organised at Stockholm
and Bucharest airports in cooperation
with local airport representatives.
The participating airports reported 22
incidents. There were nine confirmed
incidents relating to unaccompanied
children detected during the operation:
four of those incidents were reported
by Paris (Charles de Gaulle), three by
Stockholm (Arlanda) and two by Brussels (Brussels-Zaventem). The reported
incidents involved 11 children (nationals of the United States, the Democratic
Republic of Congo, Syria, Eritrea, Brazil,
the Central African Republic and France).
During the joint operation two persons were detained on suspicion of child
smuggling: a Bulgarian woman was arrested at Brussels-Zaventem and a Swedish woman was arrested at Amsterdam
Airport Schiphol. In future the concept
of VEGA Children activities could be expanded to Frontex activities at sea and
land borders.

19 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Pilot Project on the acquiring of
aerial surveillance services for
joint operational activities
Following the encouraging results of
the Pilot Project on the acquisition of
aerial surveillance services for joint operations implemented in 2014, in the
third quarter of 2015 Frontex concluded
a framework contract for the acquisition
of aerial surveillance services, assets and
expert support for Frontex-coordinated
joint operations.
The purpose of the framework contract is to develop Frontex’s own operational capacity for aerial surveillance
activities during joint operations, pilot
projects, rapid interventions and technical assistance projects in order to better meet Frontex’s operational needs in
cases of an emergency, as well as in the
event that the Member States or Schengen Associated Countries cannot provide
Frontex with aerial surveillance for a specific period and location.
The framework contract consists of
two lots: lot one covers maritime surveillance and lot two covers land border
surveillance. The services, assets and
support required for lot one are provided
by six commercial companies, with five
commercial companies providing those
needed for lot two. Some companies provide services/assets/support for both lots.

20 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

In order to test the capacity of the
framework contract for the acquisition
of aerial surveillance services, assets and
expert support, in November and December 2015 Frontex carried out a pilot
project within the framework contract
and deployed an aerial surveillance system at the EU’s external land border
between Bulgaria and Turkey and the
external land border between Hungary
and Serbia.
Evaluation of the pilot project has
shown that the framework contract provides a good working mid-term solution
for Frontex to fill in operational gaps in

Lithuania, Latvia, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland and eu-LISA have
the opportunity to study together for one
and a half years.
The programme is delivered over three
stages, each representing one semester
of full-study. The first phase, composed
of six modules, has been delivered already, with successful student performance. The programme will continue
in 2016, with the second semester and
the third stage (dissertation), which will
require the students to act as reflective
practitioners and work independently on

terms of aerial surveillance. The services
are qualitative and cost-efficient.

a well-defined problem to be addressed
in a final dissertation on a subject of current interest for national and European
border security.
The topic areas of the Master’s include: strategic planning and evaluation; management and leadership; EU
policies; technology and innovation in
border security; risks and threat management; the global context of border
security; and qualitative and quantitative research methodologies. It also has
underpinning elements of professional
ethics, cooperation in border security
and fundamental rights.
Each module is delivered by a different academic partner, offering an opportunity for the students to be exposed
to the different border management
practices at various national external

The European Joint Master’s in
Strategic Border Management
On 7 September 2015, Frontex launched
the European Joint Master’s in Strategic
Border Management (EJMSBM), an innovative degree created in response to increasing challenges to European border
security and management of migration
flows that need to be addressed strategically, in the framework of international
cooperation and partnership.
25 border guard leaders from authorities with border management responsibilities within the EU and the SAC, from
Austria, Estonia, Finland, France, Italy,

© Frontex

borders in the Netherlands, Spain, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. The consortium established for the joint delivery
and awarding of the master’s degree includes the Estonian Academy of Security
Sciences, Rezekne University in Latvia,
Mykolas Romeris University in Lithuania, the University of Salamanca and
UNED (both in Spain), and the Defence
Academy of the Netherlands.
Frontex plays a key role in the consortium, ensuring the central administration and management of the
programme, as well as the maintenance
of the same quality standards across the
consortium. The academic partners work
in close collaboration with the national
border guard academies, the complementary institutions. The teaching staff
of the programme come from 14 countries, 20 universities, eight border-guard
academies, five international organisations and Frontex.
At the end of 18 months of intensive
study and applied research, the students
will receive an internationally recognised joint degree, an award that, as
such, is an innovation in the field of
higher education. The international accreditation panel that validated the programme, organised under the European
Consortium for Accreditation in higher
education (ECA), appreciated that this
programme is a “trail blazer” in designing joint degrees and that it adheres to
the demand for senior professionals who
are strategic thinkers and have acquired
the skills to address new solutions in
the rapidly changing context of border
management.

Maritime Border Surveillance
Officer Training
A new Regulation, (EU) No 656/2014, established rules for the surveillance of
the external sea borders in the context
of operational cooperation coordinated
by Frontex. One of the Regulation’s focuses the safety of the people intercepted
or rescued at sea. In the last few years,
especially in 2015, the intensity of irregular immigration by sea has increased re-

© Frontex

markably. Maritime Border Surveillance
Officer training prepared by Frontex is
a tool for creating and enhancing the
capacities of the participating Member
State units in Frontex-coordinated Joint
operations at sea.
The first pilot training sessions were
carried out in March 2015, followed by
the Simulator Pilot Training in August
2015. A training needs assessment was
carried out at the end of 2015, all of the
parts of the modular course were tested
and the first version of curriculum was
prepared. The introduction of the training will start in February 2016.
The total time needed to complete the
course is three weeks, with the course
consisting of four modules: legislation,
surveillance, Search And Rescue (SAR),
and simulation. Three first modules are
carried out as distance learning, which
means that the trainees are not physically present in the same place. The
course starts with an induction program,
when trainees and trainers meet each
other and the trainees receive basic information about the course, the goals, and

the rules concerning the course. During
the induction the trainees become familiar with Moodle - a distance-learning environment. After the induction there is a
period of approximately two months in
which the students study all of the necessary, and partly interactive, materials
via distance learning. After the distance
learning element, all of the trainees are
invited to participate in a capstone module: simulator training. In the simulator
all of the gained theoretical knowledge is
tested and enhanced. During this module cooperation between trainees will develop via common learning and doing.
By structuring the course in the
above-mentioned way, an added value
is fitting a huge amount of substance
into a reasonable timeframe without
gathering all of the trainees in one place,
turning the theoretical knowledge into
practical skills and also, by exercising
in the simulator, increasing cooperation abilities. All this will create commonly understood working standards for
the actions needed in joint operations.

21 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Quarterly reports constitute an important part of the quality assurance regarding the data collected for risk analysis
purposes, as well as a tool for joint analytical activities. It was felt that the analytical work within three risk analysis
communities, i.e. the Frontex Risk Analysis Network (FRAN), the Western Balkans Risk Analysis Network (WB-RAN)
and the Eastern European Borders Risk
Analysis Network (EB-RAN), had matured to the point that a shift from data
description to a more problem-oriented
approach was feasible and also necessary for maintaining the relevance of
the networks.
The quarterly reports are now more
reader-friendly: they are more concise
and visual. An effort was made to develop new data visualisations and maps.

© Frontex

2.3.2. Situational Awareness6
Frontex comprehensively manages
information on migration and crime
related to the EU’s external borders.
It delivers comprehensive analysis supporting the Member States,
serving as a basis for targeted operational cooperation and for meeting
the needs of the relevant European
institutions.

Debriefing activities
During the year Frontex increased the
deployment of teams of debriefing experts that interview migrants in order to
acquire intelligence. Frontex has made
significant efforts in order to guarantee that the debriefing experts in the
field are properly trained to face the situation in the operational area, and are
familiar with the intelligence require-

6

Understanding of the environment –
important for decision-making in the
area of border security

22 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

ments that they are meant to address
for risk analysis.
The increased volume and quality of
debriefing interviews, in addition to
enhancing the opportunity to gain insight regarding the factors that determine the migratory and refugee flows
from the countries of origin, modi operandi and understanding of the functioning of the routes across transit and
destination countries, also allowed the
gathering of a growing amount of personal data in the field.
This has resulted in a significant increase in debriefing interviews containing information on people suspected of
being involved in human smuggling in Italy and Greece by Europol, and to an improved mapping of the criminal networks
operating in North Africa, Turkey, Italy and
Greece, with direct input to investigations
run by the Member States’ authorities.

A new approach: ProblemOriented Reporting
The concept for the quarterly reports
drawn up as part of regular risk analysis
network activities was reviewed in 2015.

The first Handbook on Impostor
Risk Profiles
There is only one EU-wide data collection scheme on travel document fraud
in the EU. The unique European Union
Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network
(EDF-RAN) was launched in September
2011 in order for there to be a sophisticated and regularly-updated situational
picture of the extent and nature of document fraud at the EU’s external borders.
Detections of impostors, i.e. persons
who use other person’s documents taking advantage of their physical resemblance to the genuine holder, have been
on the increase according to data from
the EDF-RAN, because of the enhanced
security features of travel documents. Despite the wide use of the latest technologies and biometric data chips in currently
issued passports, physical checking of a
person may still be problematic, as the
equipment enabling an automated comparison is not always in place. The handbook is meant to address this problem
and provide border guards with an additional practical tool to detect impostors.
The handbook was developed in collaboration with national experts represented in the EDF-RAN, and it will be
kept updated.

VDS detection of boats with
migrants

EUROSUR Fusion Services
The EUROSUR Fusion Services (EFS) are
a set of information services delivered to
the Member States and other stakeholders, such as Europol and the EMSA, by
Frontex. The EFS were launched in 2014,
and have since developed into a set of
diverse services, fusing a wide range of
data, providing Frontex stakeholders
with an enhanced situational picture
of the EU’s external borders. The overall
aim is to improve the situational awareness of the Member States, in order to
enhance their reaction capabilities to different situations, ranging from weapon
trafficking to search and rescue.
The focus of the EFS developments in
2015 was on constantly improving existing services and promoting the integration of new services and information to
enrich the European Situational Picture.
Among the developments of EFS in
2015 the Maritime Simulation Module
(MSM) was extended in response to the
latest modi operandi. This service provides simulations of probable future
vessel positions based on current and
forecasted environmental conditions.
Also, the service providing detailed
environmental information about atmospheric and sea conditions was improved significantly throughout the
year. This service now comprises a vast
range of different parameters helping operational officers in the Member States
to plan their operational activities and
search and rescue operations in the Mediterranean area on a day-to-day basis.
In 2015, Frontex has also made increased use of earth observation data
visualised in the Joint Operations Reporting Application (JORA) and distributed
via the EUROSUR Application Network
to internal and external stakeholders.
A total of 376 satellite images of specific
areas (such as ports and other coastal
areas) were delivered to Frontex stakeholders, 165 of which were delivered by
the European Union Satellite Centre (EU
SatCen) and 211 by the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA).

EFS have been used as well by police
and border forces working on facilitating of illegal border-crossing, with the
aim to connect the work of criminal police and border control authorities, and
to provide support to their investigations
at the national and EU level.
Even though the EFS were launched
relatively recently, they contributed to a
number of operational achievements at
the EU’s external borders over the course
of 2015.

New Situation Monitoring
Products
As well as the EUROSUR Fusion Services
Frontex introduced in 2015 a number of
new situation monitoring products, such
as: Situational Reports for tracking Vessels of Interest, Daily Regional Overview
Reports (Western Balkans), Weekly Reports for the European Commission and
Special Media Monitoring reports (including thematic series on the Western Balkans and Libya crisis situations).

Cooperation with EU NAVFOR
MED
Since the early preparation and implementation of the first phase of the EU
NAVFOR MED operation (code-named
Sophia) in the Central Mediterranean,
Frontex has liaised with the intelligence
unit of the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) mission in order to
ascertain the intelligence requirements
and tailor the future cooperation. Following the initial agreement and an exchange of letters, Frontex has shared
with EU NAVFOR MED its analytical
products and data on incidents in the
central Mediterranean Sea, providing
a significant contribution to the building of knowledge that would be of operational interest to its counterparty.
Frontex has shared with EU NAVFOR
MED the earth observation services acquired for its activities and has agreed
a procedure for sharing mutually new
acquisitions, whenever possible. The
Agency has provided EU NAVFOR MED

In October 2015, the Vessel Detection Service (VDS) contributed to
saving people in the Mediterranean
region during the Joint Operation
EPN-Triton 2015. A VDS scan of the
area north of Libya indicated four
objects not associable to any known
vessel in the area. This information
was swiftly forwarded to the Italian
authorities, which notified the military authorities (EU NAVFOR MED
- Sophia) operating in the area. The
fast communication enabled a quick
response by a EU NAVFOR MED – Sophia vessel, which encountered four
boats with 370 migrants in the indicated area. These people were rescued and brought to the safety of the
Italian coast.

Interception of a tracked vessel
smuggling weapons
Another operational achievement
is connected to the Tracking Vessels of Interest Service in connection
with the joint operation EPN-Poseidon Sea 2015. ‘Haddad I’, a vessel
sailing under the Bolivian flag, was
tracked for several months after being identified as potentially engaged
in illegal activities. In September
2015, following unusual behaviour
at sea, the vessel was stopped and
checked by Greek authorities. They
discovered some 5 000 weapons and
500 000 rounds of ammunition on
board, together with smuggled cigarettes. The vessel was bound for
Libya.

with a connection to its operational system, where information about incidents
is constantly updated and, in addition,
provided access to a range of EUROSUR
Fusion Services.
The two organisations have agreed
on the deployment of liaison officers in
the operational area and respective command structures.
A coordination procedure has been
agreed in order to avoid the duplication
of maritime patrolling efforts at sea.

23 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Frontex’s own equipment
The purchase of Aerial Surveillance
Services
Frontex concluded a framework contract
in the third quarter of 2015 for the acquisition of aerial surveillance services,
assets and expert support for Frontex-coordinated joint operations. The contract
aims to develop Frontex’s own operational capacity for aerial surveillance
activities during joint operations. The
framework contract is for a period of two
years, with the possibility of being extended for another two years. The framework contract contains two lots: one for
maritime surveillance and another for
land border surveillance.
Mobile field offices

© Frontex

2.3.3. Supporting Response
Frontex coordinates tailored joint
operations at sea, land and air borders and joint return operations,
thus: (i) strengthening the capacities of the Member States under
specific and disproportionate pressure; (ii) enhancing proactive response to changing humanitarian
and security challenges at external
borders; and (iii) safeguarding positive achievements in demanding
situations.

Opera 2.0
In addition to experts, modern border
control requires the use of technical
equipment. Planning and deployment
of pieces of equipment from one Member State to another is facilitated by an
ICT tool developed by Frontex: Opera. In
2015, a new version of Opera was rolled
out for Frontex and Member State users

24 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

for all operations. The updated application contains a completely new module
designed to manage the Technical Equipment Pool (TEP) and the Overall Minimum Numbers of Technical Equipment
(OMNTE). It also contains a new dictionaries module and an improved reporting
module. Opera now also manages Seconded Guest Officer (SGO) deployments
and the minimum numbers of the EBGT
pool. The appearance, speed and uniformity of the working, user friendliness
and reporting mechanisms have been
improved. In addition, the application
now includes many automated features
and more self-checking mechanisms to
ensure the accurate input and reporting of data. Opera 2.0 generates historical data and has more powerful search
capabilities. The application is used as
the main source of information for deployment, operational and pool data.

To meet operational needs, in June Frontex organised the emergency rental of
12 mobile fully furnished field offices
(containers) for an initial period of six
months, with the possibility of extension. The containers were deployed to
Sicily in Italy, Motril in Spain, Elhovo
in Bulgaria, and on a number of Greek
islands in the Aegean Sea. In the longer
term, Frontex will organise a long-term
framework contract for the provision of
mobile offices to meet on-going operational needs. The containers are used
mainly for the office needs of Frontex
staff and screening/registration, as
well as finger-printing and debriefing
purposes.

Night vision goggles, handheld scanners for document
checking, hygienic products
for handling migrants, Frontex
visibility vests for Frontex Staff
and Deployed Officers
In response to requests for operational
equipment Frontex initiated tender procedures and prepared the necessary documentation for the purchase and delivery
of various items of equipment urgently
needed in the operational areas.

Leasing of vehicles for
operational activities
Following the results of a gap analysis,
in 2015 Frontex decided to launch a pilot project for the leasing of vehicles to
be used for operational activities in Hungary, Greece and Bulgaria. A contract
was signed in October for three months
valued at approximately EUR 30 000 for
the provision of mini-busses, passenger cars and four-wheel-drive vehicles
to be used for transporting guest officers in operational areas. The pilot project is set to conclude in February 2016
and the results obtained to be used for
the preparation of a framework contract
for the supply of vehicles in all operational areas.

Successful use of the Focal
Points platform
Secondary migration from Greece has
significantly affected the number of illegal border-crossing at the EU’s external
land borders with the Western Balkan
countries. The development of the migration situation, especially at the Hungarian-Serbia border, called for enhanced
flexibility and coordination capability.
Due to the increased flow of irregular
migration at this border section, Hungarian Focal Points were reinforced with
additional human resources and technical means for border checking as well
as for green border surveillance within
the framework of Joint Operation Focal Points 2015 Land. In order to ensure
operational response to the pressure at
this specific border section, permanent
support was provided at the HungarianSerbian border. All of the resources deployed within the two operations - JO
Focal Points 2015 Land and JO Flexible
Operational Activities – were fully synchronised. During the year the deployment of experts within the framework of
Frontex-coordinated joint operations has
been changing depending on the needs
expressed by the host Member States and
continuous assessment of the situation.

Due the fact that the number of clandestine entries at the border crossing
points at the Bulgarian-Turkish border
had increased, Bulgarian Focal Points
were reinforced with additional human
resources and technical means (CO2 detectors, service dogs) for border checking within the framework of the JO Focal
Points 2015 Land.
A new activity under the umbrella of
Joint Operation Focal Points Land was
launched at the beginning of December
2015 in order to assist Greece with the
registration and fingerprinting of asylum seekers and migrants. This action
was launched with the aim of contributing to the control of secondary movements towards the Western Balkans and
to tackle cross-border crime. A new Focal Point was established at the Greek-fYROM border and the number of deployed
resources has been gradually increased.
Focal Points are a platform for exchanges of operational information
and professional experiences, therefore
the establishing of synergies between
the different host Member States’ Focal Points is particularly important in
this operation. For the first time a Focal
Point Staff Exchange was implemented
within the framework of this operation.
The main objective of the project was to
enhance cooperation and exchange of information, and best practices, between
the Focal Points on the level of Border

© European Union

Crossing Point/Focal Point Commanders and Local Coordinators.
In order to provide efficient operational support to the host Member States,
as well as to respond to the changing operational needs in a flexible way, the deployment of Joint Border Check Teams
was further improved and took place
at those Focal Points which were identified as critical border-crossing points
during the year.
In total, 38 Focal Points were active
in 2015. Compared to Joint Operation
Focal Points in 2014, three new Focal
Points were established (FP Luhamaa at
the Estonian-Russian border, FP Kastanies at the Greek-Turkish border, and FP
Idomeni at the Greek-fYROM border).

Joint Operation Alexis 2015
Within the framework of JO Alexis 2015
Frontex carried out joint operational activities focusing on strengthening the
operational capabilities of EU airports as
compared to the needs/vulnerabilities as
perceived by Member States.
The main aim was to set operational
procedures and to strengthen the capabilities of EU international airports. Two
Alexis operations were implemented, differing in scope and objectives:
1.	The operational aim of Joint Operation Alexis I 2015 was to enhance
the capabilities of EU airport border

25 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

guards’ expertise regarding document
abuses related to transit to/from third
countries.
2.	The operational aim of Joint Operation
Alexis II 2015 was to enhance the capabilities of EU airport border guards to
detect abuses when performing firstline checks and arrival and departure
gate checks.
In total, 24 Member States, 30 participating airports, and eight non-EU
countries took part in the implementation of Alexis activities. During the two
joint operations 73 officers were deployed
at different airports. In addition to the
participation of non-EU officers, Interpol deployed experts to Budapest and
Riga airports to support border control
activities related to the joint operation.
In order to raise awareness about recommended operational procedures and
counter-measures to the targeted abuses,
an instruction manual was distributed
during both Alexis activities.
At the start of the operational implementation Frontex organised dedi-

26 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

cated document training sessions, “Road
Shows”, which were carried out by eight
document expert training teams at eight
EU airports for local staff and for guest
officers deployed at those airports.

JO Pegasus 2015
The operational aim of this joint operation was to support border checks at
selected airports with specific skills in
interviewing irregular migrants, with
a focus on those whose profiles matched
specific pre-identified threats. The objective of the exercise was to increase
the knowledge about such threats at selected EU airports.
As a follow-up, an operational response stage was launched in the course
of the joint operation to respond with
dedicated operational measures to the
challenges identified in the first steps
of the joint operation.
In total, 16 Member States and 13 participating airports took part in the implementation of the joint operation. During

the implementation 11 officers (including three seconded guest officers) with
specific language skills were deployed
at those airports, according to operational needs, for a total of 740 man-days,
covering the profiles of Second-Line Interview Officer and/or Advanced-Level
Document Officer.

Future of Border Checks 2015
(FOBC)
The overarching goal of FOBC was to harmonise and build Member States’ border
control capacities, including the harmonisation of technical equipment and
working practices, with a view to increasing security and enhancing travel
facilitation at the borders.
It also aims at providing technical assistance, and analytical support to the
Member States in addressing their needs
as end-users. Apart from the Member
States, the beneficiary of FOBC is the European Commission, as the project provides support in policy development in

© Frontex

the area of border control (i.e. the Smart
Borders Package and the pilot).
The specific objectives of FOBC cover:
1.	further development of best practices
and guidelines in the area of border
checks;
2.	technical support and expertise to
Member States in applying best practices and guidelines, as well as to the
European Commission in relation to
the Smart Borders Package and its
implementation;
3.	assistance to Member States on the
roll-out of new technology for border
checks and dissemination of information about the current practices,
benefits and capability gaps among
all relevant stakeholders;
4.	technical support and expertise, by
implementing of pilot projects, including contributions to the execution of the Smart Borders pilot and
the initiation of a risk-based pilot project between the Member States and
third-country partners.

STREAMS 2015
This project is a continuation of the
STREAMS 2014 project that aimed to
build up a portfolio of capacities in border surveillance through continuous
development of capability tools and deployable products in close cooperation
with the Member States, industry and
academia. The aim is to increase bordercontrol security and provide support to
the Member States in addressing their
needs as end-users, and to the European
Commission with regard to policy development in the sector of border control.
The 2015 project built upon the previous activities in the sector of border surveillance and detection technologies,
aiming at addressing unanswered questions regarding the cost-effectiveness
and efficiency of land and maritime border surveillance solutions and technologies, as well as identifying common
accepted ‘best’ practices in various areas of border surveillance, aiming at
harmonisation.

The objective of STREAMS 2015 activities were divided in five activity clusters:
1.	The Land Border Surveillance Cluster
focused on the development and operational assessment of integrated systems solutions for land borders (i.e.
mobile surveillance, control and communication systems), including field
tests of promising solutions.
2.	The Maritime Border Surveillance
Cluster put special emphasis on costefficiency and identifying operational
effective solutions for aerial maritime
surveillance, more specifically the use
of Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems
(RPAS) and Optional Piloted Aircraft
(OPA).
3. Th
 e Sea Arrivals at EU Ports Cluster focused on the identification and dissemination of an inventory of ‘good’
practices for border control involving
sea arrivals at EU ports. The cataloguing effort covered four general areas:
legislation, information exchange,
checks, and risk analysis.
4.	The Knowledge Dissemination Cluster
covered the presentation by Frontex of
the findings and outcomes from activities conducted in 2015 during meetings, workshops and demo events.
5.	The “Registration package” proof-ofconcept test is an inter-agency initiative set up with the aim of developing
a permanent solution that will be
available upon request to Member
States in order to complement their
existing capacities for performing
identification and Eurodac registration processes when needing to
handle large numbers of irregular migrants arriving on their territories.

Strengthening Frontex’s
monitoring and contribution to
Border Security Research 2015
(SFBSR)
The SFBSR-2015 project builds on the previous efforts of Frontex in the field of
research for border security. The overarching goal was to strengthen Frontex’s monitoring of, and contribution to

European border security research and
to coordinate and enhance the activity
and the involvement of the border guard
community in this field.
The project aimed specifically at:
1.	increasing the awareness of Frontex
and Member States’ experts of the
existing cutting-edge technology developments pertinent to the border
control specific missions;
2.	increasing the knowledge of the Member States’ border guard authorities on
appropriate instruments, methodologies and methods for testing and
evaluating border security technologies, solutions and products;
3.	
providing a link between border
guards and the evolving world of research and development and contribute to border security solutions that
take into consideration the feedback
of the end-user community from the
early stages of the research and development phases, so as to increase
the awareness of Frontex and Member States of relevant research related
to border control technologies;
4.	contributing to a rethinking of the
current status quo on managing and
setting up security-related research
in Europe, obtaining consolidated
knowledge on how it is addressed outside Europe by authorities, agencies
and public bodies with responsibilities in this field and identifying aspects that could be translated to the
European approach;
5.	providing technical support for the
European Commission and Member
States, border guard authorities under the 7th Framework Programme
and Horizon 2020 programmes;
6.	consolidating the knowledge of Member States and Frontex on the implications of the use of border security
technologies on privacy, ethics, data
protection and the fundamental
rights of people crossing the borders.

27 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

tation of migrants to registration sites,
as well as supporting security checks.
While participation in Frontex joint
operations is voluntary, Member States
are required to send border guards and
technical equipment for rapid deployment, unless they themselves face an
exceptional situation substantially affecting the discharging of national tasks.
Despite the efforts of the Member States,
the operational needs of Poseidon Rapid
Intervention were not covered by the contributions provided.

Rapid Intervention Exercise
REX 2015

© European Union

2.3.4. Emergency Response
Frontex assists the Member States
in exceptional situations having
a significant impact on EU border
security.

Poseidon Rapid Intervention
At the end of 2015, the regular Joint Operation EPN Poseidon Sea 2015 was replaced
by Poseidon Rapid Intervention (PRI) following a request from Greece for support
in handling the unprecedented number
of migrants landing on its islands. Members States contributed to PRI various
profiles of experts and types of technical equipment in order to implement the
operational concept of joint operation,
especially with a focus on speeding up
the registration and identification process on the Greek islands, allowing for
a larger number of migrants to be registered and fingerprinted more quickly.

28 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

The deployments gradually rose to
more than 700 officers (including interpreters and crew members) on the
ground. Competences of officers deployed from different Member States
varied from screening and debriefing,
through fingerprinting and detection
of forged documents to border surveillance and coordination. The screening
officers play a key role in helping authorities to determine the nationality of
the incoming migrants for identification
and registration process. Debriefing experts gather information about the activities of smuggling networks, which
Frontex shares with national authorities and Europol.
PRI is taking place in the same operational area as the earlier Joint Operation
EPN Poseidon Sea but with a particular
focus on the islands of Lesbos, Chios, Samos, Kos and Leros. In addition to the
activities indicated above, a greater emphasis is being put on coastal patrols at
the disembarkation points and transpor-

REX 2015 was held between 19 August
and 14 October along the Greek-Turkish land border. The aims of the exercise were:
1.	to test the operational and logistical
capacities of Frontex and the Member
States during the summer period;
2.	to test the capacity of Frontex to coordinate a rapid intervention with
on-going Frontex joint operations or
on-going national operations organised by the host Member State;
3.	to familiarise the host Member State
with the rapid-intervention mechanism; and
4.	to test the rapid-intervention mechanism itself.
19 Member States contributed resources to the operation. A total of 16
border surveillance officers, five firstline officers, two debriefing experts and
two interpreters were deployed, as well
as four patrol cars, one dog team and
two heartbeat detectors.
REX 2015 was carried out at very short
notice, with less than two months between the initiation of the exercise and
its implementation.

Return operations
In 2015 the number of returnees increased by 64% in the context of Frontex operations, compared to the previous
year, reaching the level of 3,565. They
were returned on 66 joint return flights.
As the migration flow increased,
pressure mounted to facilitate the participation of front-line Member States
in return operations. Gap analysis indicated that a lack of available funding

© European Union

and the absence of a framework contract for charters in Greece had a direct
impact on the ability to return irregular migrants. Alternatives to facilitate
Greek participation on flights and organisation of Joint Return Operations
(JRO) were successfully explored, agreed
and implemented. Frontex launched a
request for support from Member States
and quickly negotiated arrangements
whereby Denmark chartered an aircraft
for Greece to organise a return operation

to Pakistan with two other participating Member States.
Similar support has been provided to
Italy as another front-line Member State,
with the same arrangement: a Danish
chartered aircraft being used by an Italian
organised Joint Return Operation to Nigeria. Furthermore, when “returnable irregular migrants” were identified, routing of
existing Joint Return Operations was adjusted to provide a stopover in both frontline Member States to collect returnees.

29 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

ers contributed to its delivery and the assessment of the learners. The following
countries hosted live-learning weeks:
the Netherlands, Romania, Germany,
Slovenia and Spain.
According to feedback gathered from
participants, trainers and organisers the
course well designed in terms of content
and organisation. Participants assessed
the course was as extremely interesting
and relevant to the current situation in
EU border guarding.

EBGT Land Border Surveillance
Officer Training

© The Polish Border Guard – Piotr Wiciejowski and Piotr Zakielarz

2.3.5. Development
Frontex strengthens the border
management capacity of Member
States to the full potential by using
its portfolio as a whole, promoting
interoperability and harmonisation,
and by prioritising the measures
which have an impact at the European level.
Following its values, Frontex
acts as the custodian of the European best practices in border management, and delivers to Member
States and other stakeholders in line
with the EU concept of Integrated
Border Management.

30 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Operational Training for EU
Border Guard Mid-management
in Border Guarding (MLC)
The MLC is a newly designed course for
mid-level officers of the national border guard authorities already part of, or
foreseen to be part of, the European Border Guard Teams (EBGT), ready to be deployed during Frontex-coordinated joint
operations. The new course was developed in 2014 and 2015 by Frontex with
the help of national border-guard experts
and contains four modules: (i) management and practical leadership within EU
BG activities; (ii) fundamental rights in
operational management; (iii) border
management in the European context;
and (iv) operational cooperation in EU
border guarding. It lasts for 18 weeks, of
which five are live-learning weeks, and it
has been developed for 625 hours of learning, accreditable with 25 credit points.
The course was successfully piloted
in 2015: 15 participants from 15 Member
States attended the course and 18 train-

The development of this new training
course started in 2014, when evaluation
of Rapid Intervention Exercise REX 2013
was ready. The pilot-course was conducted in the spring of 2015 and three
more courses followed until December
2015. It closes a gap in operational cooperation between deployed EBGT land
border-surveillance officers and host
Member State officers as a Joint Team
for land border surveillance in order to
tackle cross-border crime and irregular
migration and to promote the principles
of fundamental rights.
The basis of this training is the “EBGT
Land Border Surveillance Officer Handbook”, which has been developed in cooperation with experts from Member
States and Schengen Associated Countries. This handbook provides practical
advice for deployed and host officers as
a Joint Team. The handbook is available to all participants of the course for
pre-reading and is linked to a four-day
training session in which a joint operation is simulated. Participants work
within a team and experience different
typical border-related situations where
they face situations such as trafficking in human beings, first aid or illegal border-crossing.

Situation Monitoring

sponses and an improved reaction capability in detecting vessels with irregular

EUROSUR Operator Training

Over the course of 2015 the Joint Operations Reporting Application (JORA)
system was upgraded and enhanced
throughout the year, with 11 releases
of JORA introduced to more than 4 000
end-users. Each release delivered new or
enhanced functionalities, which were
introduced via several conferences and
workshops. Apart from services such as
Maritime Simulation Module or Meteo &
Satellite Imagery Service, the following
services provided under the EUROSUR
Fusion Services were either improved or

migrants on board and potential crossborder criminal activities. Over the course
of 2015 this service was tested in two separate operational trial exercises, to assess
its use under real operational conditions.

extensively tested throughout the year:

and its management tools, the improvement of the synchronisation mechanism
between the nodes, and security improvements that will be necessary for the
processing of classified information at
the “Restreint UE - EU Restricted” level.
The requirements were developed for the
installation of an appropriate level of encryption that will allow the exchange of
restricted information.

Following the adoption of the EUROSUR
Regulation, and the development of the
EUROSUR Handbook, a course for EUROSUR National Coordination Centre
operators was developed in 2015. People
involved in the development of thereof
were specialists from Member States and
Schengen Associated Countries. This new
course will help Member States a ensuring uniform implementation of EU
standards in the EUROSUR framework
and availability of relevant expertise in
the National Coordination Centres.
Under the joint certification system,

The Tracking Vessels of Interest
Service
This service provides daily updates to the
Member States on the position and movements of, and other information on, vessels suspected of being involved in illegal
activities. The information provided is
based on data delivered by the European
Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA) and additional sources, such as satellite imagery.

EUROSUR
The European surveillance system run
and maintained by Frontex was the subject of continuous improvements during
2015. The changes included the extension
of the functionalities of the application

officers nominated by Member States
and Schengen Associated Countries are
trained centrally, based on a European
curriculum, common training tools and
a course programme facilitated by Frontex the assigned trainers. At the end of
the course participants receive certification after an assessment of skills linked
to the correct application of the EUROSUR Regulation.

The Vessel Detection Service
Based on user feedback, an alerting
mechanism was implemented which
informs operational users in the Member
States about vessels detected by satellite.
The implementation of this mechanism
allows for a more timely operational response with regard to interception and
search & rescue operations.
The Visual Data Discovery Service
This service provides access to dynamic
reports, giving users enhanced tools for
visualising and using a wide range of operational data.
The Anomaly Detection Service
This service informs users about, among
other things, vessel movements and activities deviating from expected behavioural
patterns. This allows for more timely re© European Union

31 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

JO Focal Points 2015 Air
Intermediate Managers
The idea of intermediate manager deployments was implemented for the first
time in 2010, based on a proposal from
one Member State, and since that time
it has received significant support from
many Member States. It is a unique joint
operation aimed at the establishing of
permanent platforms for exchange of information and best practices at the intermediate managerial level, which has a
positive effect on the enhancement and
the quality of operational cooperation
between Member States, Schengen Associated Countries and third countries.
When it comes to newly established contacts with a third country, this joint operation gives a good opportunity to start
with joint operational cooperation for
building mutual trust, increasing common understanding and establishing
the first operational contacts between
the involved airports. In 2015, 60 intermediate managers were deployed in to-

32 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

tal at different airports, for a total of 636
man-days, both inside and outside of the
European Union.
The deployments of intermediate
managers also contributed to the enhancement of Integrated Border Management (IBM) and to an increase of mutual
cooperation at the external borders of the
European Union, by exchanges of knowledge, information and best practices.

Assistance regarding return
activities
In the field of pre-return assistance, Bulgaria received support in the training of
its own national escorts and organising
a joint return operation. Following on
from that course, the officers consolidated the training by using the skills
acquired to set up the first ever national
escort training course in Sofia, additionally training 20 Bulgarian escort officers.
For the first time Bulgaria was the
organiser of a Frontex coordinated joint
return operation, to Pakistan, with Aus-

© Frontex

tria, Spain, Poland, Germany and the
Netherlands as participating Member
States. Bulgaria has gained the skilled
staff, expertise and confidence to share
its capacity and to act as an organising
member state for future Frontex coordinated joint return operations.
Frontex has successfully implemented
a model for “Collecting Joint Return
Operations”, whereby the destination
country’s escorts and aircraft are used
to collect irregular migrants in an EU
Member State and return them to their
country of origin. Following Frontexorganised training, and relevant advice
and guidance setting out the required
standards, the model was applied with
Serbia: the first test-flight took place
with Germany as the organising Member
State, with Belgium and the Netherlands
as participating Member States, and a total of 65 returnees successfully removed.
The Frontex Fundamental Rights Officer
(FRO), a monitor from the Ombudsman
office of Serbia, and two independent
monitors from Belgium monitored the
return operation. Now three countries,
Georgia, Albania and Serbia, are willing
and able to carry out Collecting Joint Return Operations for EU Member States in
line with Frontex codes.
Frontex has developed and tested the
Frontex Application for Returns (FAR);
the application is now in the final preparation stage for rollout. The FAR application pulls together, in one easily
accessible and user-friendly format,
the planned return operations by Member States, the announcement of participation in those operations, and all
communication relating to a Frontex
coordinated return operations as well
as pre-return assistance. The advantage
of the FAR application is the provision
of planning and implementation progress of return operations at the European level.
Development of new tools and implementation of increased emergency
budget let to the 64% overall increase
in returns in 2015; 66 return operations
were organised, compared to 45 in 2014.

2.3.6. Organisation
Frontex acts as a flexible, transparent and agile organisation, in compliance with fundamental rights,
and implements an effective internal control system for the delivery of
quality services. Activities are continuously prioritised and resultoriented. Sound and transparent
governance strengthens cost-effectiveness and the positive reputation
of the Agency.

Transparency and Access to
Information
In 2015, Frontex continued to strive for
transparency and active provision of information to the general public and other
stakeholders. New reports, publications
and public versions of risk analysis products were published on Frontex’s websites and via its social-media accounts.
Frontex decided to make its quarterly
reports on the Eastern European Borders
and the Western Balkans available to the
general public, and continued the publication of both “Annual Information
on the Commitments of Member States
to the European Border Guard Teams
and the Technical Equipment Pool” and
“Frontex’s Annual Report on the implementation of EU Regulation 656/2014
of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 15 May 2014 establishing rules
for the surveillance of the external sea
borders”.
As part of its endeavours to explain
border control and the current phenomena at the external borders the Agency
published a booklet titled “Frontex at
Glance”, which explains Frontex and
Schengen in a very accessible way. It
also released a number of movies explaining the European Border Surveillance System (EUROSUR) and Triton (a
joint operation taking place in the Central Mediterranean), and a dozen short
movies in which border officers from different countries explain their work and
talk about the future.

The unprecedented migratory pressure at the EU’s external borders resulted
in an increase in media requests directed
to Frontex. In the second part of the year,
when the migratory pressure peaked,
Frontex handled 800 requests for information each month. The Agency facilitated physical access to operational areas
to more than 500 journalists, more than
60 of whom were embedded in operational maritime patrols in Italy.
In order to increase operational transparency and assist the media on the
ground, Frontex continued the deployment of Field Press Officers (FPO). Over
the course of last year five Field Press Officers were deployed to Joint Operation
Triton in Italy. The FPOs are drawn from
the European Border Guard pool and are
typically national border agencies’ press
officers seconded to help Frontex handle media in the operational area. Their
tasks include helping journalists move
around operational areas, facilitating
embedding in patrols and interviews
with national officers, and collecting
operational photo and video material
for the press.
Direct contact with EU citizens and researchers interested in the work of Frontex took place during the celebrations
of Europe Day in Brussels and Warsaw,
the Docs against Gravity film festival in
Warsaw, and more than 30 study visits
to Frontex headquarters.
Frontex continued to organise the European Day for Border Guards (ED4BG), an
annual event celebrating border guards
from all Member States and Schengen
Associated countries. The 2015 edition
gathered more than 800 guests, who
discussed issues related to the future of
border management, the Schengen area
and passenger traffic, as well as evaluating ten years of the Agency’s work. More
than 40 national authorities, EU Agencies and international organisations, as
well as the Frontex Consultative Forum
on Fundamental Rights, had exhibitions
during the day, presenting their work
and exchanging best practices amongst
border-management practitioners.

#

What is Schengen?

#

#

What is Border Control?

The "four-tier access-control model"
#

Border Management: The Big Picture

Frontex at a Glance

#

The Role of Frontex
#

Situation Monitoring and Risk Analysis

#

#

Joint Operations at the Borders

Training

This annual event strengthens the
community of European border guards
by promoting their work, providing a
forum for discussion and the exchange
of best practices. It gives border-guard
professionals an opportunity to engage
with each other, and share experiences
while helping to enhance connectivity,
understanding and collaboration across
many different border authorities.
2015 saw more and more visitors to
Frontex’s on-line communication channels, such as its website, its video-sharing platforms (YouTube and Vimeo), the
ED4BG Facebook page and the recently
launched Twitter account.
During 2015 Frontex invested resources in building future communication tools that will help increase
transparency and facilitate communication with stakeholders. The first
steps have been taken towards building a working collaborative platform,
a document system and a multimedia
management system.

33 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Docs against Gravity
As part of this year’s outreach
events, Frontex took part in Docs
against Gravity, one of the world’s
largest documentary film festivals,
taking place in Warsaw. Frontex had
its own dedicated movie section
“Borderlands”, with documentaries
dedicated to the topic of migration
and border management. The audience was engaged in a related debate
and had a chance to listen and talk
to representatives of the Polish Border Guard, academics and Frontex.

During 2015, Frontex received 60
applications for public access to documents under the remit of Regulation
(EC) No 1049/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May
2001 regarding public access to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents.
Each application contained one or
more requests for documents. The most
common requests related to Frontex Operational Plans and evaluation reports,
as well as to serious incident reports and
to data on illegal border crossings. The
profiles of the applicants varied, and
included students, researchers and
journalists.
Frontex granted partial access to the
documents requested by the majority
of applicants, with only limited parts
of the documents blanked out pursuant to the exceptions stipulated in Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001;
only a small number of applicants were
refused access altogether. The rest were
granted full access (see: Annual Report
on Access to Documents).

The Frontex Fundamental
Rights Officer (FRO)
In the course of 2015, the FRO was involved in a variety of activities and issues within the remit of her mandate
and tasks. The principal objective of such
engagement was to ensure adequate

34 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

© Frontex

© European Union

protection and guarantees of fundamental rights during operations coordinated
by Frontex and all Frontex activities. In
2015, the FRO particularly concentrated
her work in the following four fields:
1.	revision of the Frontex Fundamental
Rights Strategy and its corresponding
Action Plan;
2.	monitoring and reporting;
3.	support given in the field of operational activities coordinated by
Frontex;
4.	support given in the field of capacity
building.
One of the main objectives of the work
of the Fundamental Rights Officer is to
support Frontex in the implementation
of the Frontex Fundamental Rights Strategy (FRS) and to ensure respect for and
promotion of fundamental rights in all
Frontex activities, with a focus on operational activities. For this purpose,
the FRO launched a process of the revision of the existing FRS, which included
an in-depth analysis of the already received contributions reported by the various entities within Frontex, annexed in
prior General Reports of Frontex, a compilation of recommendations provided
by several international organisations,
NGOs and other bodies to Frontex since
2012, and a subsequent draft proposal
prepared by the FRO.
In the field of monitoring and reporting, the FRO continued to fulfil her role

of following up on incidents of alleged
fundamental rights violations reported
during joint operations, providing a preliminary assessment on the fundamental rights implications and, in several
cases, also giving recommendations.
Those recommendations mainly identified possible preventive and corrective
measures to be introduced to the monitoring system in order to achieve better
protection of fundamental rights in the
activities at the borders
During 2015 and in the field of operational activities, the FRO continued to
support the planning and preparation
of operations through the provision of
fundamental rights assessments and
suggestions regarding proposed joint
operations and analysis of potential
challenges and risks that could occur
in the context of a joint operation and
that could have a negative impact on
fundamental rights. With reference to
fieldwork, the FRO also undertook several visits to operations at sea, land and
air borders, as well as to joint return
operations and collecting joint return
operations to gather information on fundamental rights concerns in each such
field. Furthermore, the FRO supported
the Risk Analysis Unit with regard to
matters related to fundamental rights
when requested to do so.
In the field of returns activities, the
FRO actively supported the process of the

revision of the Best Practices for Joint
Return Operations, to be called a “Guide
for JROs coordinated by Frontex”. The
FRO was actively involved in a contribution to Frontex’s complex answer to
the European Ombudsman’s own initiative inquiry concerning the protection of
fundamental rights in Joint Return Operations coordinated by Frontex, which
was launched back in October 2014. In
this respect, the FRO also provided a
separate annex with her observations
on this topic, which mainly focused on
child protection and medical issues during return operations. Furthermore, in
the course of 2015, the FRO was actively
supporting the ICMPD project on Forced
Returns Monitoring (FReM) by providing
training to the participating monitors
and providing substantial input to the
training and project materials.
The FRO has also been very much engaged in supporting the Joint Operation
VEGA Children. The FRO highlighted the
importance of the matter of providing
adequate procedures, training and resources for border guard authorities to
identify children at risk at the external
borders of the EU Member States. Child
identification and referral with efficient
border management were explicitly addressed as a common objective of corresponding operational activities and
in the Frontex Annual Risk Assessment
2015 as a field of specific concern and

35 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

needs for MS in their border management system.
In the fields of capacity building, the
FRO contributed significantly to the IPA
II project “Regional support to protection
sensitive migration management in the
Western Balkans and Turkey” during
its needs assessment phase. The FRO
also provided an overview of Frontex’s
activities and tools in the field of fundamental rights for the ENPI project on
asylum and border management in Tunisia and Morocco.
With regard to the raising of internal awareness on the role of border
guards in access to international protection, the FRO, in cooperation with
the Frontex Information & Transparency
team, organised at Frontex’s headquarters an internal session on the relevant
aspects developed in the Asylum Procedures Directive. The invited external
experts, from the EASO and the UNHCR,
presented the latest record figures on
displacement and the scope and impli-

36 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

cations of the Asylum Procedure Directive for the daily work of border guards.
Furthermore, in the field of promotion
of fundamental rights, the FRO moderated a panel discussion in the framework
of the European Day for Border Guards
(ED4BG), which focused on children at
the borders. During the panel discussion
the subject of children at the borders
was discussed from different perspectives, with speakers from civil society
organisations, e.g. Save the Children
and the IOM, and experts from national
authorities.
Also in the context of capacity building, the FRO took part in providing
fundamental rights and practitioner’s
perspectives to the first phase of the EU
Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA)
project on “Biometric data in large scale
EU IT-systems in the areas of borders,
visas and asylum fundamental rights
implications”.
In the field of fundamental rights
training, the FRO supported the work on

the Fundamental Rights Training Manual for Border Guards (training of trainers), by working on adapting it as an
e-learning tool. The FRO supported the
further updating and further implementation of basic fundamental rights training for Frontex staff and highlighted
the need to expand it so as to offer more
specialised modules (operational, risk
analysis).

The Consultative Forum
During 2015, the Frontex Consultative
Forum on Fundamental Rights (CF)
continued to provide strategic advice to
Frontex’s Executive Director and Frontex’s Management Board. In line with
its working methods, the CF held three
formal meetings during the year, which
proved to be further opportunities to
work with Frontex staff.
In the area of training, the CF’s members provided observations and recommendations that contributed to ensuring

© European Union

a fundamental rights perspective in
Frontex training activities, including
input to the pilot Operational Training for EU Mid-Management in Border
Guarding and the EBGT Land Border Surveillance Officer Training. CF members
continued to support with their expertise
the European Joint Master’s Programme
on Strategic Border Management and
started to contribute to the development
of the e-learning course on fundamental rights training for border guards.
The CF Working Group on Training regularly exchanged views with the Frontex
Training Unit in order to plan cooperation and exchanges.
CF members supported Frontex’s operational activities in the area of Joint
operations, return and risk analysis.
The CF provided recommendations and
advice with regard to the Best Practices
for Joint Return Operations and participated in the second phase of Joint Operation VEGA Children. In this regard,
CF members were deployed at different

EU airports together with border guard
authorities aiming at strengthening the
protection of children at the borders and
enhancing cooperation between the different stakeholders in this field. A CF
delegation conducted a visit to Joint Operation Triton in October 2015. The observations of the visit were discussed with
Frontex and Management Board representatives through the organisation of
focus group discussions. In addition to
exchanging views on key challenges, the
discussions helped to set up initiatives
to advance fundamental rights in Frontex operations.
In 2015, the CF also started to gather
information about gender approach and
mainstreaming within the activities coordinated by Frontex and initiated a series of meetings with Frontex in order
to jointly reflect, in practical terms, on
the fundamental rights implications of
Frontex joint operations in different real
scenarios. In this context, the CF also
provided its views on the implementa-

tion of the Charter of FR during the evaluation of the Agency as per Article 33 of
the Frontex Regulation.
In September 2015, the Management
Board decided on the new composition of
the Consultative Forum, due to the expiration of its mandate. Representatives
from civil society organisations were selected on the basis of a public call made
by Frontex, while international organisations renewed their membership by
exchanges of letters. The current mandate of the elected CF members will expire on 31 December 2018.
The CF published its second annual report in July 2015 and that report is available on Frontex’s website.

37 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

38 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

3. Summary of budgetary,
staff and organisational
issues
3.1. Budgetary Developments
The originally adopted budget of EUR
114.0 million was to cover the activities initially indicated in the 2015 Programme of Work. However, in the light
of the migratory pressure in the Mediterranean observed since the spring of
2015 and the Council’s conclusions of 23
April, Frontex carried out intensive reinforcement of the operational activities in
the Mediterranean. Particular attention
was paid to the request of the Council
to reinforce joint operations, especially
Triton in Italy and Poseidon in Greece.
The reinforcement focused on the extension of the operational areas concerned,
more flexibility in the deployment of
assets and experts, intensification of
the aerial and maritime surveillance,
and increased screening and debriefing activities. In the course of the year,
and as a reaction to the developing crisis on the Greek islands, Frontex-coor-

dinated joint activities were extended
with fingerprinting.
As a result, three budget amendments
were adopted in the course of 2015, two
of them related to the alignment with
the European Council conclusions and
aimed at tripling the budget for the relevant operations in the Mediterranean,
and the last one covering the costs of
additional posts that the Agency had
been granted in order to cope with the
increased workload. As a result, the final Frontex budget for 2015 amounted
to EUR 143.3 million.
Despite the increased workload resulting from the significantly higher budget
allocation, the Agency managed by 31 December 2015 to commit 100% of its appropriations. 69% of its appropriations had
been used for payments by that date.
The remaining 31% of appropriations,
which are already committed to serve a
certain operational purpose or to honour
contractual obligations, are planned to
be paid out in 2016.

Euro thousands

Figure 1 Budget development 2011–2015
150 000
53.41%
120 000

90 000
-24.21%

4.88%

-0.57%

60 000

30 000

0

2011

2012

2013

2014

2015

Year (% indicate total budget change)

© European Union

39 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

3.2. General Budget

Operational Budget

The distribution of the 2015 budget reflects the importance given to operational activities. There is a 79:21
distribution ratio between operational
and administrative titles.
In addition to the traditional budget
approach – operational versus administrative expenditure (Figure 2) as of 2014
Frontex also shows its budget in the form
of Activity Based Budgeting (Figure 3).
The idea behind ABB is that all resources,
both human and financial, which are
needed to carry out an activity, will be
allocated to that activity.

and form the basis for the allocation of
direct and indirect costs. Direct costs are
human and financial resources which
can be directly attributed to an activity.
Indirect costs are those costs which stem
from indirect staff costs (such as, for example, staff from corporate services or
from finance and procurement which
support the activities) and indirect costs
(for example rental costs).
The calculation of Frontex budget for
2015 based on ABB indicated that 90%
of the Agency’s human and financial
resources were directly attributable to
Frontex’s core operational activities.
The Agency has identified the poten-

Core governance level activities, such
as joint operations, training or fundamental rights work (to name but a few),
were endorsed by the Management Board

tial offered by the ABB approach and
will use the opportunities to improve
its resource utilisation and performance
management.

iterranean area; therefore sea border
operations received by far the largest
allocation of all operational activities.

Figure 2. Regular budget distribution

Figure 4. Final operational budget distribution

From the traditional budgeting perspective, the operational budget amounted
to EUR 113.5 million; 84.3% of the available funds were committed to joint operations (land, sea and air borders and
return operations), as indicated in the
chart below. The Frontex Programme
of Work as adopted by Frontex’s Management Board guides this allocation
of funds. The additional funds from the
budget amendments in May, July and
November 2015 were allocated to the
relevant areas of work in order to reinforce operational activities in the Med-

Other Administrative

6%

Research &
Pooled Misc. operational
Development Resources
activities Supporting operational
activities
1%
1%
1%
Training

Staff

15%

0%

3%

Land borders

Risk analysis & Frontex
Situation Centre

8%
EUROSUR

2%

8%

Operational Activities

79%

Return co-operation

12%

Figure 3. Activity based budgeting
distribution
Indirect costs

Air borders

10%

2%

Sea borders
62%

Direct costs

90%

40 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

3.3. Use of appropriations from
2014 carried forward to
2015
By 31 December 2015, Frontex had used
to a large extent the payment appropriations made in 2014. Out of the total
amount carried forward from 2014 to
2015, EUR 23.6 million was paid out in
2015, while EUR 4.6 million needed to be
cancelled. The main reasons for the cancellations were related to the non-implementation of contracts or due to the fact
that grant beneficiaries finally claimed
lower amounts than estimated at the beginning of an operational activity. Nevertheless, the total budget utilisation
of the appropriations made available to
Frontex in 2014 was 94%.

3.4. Procurement
The Agency also spends its budget via procurement procedures, purchasing products and services from contractors; one
needs to note that Frontex does not outsource any of its operational activities.
Overall, 1 137 procurement procedures
were carried out in 2015. These procedures consisted of either launching own
tenders or using framework contracts already in place concluded by the Agency
or by the European Commission.

3.5. Organisational changes
In 2015, Frontex initiated a re-structuring phase, the aim of which was to have
a new structure in place as of January

2016. The main reasoning behind this
change was to respond to new business
requirements. The main modifications
are related to the creation of two new
units: a Return Support Unit, within the
Operations Division; and a Third Countries and EU Cooperation Unit, within
the Capacity Building Division.
The former Executive Support was
streamlined and reduced to a Cabinet
reporting directly to executive management. All other functions that were formerly assigned to the Executive Support
were reallocated to relevant business entities in the three divisions.
It has been also proposed to change
the names of three entities: Corporate
Governance (formerly the Administration Division), the Finance and Corporate

Figure 5. Organisational Structure

CONSULTATIVE FORUM

FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS OFFICER

DATA PROTECTION OFFIECER

MANAGEMENT BOARD

EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

PRESS OFFICE
CABINET

DEPUTY EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR

BRUSSELS LIAISON OFFICE

OPERATIONS DIVISION

CAPACITY BUILDING DIVISION

CORPORATE GOVERNANCE

RISK ANALYSIS

TRAINING

FINANCIAL AND
CORPORATE SERVICES

FRONTEX SITUATION
CENTRE

RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT

HUMAN RESOURCES
AND SECURITY

JOINT OPERATIONS

POOLED RESOURCES

INFORMATION AND
COMMUNICATION
TECHNOLOGY

RETURN SUPPORT

THIRD COUNTIES AND
EU COOPERATION

LEGAL AFFAIRS

41 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Services Unit (formerly the Finance and
Procurement Unit), and the Human Resources and Security Unit (formerly the
Human Resources and Services Unit).
Following the introduction of the new
organisation structure some staff members will be allocated to the new entities.

3.6. Recruitment
In 2015, a total of 2 243 applications were
received for vacant positions: temporary
agents, contract agents and seconded national experts. Thirty-four recruitment
procedures were launched; 10 procedures
initiated in 2014 were closed in 2015; 14
procedures initiated in 2015 will be finalised in 2016. Forty-seven new staff members were recruited; 139 interviews and
written tests were conducted for temporary and contract agents, with another
39 for seconded national expert posts.
Out of the new staffing figures approved in July and November of 2015,
Frontex reached a total of 308 at the end
of 2015. For the remaining 103 new posts
recruitment was on-going in December
2015. The new Executive Director took
up his post on 16 January 2015. The pro-

42 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

cedure of selecting the Deputy Executive Director was finalised in November
2015. The first Frontex Liaison Officer in
a third country Turkey has been selected.
Breakdowns of staff by Frontex unit
and the number of temporary agents
are attached as annexes to this General
Report.
Due to increased demand from the
Frontex business areas, a contract with
an external company to provide interim
HR services on a short-term basis has
been continued. In 2015, the number
of individuals providing services under
this contract reached 19, working a total of 167 man-months.

3.7. Staff Development and
Training7
In 2015, in addition to twenty language
courses, four fundamental rights training sessions, four sessions on new approaches to appraisal, and fifty-four

7

This chapter refers to training and
development of Frontex staff; training
activities provided to Member States’
officers are described in Chapter 2.

other training courses were organised,
including risk management training, as
well as training on EU Staff Regulations.
Also in 2015, the Frontex initiated
cooperation with the British Council (a
well-known provider of language and
communication skills training), which
delivered two well-received training
courses for Frontex staff: one on business excellence communication and another on proposal and report writing.
It is also worth mentioning that an
open tender procedure for the provision of in-house language courses was
launched in 2015. The outcome of this
procedure will be known in the first
quarter of 2016.
A total of 34 traineeships were taken
up in 2015 (of which seven were extended
from 2014), from a pool of 700 applications, contributing greatly to the areas
to which they were assigned.
The first ever reclassification of contract staff was launched in November
2015. The preparatory work has been conducted in order to introduce a new appraisal system as from 2016.

Annexes

© European Union

43 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

List of Management Board Members
Country

Name

Position/Rank

Institution

Mr. Matthias Ruete

Director General
Migration and Home Affairs Directorate General

European Commission

Mr. Laurent Muschel

Director
Directorate Migration and Protection

European Commission

Austria

Mr. Robert Strondl

Major General
Head of Department of Operational Affairs

Ministry of the Interior

Belgium

Mr. Herbert Veyt

Director of Operations
Chief Commissioner

Federal Police

Mr. Zaharin Penov

Director General of Chief Directorate Border Police
Chief Commissioner

Mr. Milen Emilov Penev

Director of Chief Directorate Border Police

Mr. Antonio Angelov

Director of Chief Directorate Border Police

Commission

Bulgaria

Croatia

Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Bulgaria

Mr. Zlatko Sokolar

Head of Border Police Directorate

Ministry of the Interior of the Republic of Croatia

Cyprus

Mr. Glykerios Leontiou

Superintendent A
Commander of Aliens and Immigration Unit

Cyprus Police

Czech Rep.

Mr. Martin Vondrášek

Colonel
Deputy Police President

Czech Police Forces

Denmark

Mr. Richard Østerlund la Cour

Chief Superintendent

Danish National Police

Mr Rando Kruusmaa

Deputy Director General
Lieutenant Colonel

Police and Border Guard Board

Mr. Joosep Kaasik

Deputy Director General

Finland

Mr. Ilkka Laitinen

Deputy Chief
Major General

France

Mr. Benoît Brocart

Director of Immigration

Ministry of the Interior

Germany

Mr. Ralf Göbel

Chairman of the Frontex Management Board
Deputy Director General

Federal Ministry of the Interior
Directorate General of the Federal Police Matters

Greece

Mr. Alexandros Soukoulis

Director of Border Protection Division
Police Brigadier General

Hellenic Police
Ministry of Public Order and Citizen Protection

Hungary

Mr. Zsolt Halmosi

Major General
Director General in Charge of Policing

Hungarian National Police

Italy

Mr. Giovanni Pinto

Director of Immigration and Border Police

Ministry of Interior

Mr. Normunds Garbars

General
Chief of the State Border Guard

State Border Guard

Mr. Vainius Butinas

Commander of the State Border Guard Service
General

Mr. Renatas Požėla

Commander of the State Border Guard Service

Estonia

Latvia

Lithuania

Finnish Border Guard

State Border Guard Service

Luxembourg

Mr. Thierry Fehr

Director

National Airport Police Unit

Malta

Mr. Neville Xuereb

Superintendent Immigration/Commissioner of Police

Malta Police Force

44 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Country
Netherlands

Poland

Name

Position/Rank

Institution

Mr. J.A.J Hans Leijtens

Commander
Lieutenant General

Royal Netherlands Marechaussee

Mr. Harrie van den Brink

Commander

Mr. Dominik Tracz

Commander-in-Chief
Major General

Polish Border Guard

Portugal

Mr. António Beça Pereira

National Director

Portuguese Immigration and Borders Service

Romania

Mr. Ioan Buda

General Inspector

Romanian Border Police

Slovakia

Mr. Ľudovít Bíró

Director
Colonel

Border and Aliens Police
Ministry of the Interior

Slovenia

Mr. Marko Gaŝperlin

Deputy Chairman of the Frontex Management Board
Assistant Director
Senior Police Superintendent

Ministry of the Interior
General Police Directorate

Spain

Mr. Emilio Baos Arrabal

General Commissioner for Aliens and Borders

National Police Force

Mr. Sören Clerton

Deputy Police Commissioner

Central Border Management Division
National Bureau of Investigations

Mr. Patrik Engström

Head of Border Policing Section
Superintendent

Operations Division
Swedish Police Authority

Sweden

Iceland

Mr. Ólafur Helgi Kjartansson

Police Commissioner

Sudurnes Police District

Norway

Mr. Jan Eirik Thomassen

Assistant National Police Commissioner

National Police Directorate

Switzerland

Mr. Héribert Wider

Chief of the Operations Sector
Lieutenant Colonel

Swiss Border Guard

Lichtenstein

Mr. Uwe Langenbahn

Deputy Chief

National Police

Mr. John O’Driscoll

Head of Bureau
Detective Chief Superintendent

Garda National Immigration Bureau

Mr. David Dowling

Head of Bureau
Chief Superintendent

Mr. Paul Morgan

Director

Ireland

UK

Frontex’s Management Board is
tasked with efficiently controlling the
functions of the Agency. Among other responsibilities, the Board establishes the
budget and verifies its execution, ensures
transparent decision-making procedures
are in place, and appoints the Executive
and Deputy Executive Directors.
It is composed of representatives of
the heads of the border authorities of the

26 EU Member States that are signatories
of the Schengen acquis, plus two members of the European Commission. Representatives from the United Kingdom
and Ireland are also invited to participate in Management Board meetings.
Iceland, Lichtenstein, Norway and
Switzerland (countries which are not EU
Member States, but which are associated
with the implementation, application

Border Force
Home Office

and development of the Schengen acquis) also participate in the Management
Board meetings. Each of them sends one
representative to the Management Board
but retains limited voting rights.

45 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

List of Management Board Decision
Number

Title

Date

01/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting Frontex Programme of Work 2015 and Frontex Budget 2015, including establishment plan

07 January 2015

02/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the participation of IE in Frontex operational activity JRO to Nigeria

03 February 2015

03/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the non-automatic carry-over of appropriations from 2014 to 2015

12 February 2015

04/2015

Decision of the Management Board on prioritising Turkey for deployment of Frontex Liaison Officer

18 February 2015

05/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting additional 20 MEUR in the preliminary draft budget 2016

19 February 2015

06/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the participation of IE in Frontex operational activity JRO to Nigeria organised by Norway on 11 March

09 March 2015

07/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the participation of UK in Frontex JO Flexible Operational Activities 2015 and JO Focal Points 2015 Land

10 March 2015

08/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting Frontex MAP 2016

26 March 2015

09/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting the preliminary Programme of Work 2016

26 March 2015

10/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting the draft revenue and expenditures for 2016

26 March 2015

11/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting Frontex General Report 2014

26 March 2015

12/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the rules relating to technical equipment (OMNTE) to be deployed in Frontex coordinated activities in 2016

26 March 2015

13/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the participation of UK in Frontex JO Alexis I 2015

13 April 2015

14/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the participation of UK in operational activities coordinated by Frontex in 2015

14 April 2015

15/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the Ireland’s participation in JO Joint Return Flight to the Republic of Congo organised by Belgium on 28 April 2015

27 April 2015

16/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the UK’s participation in JO Focal Points Air Intermediate Managers 2015

30 April 2015

17/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the participation of IE in operational activities coordinated by Frontex in 2015

13 May 2015

18/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the UK’s participation in JO EPN Triton 2015

15 May 2015

19/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the Management Board ‚s analysis and assessment of the Annual Activity Report 2014

19 May 2015

20/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the amendment of the Programme of Work 2015 (N1) and amendment of the Budget 2015 (N1)

20 May 2015

21/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of MSPP 2016-2018

20 May 2015

22/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the UK’s participation in JO VEGA Children 2015

02 June 2015

23/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the Ireland’s participation in JRO to the Republic of Congo organised by Belgium on 17 June 2015

15 June 2015

24/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the UK’s participation in JO EPN Triton and JO EPN Poseidon Sea

26 June 2015

25/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the opinion on Frontex annual accounts for the financial year 2014

01 July 2015

26/2015

Decision of the Management Board on Ireland’s participation in JRO to Nigeria organised by Italy on 16 July 2015

15 July 2015

27/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the amendment of Frontex’ PoW 2015 (N2) and Frontex’ Budget 2015 (N2)

28 July 2015

28/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the UK’s participation in Frontex JO EPN Triton and JO EPN Poseidon Sea

02 September 2015

29/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the composition of the Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental Rights

09 September 2015

30/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the dates planned for the MB meetings in 2016

09 September 2015

31/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the deployment of a Frontex Liaison Officer to Turkey

09 September 2015

46 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Number

Title

Date

32/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the mandate to the Executive Director to negotiate a WA with Kosovo

10 September 2015

33/2015

Decision of the Management Board on Unit Costs for Operational Activities

10 September 2015

34/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting Implementing Measures for the application of Regulation (EC) No 45/2001 by Frontex

10 September 2015

35/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the UK’s participation in Frontex JO EPN TRITON and JO EPN POSEIDON SEA

24 September 2015

36/2015

Decision of the Management Board amending the Management Board Decision No 12/2015 adopting rules relating to the
technical equipment, including OMNTE, to be deployed during Frontex coordinated operational activities in 2016

09 October 2015

37/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the UK’s participation in Frontex Flexible Operational Activities in Return 2015 (FOA-R) and JO EPN Poseidon Sea 2015

08 October 2015

38/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the United Kingdom’s participation in Frontex JO Focal Points Air 2015 and JO Pegasus 2015

21 October 2015

39/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting implementing rules on reclassification of contract staff

28 October 2015

40/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting recommendations of the Management Board following the evaluation of Frontex (Article 33)

28 October 2015

41/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the United Kingdom’s participation in Frontex JO Flexible Operational
Activities in Return 2015 (FOA-R), JO EPN Triton 2015 and JO EPN Poseidon Sea 2015

30 October 2015

42/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting the amendment of Frontex’ Programme of Work 2015 (N3) and Frontex’ Budget 2015 (N3)

06 November 2015

43/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the UK’s participation with OPV deployment (cost-free) in Frontex JO EPN Poseidon Sea 2015

13 November 2015

44/2015

Decision of the Management Board on organisation by the United Kingdom (UK) of a Joint Return Operation to Albania on 19 November 2015

18 November 2015

45/2015

Decision of the Management Board on general provisions for implementing Article 87(1) of the Conditions of Employment of Other
Servants of the European Union and implementing the first paragraph of Article 44 of the Staff Regulations

20 November 2015

46/2015

Decision of the Management Board laying down general provisions for implementing Article 43 of the Staff Regulations
and implementing the first paragraph of Article 44 of the Staff Regulations for temporary staff

20 November 2015

47/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the appointment of the Deputy Executive Director

25 November 2015

48/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the election of a new Chairperson

25 November 2015

49/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the election of a new Deputy Chairperson

25 November 2015

50/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the adoption of the general figures related to the titles and chapters of Frontex preliminary budget 2017

26 November 2015

51/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the future of Frontex Liaison Office in Piraeus

26 November 2015

52/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the amended organizational structure of the Agency

26 November 2015

53/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting Working Arrangement with Morocco

10 December 2015

54/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the practical arrangements for the participation in and financial contribution to Frontex operational activities by Ireland

11 December 2015

55/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the practical arrangements for the participation in and financial contribution to Frontex operational activities by the United Kingdom

11 December 2015

56/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting Frontex’ Anti-Fraud Strategy

17 December 2015

57/2015

Decision of the Management Board extending the applicability of the Implementing Rules on Teleworking

17 December 2015

58/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting Implementing Measures for processing personal data collected during joint operations, pilot projects and rapid interventions

18 December 2015

59/2015

Decision of the Management Board adopting the Programme of Work 2016 and the Budget 2016, including the Establishment Plan

24 December 2015

60/2015

Decision of the Management Board on the United Kingdom’s participation in Frontex Joint operation European Patrols Network Triton (JO EPN Triton)

24 December 2015

47 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

List of Joint Operational Activities
Name of
the Operation
or Pilot Project
JO Focal Points 2015 Air
Regular Officers
(AIR)

Operational Area
29 EU Focal Points Air activated: Amsterdam, Stockholm Arlanda, Athens,
Brussels, Budapest, Copenhagen, Paris Charles de Gaulle, Düsseldorf, Rome
Fiumicino, Frankfurt, Geneva, Helsinki, Larnaca, Ljubljana, Lisbon, Madrid,
Marseille, Munich, Milano Malpensa, Paris Orly, Bucharest, Prague, Riga,
Sofia, Varna, Vienna, Venice, Vilnius, and Warsaw airports

Length
306 days
(permanent
operation)

23 EU Focal Points Air activated: Amsterdam, Athens, Brussels, Bucharest,
Budapest, Dusseldorf, Geneva, Lisbon, Ljubljana, Madrid, Milano Malpensa,
Munich, Paris Charles de Gaulle, Paris Orly, Riga, Rome Fiumicino, Sofia,
Stockholm, Venice, Vienna, Vilnius, Warsaw, and Zurich airports

288 days
(permanent
operational
concept)

3 Coordination Point airports activated: Belgrade, Chisinau, and Tirana airports

JO Alexis 2015
(AIR)

30 EU International airports: Amsterdam, Barcelona, Bratislava, Brussels,
Budapest, Bucharest, Copenhagen, Dusseldorf, Geneva, Helsinki, Ljubljana,
Lisbon, Lyon, Madrid, Marseille, Oslo, Paris Charles de Gaulle, Paris Orly,
Porto, Prague, Riga, Tallinn, Timisoara, Sofia, Stockholm, Varna, Vienna,
Vilnius, Warsaw, and Zurich airports

26 Member States/SAC: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Switzerland, Cyprus, the Czech
Republic, Denmark, Germany, Estonia, Finland, France, Hungary, Luxembourg,
Spain, Greece, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Sweden, the United Kingdom
10 Third Countries: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Serbia, Moldova, Montenegro, Ukraine, Georgia, Canada,
and Turkey

Four Coordination Point airports activated: Tirana, Sarajevo, Belgrade, and
Podgorica airports
JO Focal Points 2015 Air
Intermediate Managers
(AIR)

Participating Member States and Third Countries

25 Member States/SAC: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Italy,
Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom
11 Third Countries: Albania, Belarus, Cape Verde, Georgia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Moldova, Nigeria, Serbia, Turkey, Ukraine, the United
States of America

81 days

24 Member States/SAC: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Slovakia, Slovenia,
Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom
8 Third Countries: Albania, Bosnia and Hercegovina, Georgia, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Turkey, Ukraine
International Organisations: Interpol

JO VEGA Children 2015
(AIR)

12 participating airports: Amsterdam, Stockholm Arlanda, Brussels, Geneva,
Lisbon, Ljubljana, Madrid, Bucharest, Paris Charles de Gaulle, Porto, Riga,
Warsaw, and Zurich airports

68 days

18 Member States/SAC: Austria, Belgium, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Denmark,
Finland, France, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Spain, Portugal,
Poland, Romania, Sweden, Slovenia, the United Kingdom
International Organisations: the International Organization for Migration (the IOM),
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (the UNHCR)
Non-Governmental Organisations: ADPARE, the Halina Centre, PICUM, Terre des
Hommes, Amber Alert

JO Pegasus 2015
(AIR)

13 participating airports: Amsterdam, Brussels, Bucharest, Budapest,
Marseille, Milan Malpensa, Munich, Paris Orly, Prague, Riga, Sofia, Vienna,
and Warsaw airports

209 days

16 Member States/SAC: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Finland,
France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Portugal, Romania, Spain, Switzerland,
The Netherlands, the United Kingdom

JO Focal Points 2014
extension
(LAND)

Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary,
Croatia, Bulgaria, Romania, Greece

34 days

25 Member States/SAC: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxemburg, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, Sweden
6 Third Countries: Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, Moldova, Serbia, Ukraine

JO Focal Points 2015
(LAND)

Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary,
Croatia, Bulgaria, Romania, Greece

330 days

23 Member States/SAC: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Switzerland, Sweden
8 Third Countries: Albania, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, the former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Moldova, the Russian Federation, Serbia, Ukraine

JO Flexible Operational
Activities 2015
(LAND)

Croatia, Bulgaria, Greece, Hungary

309 days

26 Member States/SAC: Austria, Bulgaria, Switzerland, Cyprus, the Czech Republic,
Germany, Spain, Estonia, Finland, France, Greece, the United Kingdom, Hungary,
Croatia, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Sweden, the United Kingdom
3 Third Countries: the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Georgia, Serbia

JO Coordination Points
(LAND)

Albania, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Moldova, Ukraine,
Bosnia and Herzegovina

281 days

15 Member States/SAC: Austria, Bulgaria, Croatia, Estonia, Finland, France,
Greece, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Slovenia,
Switzerland

Rapid Intervention
Exercise 2015
(LAND)

Greece

57 days

19 Member States/SAC: Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Cyprus, Denmark,
Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Italy, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway,
Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland

48 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Name of
the Operation
or Pilot Project

Operational Area

Length

Participating Member States and Third Countries

Staff Exchange
(LAND)

Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Poland, Hungary, Croatia, Bulgaria,
Romania, Greece

70 days

10 Member States/SAC: Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Poland, Hungary, Croatia,
Bulgaria, Romania, Greece

Joint Border Check Teams
(LAND)

Bulgaria, Hungary, Croatia

109 days

4 Member States/SAC: Latvia, Bulgaria, Slovenia, Romania

JO Poseidon Sea 2014
extension
(SEA)

Eastern Mediterranean

31 days

Host MS: Greece

JO EPN Poseidon Sea
2015 / Poseidon Rapid
Intervention (as of 28
December 2015)
(SEA)

Eastern Mediterranean

4 Member States/SAC: Belgium, Finland, Portugal, the Netherlands
334 days

Host MS: Greece
26 Member States/SAC: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Italy, Latvia,
Lithuania, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom
2 third countries: Albania, Ukraine

JO EPN Triton 2014
extension
(SEA)

Central Mediterranean

JO EPN Triton 2015
(SEA)

Central Mediterranean

31 days

Host MS: Italy
19 Member States/SAC: Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, France,
Germany, Greece, Iceland, Lithuania, Malta, the Netherland, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom

334 days

Host MS: Italy
28 Member States: Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, the Czech Republic,
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Latvia,
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom
1 third country: Egypt

JO EPN Hera 2015
(SEA)

North-West Atlantic

JO EPN Indalo 2015
(SEA)

Western Mediterranean

93 days

Host MS: Spain
2 Member States/SAC: France, Portugal

153 days

Host MS: Spain
10 Member States: Belgium, Finland, France, Iceland, Italy, Norway, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Switzerland
1 third country: Moroccan (observer based on bi-lateral agreement with Spain)

JO EPN Minerva 2015
(SEA)

Western Mediterranean (seaports)

JO Focal Points Sea 2015
(SEA)

Border Crossing Points in 11 MS: Romania, Bulgaria, Spain, Portugal,
Slovenia, Croatia, Lithuania, Finland, France, Germany and Estonia

44 days

Host MS: Spain
13 Member States/SAC: Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, France,
the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Sweden,
Switzerland

199 days

Host MS: Romania, Bulgaria, Spain, Portugal, Slovenia, Croatia, Finland, France,
Germany, Estonia and Lithuania
19 Member States/SAC: Bulgaria, Belgium, Croatia, Denmark, Estonia, Finland,
France, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Norway, Poland, Portugal,
Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden

EPN General
(SEA)

EPN General activities:

365 days

all MS/SAC

281 days

Host MS/SAC: Greece and Bulgaria

EPN General Meetings
EPN Common Patrols,
Yellow Pages, Staff Exchange, Frontex Compatible Operational Image,
Frontex Positioning System and tailored working group on boarding,
support to BSRBCC and EUCGFF

JO Flexible Operational
Activities in Return

Greece external sea borders;
Bulgaria external land border and Sofia

49 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Joint Return Operations
Number

Destination(s)

Organising Country

Participating States (with returnees)

Total Number of Returnees

1

Bosnia & Herzegovina, and Serbia

Germany

DE, SE

84

2

Kosovo

Austria

AT, HU, DE, SE, FR

60

3

Colombia and the Dominican Republic

Spain

ES, CH

62

4

Nigeria

Italy

IT, CH, NO, GR

43

5

Albania (TC)

France

FR, DE, DK, BE

50

6

Nigeria

Austria

AT, CH, DE, IE, ES, CZ, SE

20

7

Kosovo

Hungary

HU, AT, DE, SE, FI, SK, FR

73

8

Bosnia & Herzegovina, and Serbia

Germany

DE, LU, SE

77

9

Albania and Georgia

Spain

ES, DE, EE, IT, SE

54

10

Kosovo

Austria

AT, HU, DE, FR, RO

68

11

Nigeria

Norway

NO, SE, FI, DK, ES, FR, DE, CH, MT, IE

45

12

Serbia and the fYR of Macedonia

Germany

DE, SE

89

13

Albania (TC)

France

FR, BE, FI, DE, IT, ES

49

14

Georgia (TC)

Germany

DE, CH, ES, IT, LT, PL

35

15

Kosovo

Hungary

HU, AT, HR, FR, SE

51

16

Kosovo

Austria

AT, HU, FR, SE

83

17

Nigeria

The Netherlands

NL, BE, DE, EE, ES, LU, MT

25

18

Albania

Sweden

SE, DE, FR, FI

58

19

Georgia

Germany

DE, LT, SE, IT, FR

23

20

Pakistan

Spain

ES, PT, AT, BG, PL, CH

54

21

Kosovo

Hungary

HU, AT

73

22

Kosovo

Germany

DE, AT, HU, FR

85

23

Serbia and the fYR of Macedonia

Germany

DE, SE

89

24

Nigeria

Italy

IT, DE, MT, NO, SE

44

25

Albania (TC)

France

FR, BE

50

26

Albania

Sweden

SE, DE, FR

44

27

Bosnia & Herzegovina, and Serbia

Germany

DE, LU

28

DRC

Belgium

BE, IE, LT, CH

16

29

Kosovo

Germany

DE, HU

115

30

Russia

Switzerland

CH, PL

11

31

Nigeria & the Ivory Coast

Austria

AT, BG, GR, NO, PL, ES, IT, CH

59

32

Kosovo

Germany

DE, FI, BE

58

33

Albania

Germany

DE, NL, IS.

22

34

Nigeria

Italy

IT, NO, ES, IE, CH, LU

45

35

Kosovo

Germany

DE, FI, AT, HU

97

36

Albania and Georgia

Spain

ES, DE, IS, FR, LT

60

37

Kosovo

Germany

DE, HU

116

38

Kosovo

Austria

AT, DE, HU

97

39

Kosovo

Germany

DE, HU, FR

66

40

Nigeria

Italy

IT, CH, FR, DE, MT

49

41

Kosovo

Austria

AT, DE, SE, HU

65

42

Albania (TC)

France

FR, BE, DE

51

43

Pakistan

Bulgaria*

BG, AT, ES, NL, PL, DE

29

44

Armenia

Germany

DE, FI

6

45

Nigeria

Norway

NO, SE, ES

26

46

Albania

Sweden

SE, DE, FR

49

47

Nigeria

The Netherlands

NL, BE, LU, FI, SE, ES, HU

28

48

Kosovo

Austria

AT, DE, HU

56

49

Nigeria

Italy

IT, GR, BG

42

50

Georgia (TC)

Germany

DE, CH, BG

36

51

DRC

Belgium

BE, CH, SE.

20

52

Albania and Georgia

Spain

ES, GR, SE.

56

53

Kosovo

Germany

DE, HU, FI, SE

83

54

Nigeria

Austria

AT, NO, CH, HU

17

55

Georgia and Armenia

Austria

AT, IT, IS, SE, LT, ES, DE

47

50 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Number

Destination(s)

Organising Country

Participating States (with returnees)

Total Number of Returnees

56

Kosovo

Austria

AT, IS, DE

92

57

Nigeria

Italy

IT, RO, CH, GR

50

58

Albania

The United Kingdom

UK, BE, FR

64

59

Serbia (TC)

Germany

DE, NL, BE

65

60

Albania

Sweden

SE, DE, IS

64

61

Kosovo

Germany

DE, HU, FI, FR

103

62

Pakistan

Greece

GR, AT, BG

19

63

Georgia and Armenia

Austria

AT, SE, DE, GR

25

64

Albania and the fYR of Macedonia

Germany

DE, IS, SE

145

65

Kosovo

Germany

DE, AT, HU

0

66

Nigeria

Italy

IT, BE, CH

28

Total number of returnees 3 565

51 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Comparative Analysis of Joint Operational
Activities
Air Borders
The intensity of operational activities
at the EU’s external air borders was enhanced and the number of man-days
devoted to air border joint operations
increased by 31%, from 6 703 man-days
in 2014 to 8 779 man-days in 2015. That
was mainly due to the continuous and
long-term deployment of 26 SGOs in operational areas.
Five joint operations were carried out
in 2015, for a total of 952 operational
days, compared with six joint operations in 2014 for a total of 1 038 operational days.
The number of deployed officers was
43% higher (222 in 2014 and 317 in 2015),
and the duration of deployments was extended, particularly in the case of SGO
deployments.
The number of participating MS/SAC
remained very high (29), and an additional 14 Third Countries took part in
joint air operations by hosting operational activities and/or deploying a total of 32 Third Country observers.
In 2015, the budget of the Air Borders
Sector was increased to EUR 2 580 000 (in
2014 it was EUR 2 200 000 EUR) to cover
the costs of activities.

Land Borders
In response to the challenges faced in
border management at the external land
borders, five joint operations and one Rabit Exercise were launched. After the extension of Joint Operation Focal Points
2014 Land into the first months of 2015,
JO Focal Points 2015 Land was carried
out at border crossing points. Flexible
Operational Activities 2015 Land covered
green border surveillance activities. Additionally, Joint Border Checks teams
provided further support at selected Border Crossing Points, while Coordination
Points were established in the territory

52 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

of Third Countries. Finally, the rapid intervention mechanism was tested with
the implementation of a Rapid Intervention Exercise at the external land border
(Greece with Turkey).
The overall number of operational
days in 2015 remained at approximately
the same level as in 2014, with 1 011 days
in 2015, compared to 1 177 days in 2014.
In 2015, the operational activities implemented at the green border in the
Western Balkans and at the South-Eastern land borders were implemented under one joint operation, which allowed
a more flexible use of the available resources, as well as much more rapid reaction potential in cases of the need for
relocation of resources.
The number of hosting MS/SAC (12)
and the number of participating MS/
SAC (27) remained the same as in 2014,
while in terms of Third Countries there
was one additional hosting Third Country (five in total).
Deployed experts performed 73 318
man-days, as compared to 38 335 in
2014, an increase of more than 100%.
In addition, thanks to an increased application of the SGO mechanism, SGOs
contributed an additional 2 554 mandays in 2015.
In 2015, the land borders budget for
joint operations was increased to EUR
9 327 975 (an increase of more than EUR
1 million from the EUR 8 011 573 in 2014),
resulting in a higher volume of activity.

At the Sea Borders
Aiming to facilitate interoperability and
flexible responses to the irregular migration phenomena and cross-border crime,
six joint maritime operations and eight
tailored activities, as well as coordination of national patrolling in predefined
European Patrol Network (EPN) areas,
were carried out in 2015.

The number of operational days in sea
operations in 2015 decreased slightly, by
13%, to 1 584 in 2015 (compared with 1 829
in 2014), due to the fact that two joint operations hosted by Italy, EPN Aeneas and
EPN Hermes, were merged into a single
JO, EPN Triton, in the Central Mediterranean area.
In 2015, Frontex’s budget for joint
maritime activities was increased by a
factor of 2.5, to EUR 70 400 129 (compared
with EUR 28 383 700 in 2014), resulting in
a higher volume of activity in joint maritime operations. This budget was accompanied by EUR 2 000 000 EUR from
the 2014 budget, which was dedicated
to extension of sea operations in 2015.
The scale of Frontex-financed technical equipment deployments nearly doubled, reaching 81 316 patrolling hours
in 2015 (compared with 43 006 hours
in 2014). This was a remarkable contribution to the maritime border surveillance and search and rescue efforts of
the front-line MS facing the major migration flows.
Similarly, deployed experts performed
more than 200% more man-days: approximately 66 000 man-days in 2015
(compared to 20 000 in 2014). In addition, during the maritime joint operations, crew members performed 72 000
man-days (more than double the 33 767
man-days in 2014). This increase was a
result of more intensive patrol activities.
The number of MS/SAC participating
in joint sea operations increased to 30
in 2015 (compared to 28 in 2014). There
were also four Third Countries involved
in sea operations in 2015 (six TCs were
involved in 2014).
In total, 972 422 migrants (some 2 664
migrants per day) were intercepted during the joint maritime operations in 2015
(compared with 217 776, or about 600
per day, in 2014). The migration pressure in the Eastern Mediterranean area
represented the main part of the overall flows via sea borders: approximately
811 541 migrants arrived in Greece during sea operations in 2015.
In the area covered by JO EPN Triton, the number of migrants decreased

slightly compared with the previous year
(approximately 155 000 versus 170 000
in 2014).
In 2015, an increased number of 1 166
suspected facilitators were apprehended
during joint maritime operations (compared with 1 086 in 2014).
Assets taking part in Frontex-coordinated operations rescued 254 693 migrants, which was almost 700 persons
per day, on average. Compared with
2014, that was 47% more lives saved.
However, the risk of fatalities was constantly high, due to the use of unseaworthy overloaded boats.

Return Operations

During the maritime joint operations
some other types of cross-border crime,
including drug trafficking, were also
detected.
Some 106 tonnes of hashish, worth
more than EUR 160 million, plus 10.3
kg of cocaine, 11.3 kg of heroin and 5.4
kg marijuana, worth EUR 1.3 million,
were seized (compared with 43 tonnes of
hashish, worth more than EUR 65 million, and 35 kg of cocaine, worth EUR 2
million, seized in 2014) and 239 suspected
drug traffickers were arrested.
Most of these drugs were seized in
the Western and Central Mediterranean
area.
Moreover, 336 million contraband
cigarettes, worth EUR 38 million, were
also seized (compared to 24 million cigarettes, worth EUR 2.8 million, in 2014)
and seven cases of possible illegal fishing and one case of possible sea pollution were detected and reported.

In response to the European Commission (Return Handbook) guidance to
ensure a monitoring presence on joint return operations, there was an increase in
the number of flights monitored, to 76%
in 2015 (compared with 60% in 2014). In
addition, the monitoring was extended
to include all phases of the operations:
pre-departure, joint connecting charters
and the final destination flight.
Screening interviews establish a presumed nationality, which is the first
step in an effective return process. In
response to the increased activity on
migration routes in Greece, screening
activity was extended to cover three additional islands (Chios, Kos and Leros),
and deployed human resources were reinforced twice to meet the host Member
State’s needs. The number of deployed
screeners increased to 42 in 2015 (compared to 18 in 2014) and the number of
deployed interpreters increased to 101 in
2015 (83 in 2014).

Joint return operations are in principle
carried out based on the idea of sharing
existing capacities, third-country relationships and the readiness of Member
States to organise flights. Effective use
was made of the increased emergency
budget for joint return operations: using the same number of Frontex staff
the number of return operations was increased to 66 in 2015 (compared with 45
in 2014), with 3 565 irregular migrants
successfully removed, which constituted
a 64% overall increase in returns in 2015.

53 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Training Activities
Training Title or Name of the Event and a short description

Number of events

Number of Participants

Profile Training for Debriefing Experts
A course in which participants learn how to debrief migrants by systematic extraction of information from migrants
willing to cooperate. Participants learn how to prepare for an interview, how to select the interviewee and how to gain
his/her trust. Understanding of cognitive interviewing techniques and psychological aspects is essential.

3 courses

45

Profile Training for Screening Experts
A course that focuses on assumption of nationality and identity of undocumented migrants. The topics covered during the course
included different ways of reaching an assumption of nationality and identity, challenges related to proving identity, work with
interpreters, screening form particularities, and the ways of identification of vulnerable persons during a screening interview.

4 courses

64

Profile Training for Second-Line Interview Experts
This training focuses on interviewing as the major fact finding method. It equips participants with the necessary knowledge and
skills to interview persons crossing all types of EU borders and to conduct fair and objective interviews. Officers learn how to
conduct a structured and comprehensive interview, using effective questioning and probing techniques. They also get the necessary
psychological background and gain awareness of how psychological biases and filters can influence perceptions of others.

1 course

16

Second-Line Airport Officer Profile training
This course enables participants to effectively fulfil the role of second-line airport officers, helping them to interact
appropriately and respectfully with passengers. In a form of blended learning, this course provides the opportunity
for officers to gain, update, and demonstrate acquired skills and knowledge, and to become competent and
motivated to perform the complex tasks while deployed to joint operations, and also in their daily duties.

3 courses

48

Second-Line Airport Officer Profile training
Evaluation and planning meeting.

1 activity

12

Anti-trafficking in human beings train-the-trainers course
This is a course for national trainers of border guards based on the Frontex anti-trafficking in human beings manual.

2 courses

27

Fundamental Rights train-the-trainers course
This is a course for national trainers of border guards based on the Frontex Fundamental Rights manual for trainers.

2 courses

26

English for border guards
Development of an on-line English language course with specific professional vocabulary for first-line border guards.

5 expert working group meetings

56

Fundamental rights eLearning Development
Developing a concept and story board for an e-learning phase on fundamental rights.

3 expert meetings

22

Training on advanced skills for detection of falsified documents
This is a specialist course for the detection of falsified documents and consisted of a two-week course for document specialists (third-line officers)
aiming to enhance their knowledge of printing techniques, common terminology and the examination and analysis of queried documents.

3 courses (including 1 course
for third countries organised in
cooperation with RELEX TC)

45

Road show for first-line officers
An information session to raise the awareness amongst first-line officers of the design and abuse of identity documents,
routes, trends, and document fraud to emphasise their vital role in the detection of false documents.

5 road shows carried out in
addition to 8 road shows
organised together with ABS
prior to Operation Alexis II

625 + 615 for road shows Alexis II

Training for visa section staff of MS/SAC embassies/consulates in third countries
This training aims to increase the knowledge and skills at embassies/consulates of MS/SAC in third countries
with regard to document fraud and to raise the detection level of ID fraud during visa applications.

3 training courses

105

Document Specialist board
Expert meeting to review/evaluate a project and discuss future plans/activities with regard to document fraud.

1 meeting

30

Expert meetings for the updating of advanced level training tools
Workshops to review the tools for and inputting of the latest technologies and security features in identity documents.

3 meetings

20

Standardised training for return officers, Escort Leaders
Training to enhance MS/SAC capacity to organise and run safe return operations organised by Frontex,
and on the National level, and to improve professional related knowledge and skills.

3 training courses

58

Training for National Multipliers
Training aimed at qualifying Member States’ teachers and instructors (pool of experts) for the training of escort officers at the national level.

2 training courses

27

Training for Escort Officers, Bulgaria
Training for national Bulgarian Escort officers for return operations according to Frontex standards and best practices.

1 training course

22

54 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Training Title or Name of the Event and a short description

Number of events

Number of Participants

Training Support Network
A meeting of representatives from Partnership Academies for a presentation on PA
survey results and the preliminary concept of the new PA network.

1 meeting

20

National Training Coordinators meeting
A meeting for the presentation of the concept of the Training Needs Assessment instrument
as a systematic approach to identify needs in the context of training.

1 meeting

33

Frontex Annual Training Conference
The main purpose of this was to present the role of the SQF in harmonising border guard education
and training curricula in line with the Bologna and Copenhagen principles.

1 conference that included:
2 panel discussions,
1 workshop,3 parallel sessions
and bilateral discussions

97 (77 external +20 Frontex staff)

Meeting for NFPOC and NTC representatives
This focused on the finalisation of the concept of the Training Needs Assessment instruments and methodologies.

1 focus group

8

Development of European Course for NCC Operators

9 development meetings

100 (external) + 7 (Frontex staff)

Development of Risk Analysis training

1 development meetings

9 (external) + 1 (Frontex staff)

Schengen Evaluator Training
A four-module course for Schengen evaluators in the field of external borders and return. The aim of the course is to train to a high standard
professional evaluators for air, sea and land borders and returns in order to conduct Schengen evaluations in line with existing legislation.

4 course

169

3 preparatory meetings
3 development meetings

Maritime Border Surveillance Officer
Training for officers in decision-making positions in maritime Frontex joint operations focused on taking best decisions in immigration
and Search-and-Rescue related cases at sea and enhancing their cooperation skills in a multinational operative environment.

2 course

82

3 development meetings
1 evaluation meeting

SQF Course design
This training is focused on using the Sectoral Qualifications Framework (SQF) for Border Guarding in line with the Bologna and
Copenhagen principles, and was delivered to the MS experts qualified to facilitate the national integration of Common Core Curricula and
Sectoral Framework. It provided support to MS in integrating the common curricula and SQF into their national training systems.

4 courses

40

Trainers workshop
Finalisation and review of the SQF trainer handbook that will ensure that trainers have
the necessary tools to deliver sessions during the course design.

3 development meetings

10

SQF expert board, MS represented on the expert board, feedback provided on usage of the SQF, requests for integration.
Developments in the SQF, review of training programmes and further steps, meeting, documents and reports.

1 evaluation meeting

30

Establishing of a certification system; Bologna / Copenhagen validation of products.

2 development meetings

7

55 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Fundamental Rights Progress Report 2015
Introduction
Article 1(2) of the Frontex Regulation explicitly states that the Agency, when carrying out its mandate, must always act
in full compliance with the EU Charter
of Fundamental Rights, relevant obligations and principles of international
law. The Frontex Fundamental Rights
Strategy, adopted in March 2011, and
its Action Plan refer to the Fundamental Rights Progress Report (Para. 37 and
Action 18, respectively). Following the
structure of the strategy, this Progress
Report aims to provide an overview of
the current state of play and the progress made by Frontex in 2015 as regards
the implementation of the Fundamental
Rights Strategy and Action Plan, in particular in the areas of Joint Operations,
Risk Analysis and Capacity Building.
Furthermore, and with regard to the
activities of the Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental Rights (the CF),
Article 1(2) of the Frontex Regulation
also states that the Agency must take
into consideration the CF’s reports in accordance with Article 26(a) of the Regulation. The CF prepares a specific annual
and public report on its activities in the
first half of each year.
This Fundamental Rights Progress
Report covers the period from January
to December 2015.

Operations
General framework Joint Operations
All participants in Frontex coordinated
operations receive the Operational Plans,
together with the annexes thereto, prior
to their deployment, in order that they
can become familiar with the content
thereof, and the documents are uploaded
to the FOSS. The “Fundamental rights in
Frontex coordinated activities” and the
“Code of Conduct” are presented in detail
in the General Annexes for Air, Land and
Maritime Borders and form an integral

56 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

part of all of the joint operations’ Operational Plans. The text related to the fundamental rights obligations to respect
and promote fundamental rights, and to
report allegations of violations, has been
created in cooperation with the FRO.
In addition to the above, all participants take part in the operational briefings organised by Frontex and the Host
Member State during the first day of
their deployment. A standard agenda
for a briefing meeting has been created
in order to have a harmonised approach
from Frontex and the Host MS’ perspective towards all GOs deployed within
Frontex coordinated operational activities. Among other topics, the following issues are always presented during
briefing meetings:
1.	respect for and promotion of the Fundamental Rights;
2.	Referral Procedures for vulnerable categories of persons;
3.	the code of conduct for all participants
in Frontex coordinated activities.
It is mandatory that briefing meetings
are organised by the Host MS, in close
cooperation with Frontex. In this regard, the Frontex participants who deliver the related presentations are: the
Frontex Coordinating Officers, the operational managers for particular operational activity or Frontex Operational
Coordinators deployed or working at the
particular operational area. Representatives of the FRA, the UNHCR and the
IOM often contribute to the briefings.
During the carrying out of each joint
operation, special attention is given to
“Serious Incidents” reported in relation
to alleged fundamental rights violation.
In each such case the nominated responsible Frontex Coordinating Officers are
responsible for collecting all relevant
information in order to create/provide
the SIR, following the provisions of the
SIR SOP. The collection of relevant information from the Host MS’ operational stakeholders (acting within JOs)
is sometimes challenging and time-con-

suming, due the fact that such cases are
mostly investigated by other national
authorities (such as, for example, the
police, the public prosecutor or other
law enforcement services). Border-guard
national authorities generally act as contact points for information supplied to
Frontex.
JOU staff support Consultative Forum
visits to the host MS and contribute to
the meetings organised. In addition, it
worth underlining that all staff have attended compulsory fundamental rights
training.
VEGA Handbook: Children at
Airports
In 2015, Frontex published the VEGA
Children at airports handbook: children
at risk on the move, guidelines for border
guards, available from the EU Bookshop.
The recommendations contained in
this handbook aim to increase the awareness of border guard officers with regard
to children (minors) who are crossing
the external air border of the European
Union, whether they are unaccompanied or not. This can improve the identification of children on the move at risk
at airports, while ensuring respect for
their rights and enhance action taken
against criminal threats to their safety,
security and wellbeing. The handbook
contains tailored operational actions for
entry, transit and exit controls, allowing for an initial contact and assessment
in the absence of specialised child protection officers.
The guidelines also try to reflect and
ensure at all times an approach based on
the rights of the child and are based on
the principles of the best interests of the
child and child protection at the border
while taking into account the concrete
needs and obligations of border guards’
activities.

Joint Operation VEGA children
Frontex carried out Joint Operation VEGA
Children 2015 at EU airports from June to
July 2015 and August to October of that
same year.
The operation sought to identify children on the move at risk and refer them
to welfare and child protection agencies.
The underpinning operational measures
were provided by standard operational
procedures based upon the VEGA Children Handbook.
With the support of the Frontex Fundamental Rights Officer, along with the
Frontex Consultative Forum, during the
joint operation joint operational teams
were deployed at the hosting airports.
Such teams consisted of border guards,
experts from international and non-governmental organisations, and members of
the Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental Rights. VEGA Children is the first
joint operation organised by Frontex that
brought together border guards and civil
society to operationalise a common objective: identification of children on the
move and prevention of the risks they face.
While fighting trafficking of human
beings, border guards at participating
EU airports showed commitment and
made use of the provisions of the relevant
EU law, the EU Charter of Fundamental
Rights, the Convention Relating to the
Status of Refugees from 1951 and the Convention on the Rights of the Child. The
attention to the Fundamental Rights of
children, in particular the access to international protection and the compliance with the principle of non-refoulement,
from input provided by the Frontex Consultative Forum and other NGOs, became
clear during the compilation of the VEGA
Handbook: children at airports.
In 2015, the joint operational teams
improved the capabilities to identify suspected cases of trafficking involving children at airports, taking many actions
that, even if not ending in formal investigations, ensured the safety and central
position of children in the context of migratory movements.

The most important conclusion and
recommendation of the joint operation
was that the current lack of a consistent approach within the EU with regard
to parental travel authorisation and the
issuing of 1951 documents create both
vulnerabilities for child protection and
opportunities for organised criminal networks. Therefore, Member States’ harmonisation of practices across the EU
concerning these documents would be
useful in order to reduce the risks posed
to children by criminal networks.
Joint Return Operations (JROs)
At the start of each deployment period,
JO Flexible Operational Activities in Return provides screening experts and interpreters with an on-the-spot briefing,
during which specific reference is made
to Fundamental Rights in Frontex activities; the briefing also includes information and guidance from the FRO. All
participants in Frontex activities are advised on how to manage vulnerable migrants and refer requests for international
protection to the adequate authorities. In
addition, all participants in Frontex activities are informed of the need to report
concerns or allegations regarding fundamental rights, and the reporting method
used within operations, which is the Serious Incident Reporting mechanism.
During 2015, Frontex strongly encouraged Member States to ensure the presence
of a forced-return monitor in all JROs coordinated by Frontex. Their presence on
a JRO aims at gathering information and
monitoring whether the JRO is conducted
in compliance with fundamental rights,
paying specific attention to the treatment
of vulnerable persons, the use of force and
means of restraint, among other fundamental rights matters. Through Frontex’s
efforts the percentage of JROs coordinated
by Frontex with forced-return monitors present during the whole JRO has increased significantly, from 60% in 2014 to 76% in 2015.
The FRO and the CF also actively supported the process of a revision of the Best
Practices for JROs, which has been renamed
“Guide for JROs coordinated by Frontex”.

Risk Analysis
During the information-gathering phase
of the updating of the 2015 Handbook
on Risk Profiles in Trafficking in Human Beings, it was decided that the
participation and expertise of certain
organisations within the Frontex Consultative Forum would prove very useful.
In addition to selected Member States,
Third Countries and international organisations, two organisations from the
Consultative Forum were invited to participate in the THB Handbook Guest-Analyst Workshop on 1718 June 2015.
Following consultations within the
Consultative Forum, participants were
primarily asked to share information and
analysis in order to update the existing
profiles of Albanian, Brazilian, Chinese,
Ghanaian, Nigerian, Russian, Ukrainian
and Vietnamese victims of trafficking, as
those are the nationalities most frequently
reported by Member States as being victims of THB. The workshop proved to be
a very useful method of exchanging ideas
and gathering the necessary information
for the subsequent drafting of the 2015
Handbook on Risk Profiles in Trafficking
in Human Beings (published in mid-September 2015). In addition to Guest-Analyst
Workshop participation, the IOM also provided the Frontex Risk Analysis Unit with
comprehensive written responses to a THB
questionnaire sent out to various organisations and Member State authorities.
During 2015, Frontex continued to use
the Debriefing Guidelines to which the
Consultative Forum had provided input
in previous years that include several
safeguards to prevent negative impacts
on persons crossing borders.
The Frontex Risk Analysis Unit continued its work with the UNHCR within the
framework of the MoU between the two
organisations. This work has included
regular exchanges and discussions on
areas of common interest.

57 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

The Frontex Situation Centre
(FSC)
Over the course of 2015 fundamental
rights continued to be at the core of the
overall border situational monitoring activities of Frontex, and, in particular, of
the Eurosur Fusion Services framework.
This approach is reflected in some concrete developments outlined below.
Media monitoring
In 2015, information collected from open
sources raised awareness among Frontex staff and stakeholders in Member
States and EU institutions about possible cases and allegations of violations of
fundamental rights, allowing the Fundamental Rights Officer and other relevant
stakeholders to support the monitoring
of compliance with fundamental rights
requirements in Frontex activities and
the overall situation at the EU’s external borders.
Serious Incident Reporting (SIR)
In 2015, the SIR procedure remained the
official reporting mechanism for informing about and reporting on serious incidents, also involving cases of alleged
violations of fundamental rights, in the
framework of Frontex coordinated joint
operations. The mechanism includes specific reporting and follow-up measures
for ensuring that all relevant managerial
staff are timely informed of any relevant
situation and that all appropriate measures are taken by relevant stakeholders
in order to address the incident. Since
2015, all SIRs have been successfully reported via the Joint Operations Reporting Application (JORA).

58 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

The EUROSUR Fusion Services (EFS)
The EFS were launched in 2014, and have
since then developed into a set of diverse
services, fusing a wide range of data
from different sources. Over the course
of 2015, Frontex delivered an even wider
range of services to improve the situational awareness of Member States in
order to enhance their reaction capabilities, and therefore also help to save
lives at sea.
Over the course of this year Frontex
further improved several EUROSUR Fusion Services in order to support in particular operational staff in the Member
States during search and rescue operations at sea:
1.	The EFS Meteo Service now provides
advanced weather and environmental forecasts, especially with regard
to sea conditions.
2.	The EFS Maritime Simulation Module
Service now provides simulations of
possible future vessel positions based
on current environmental conditions.
This is especially valuable for supporting search and rescue operations involving migrant vessels drifting at sea.
Some concrete examples of how EUROSUR Fusion Services contributed to
saving lives at sea are provided in the
‘Situation Monitoring’ chapter of this
publication.

Capacity Building
The principles of fundamental rights and
international protection are fully integrated into all Frontex training activities.
2015 saw the development and launch of
several new training programmes and
products in which fundamental rights
aspects are incorporated. Previously developed programmes and products also
continued to be implemented.
The following activities with a focus
on fundamental rights have been carried out in 2015:

Train-the-trainer courses
on fundamental rights and
anti-trafficking
The training of national trainers based
on the methodology of the Fundamental Rights trainers’ manual and the Antitrafficking in Human Beings trainers’
manual continued in 2015. Two trainthe-trainers courses have been organised for MS officials on fundamental
rights for border guards, as well as two
train-the-trainers courses for MS on combatting trafficking in human beings.
Experts from the following partnership
organisations contributed to the training courses: the UNHCR, the OSCE, the
IOM, the OHCHR, and the UNODC.
Anti-trafficking in human beings
train-the-trainers courses have been
carried out in two phases: an eLearning phase and an interactive seminar.
An eLearning phase for the fundamental rights train-the-trainer course is under development and will be finalised
in 2016.
The participants are trained on the
content of the manuals, as well as how
to design training sessions and to apply
relevant methodologies and participatory
approaches in training in fundamental
rights and anti-trafficking in human
beings. The use of creative, interactive
teaching methods helps to secure the
active and committed involvement of
participants.
The European Joint Master’s in
Strategic Border Management
Part of the European Joint Master’s in
Strategic Border Management, the second module of the programme, Fundamental Rights and Ethics in Border
Security, was delivered from 5 to 9 October 2015 at the premises of the Defence
Academy of the Netherlands in Breda
and the Royal Marechaussee Training
Center in Schiphol.
The module aimed to equip the 26 students from 20 MS/SAC and partner organisations, all high-level border guard
managers, with knowledge and skills

to integrate respect for and promotion
and fulfilment of fundamental rights
and ethics when taking strategic decisions, while considering the implications thereof on border management.
The students acquired knowledge of fundamental rights and ethics as reflected
in the relative legal framework, as well
as that emanating from jurisprudence
and case law. The module enabled the
students to make strategic decisions and
to review current institutional structures and policies in a manner that is
respectful of fundamental rights and
ethics. The CF supported the delivering
of training in this strategic field of expertise at the senior managerial level of
border authorities.
Fundamental rights and ethics are
integral to every aspect of border guarding learning and practice. The learning
strategy of the module aimed to facilitate
this integration through scenario-based
learning, which provides an opportunity
for peer learning and sharing of national
best practices in the application of fundamental rights and ethics. Another
important aspect of the methodology is
that it integrates theoretical learning,
including jurisprudence and case law,
and practical skills that can be transferred to the organisational context of
border guarding. The studying consisted
of three parts: an independent phase, a
contact (residential) week and an experiential learning phase. It was assessed
through case studies and open-book exams that all students passed with remarkable grades.
The module teaching staff brought together experienced border guard practitioners from the National Police of Spain,
highly regarded academics from the University of Salamanca, UNED Spain, the
Defense Academy of the Netherlands and
the Estonian Academy of Security Sciences, and a representative of the Consultative Forum. The students had the
opportunity to exchange views with Zekarias Kebraeb, author of the book titled “Hope in my heart, freedom on my
mind” which is about his experience at
borders during his journey to Europe.

The Sectoral Qualifications
Framework for Border Guarding
The Sectoral Qualifications Framework
for Border Guarding contains a guide
to integrating fundamental rights into
all border guard studies. The guide provides high-level learning outcomes relating to fundamental rights that apply to
all border guard activities in order to assist Member States in integrating fundamental rights into all training courses.
In 2015, the SQF work focused on the
development of a manual and of a course
concept for training developers that in-

of EBGT members and Guest Officers deployed on joint operations.
The development of EBGT Land Border Surveillance Training has been introduced in 2015 and will continue with
five training activities in 2016. The content of the training has a practical and
interdisciplinary approach and will focus on practical aspects, such as patrolling as a Joint Team, communication,
detection of cases of irregular migration
or THB, surveillance activities in compliance with the legal framework, first
aid, reporting on a joint operation, use
of coercive measures, etc. The training

clude practical and theoretical lessons
on how to integrate fundamental rights
learning outcomes into all courses and
curricula in the border guard sector. In
order to teach the learners in selecting
appropriate learning outcomes related
to FR from the SQF for BG, and integrate
the selected learning outcomes into specific course design, a full-day session is
included in the contact week phase of the
training and was delivered during each
of the three courses carried out in 2015.

was observed in 2015 by the Consultative
Forum, which supported the enhancement of its fundamental rights content.
During the development of the EBTG
Profile training for maritime border surveillance officers in 2015 the fundamental rights aspect has been strongly on the
agenda and the Consultative Forum delegated to the UNHCR participation on
a bilateral basis in a development and
evaluation meetings as well as during
the actual training sessions.

Profile training for EBGT members

The European Course for NCC
(EUROSUR) operators

In the direct residential profile training courses for EBGT members (Profile
Training for Debriefing Experts, Profile
Training for Screening Experts, Profile
Training for Second-Line Interview Experts and Second-Line Airport Officer
Profile Training) the sessions related to
fundamental rights and identification of
persons in need of international protection are covered by experienced trainers.
The subjects reflect the major fundamental rights topics of concern to border
guards: fundamental rights in the work
of border guards, persons in need of international protection, identification of
vulnerable persons, non-refoulement principles, risk factors when interviewing
persons with vulnerabilities, and serious
incident reporting related to allegations
of violations of fundamental rights.
All these topics have been presented
both from the legal and practical points
of view, bearing in mind the perspective

The European course for NCC (EUROSUR) operators was developed in 2015
and it includes one day of fundamental
rights training. The FRO was involved,
and supported the Frontex Training Unit
on the development of the content and
practical cases related to matters regarding fundamental rights in connection
with the EUROSUR framework, including data protection, surveillance activities, and Search and Rescue at sea (SAR).

59 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Mid-level Course (Operational
Training for EU Mid-management in
Border Guarding)
This course is made up of four independent modules. One module is dedicated
to FR training, including relevant topics, learning and evaluation methods
and corresponding selected reading.
This module was developed by FR trainers with contributions from the Frontex Consultative Forum. The other three
modules contain FR content and related
activities to increase awareness of the
implications and obligations with regard
to respecting, ensuring and promoting
FR at the mid-management level in EU
border guarding. During the pilot course
in 2015, four of the five contact weeks
were observed by representatives of the
CF in order to support the inclusion of
FR content and approach in the training
materials. The CF members presented
their observations during the evaluation of the pilot course.
The Interoperability Assessment
Project Study
This study was finalised in 2015 and contains a special section dedicated to analysis of the implementation of FR in BG
basic training in MS, corroborated by
an analysis of the evaluation of basic BG
students in FR training. Relevant conclusions were drawn and recommendations made for Frontex to support and
for MS to enhance the implementation
of FR training in their basic curricula for
border guards.

60 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Teacher Mobility and Student
Exchange

Fundamental Rights Training for
Frontex staff

These emphasise the importance of FR
training through common training activities, debates, exchanges of experience
in CCC implementation and exchanges
of teaching materials in the field of FR.

The concept of basic fundamental rights
training for Frontex staff was developed
as a result of the close cooperation with
both the European Union Agency for
Fundamental Rights (the FRA) and the
UN High Commissioner for Refugees (the
UNHCR), as well as with support from
the FRO. This concept derives from the
Frontex Fundamental Rights Strategy.
Basic two-day fundamental-rights
training sessions are mandatory for all
Frontex staff. In 2015, four fundamen-

Joint Return Training and Escort
Leader Training
Training in fundamental rights is integrated into the Joint Return Training
and Escort Leader Training with several
lectures. Five such courses have been organised in 2015.
Schengen Evaluator training
Fundamental rights are now an integral part of the training of Schengen
Evaluators and have also been included
in training curriculum. In 2015, a new
module, titled “return”, was introduced
in this training programme and fundamental rights were taken into account
when developing and implementing the
training module. Representatives from
the FRA are invited on regular basis to
development and evaluation meetings
in order to keep fundamental rights aspects updated.
Contribution to an EASO training
module on Fundamental Rights and
International Protection
The development of a new EASO training module on Fundamental Rights and
International Protection in the EU (FR &
IPEU) was initiated in close cooperation
with Member States’ asylum authorities
and academic institutions, as well as the
FRA, the UNHCR, Frontex and selected
civil society organisations.

tal rights training sessions took place on
Frontex premises: two sessions in July
2015 (on 7–8 and 9–10 July) and two sessions in October 2015 (on 20–21 October
and 22–23 October 2015). 60 participants
took part in those sessions.
The objectives of the training, in
terms of learner outcomes, are threefold: knowledge, skills and attitude.
Specifically, staff are expected to understand the basics and principles of
human rights, to be able to apply a human-rights perspective in their field of
work or put them into practice using a
“human-rights analysis tool” and finally
to accept fundamental rights as relevant to their work. The organisation of
the training is managed by the Frontex
Human Resources Unit.

Research and development
activities
The use of the technologies related to border security may have implications for
the fundamental rights of people crossing the border. Usually, the technologies are contemplated from the point
of view of operational effectiveness and
cost efficiency, their capabilities/performance are measured/tested and their
achievements are contemplated, but
their potential intrusiveness on the people is sometimes given not sufficient
consideration.
Surveillance and tracking, the use of
image processing, data fusion, storing
and access, capturing of biometric features, and the use of body scanners and
X-ray devices are only a few examples
with potential impact or intrusiveness
into the attributes of the fundamental
rights of people crossing the EU’s external borders.

Along these lines, the Frontex Research and Development Unit (the RDU)
decided to organise a workshop on the
relationship between the use of border
security technologies and the implications on the privacy, ethics and data
protection/fundamental rights of people crossing the borders.
Its aim was to find out what the results of the latest research on this topic
are and to debate them, and also to consolidate the participants’ knowledge of
this subject. The speakers invited for the
workshop were policy makers, researchers and scientist involved in activities

Other fundamental rights
issues

and projects which address the binomial
“technology at the border fundamental rights implications”. Fifteen officers from 13 authorities attended (from
DK, EE, FR, GE, GR, LT, NO, PL, PT, RO,
SK, SP and SE), as well as Frontex representatives from the Research and Development Unit, the Land Border Sector,
the Air Border Sector, the Frontex Situation Centre, and the office of the Fundamental Rights Officer, bringing the total
number of participants to 30 persons.

ness units of Frontex and the process
will continue with external partners,
namely MB and CF Members, in 2016.
The new updated FRS will be published
in 2016 on Frontex’s webpage.

Frontex and its FRO launched a process
of a revision of the existing Fundamental Rights Strategy, which included an
in-depth analysis of the already received
contributions reported by the various entities within Frontex, annexed in prior
General Reports of Frontex, a compilation of recommendations provided by
several IOs, NGOs and other bodies to
Frontex since 2012 and a subsequent draft
proposal prepared by the FRO. The draft
was internally consulted with all busi-

61 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Annual Report on Access to Documents
The annual report on access to documents
is drawn up in accordance with Article
17(1) of Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001. It
covers the period from 1 January 2015 to
31 December 2015 and is based on the
statistical data summarised in the tables below.
Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 30 May 2001 regarding public access to European Parliament, Council
and Commission documents is applicable to Frontex when handling applications for access to documents drawn up
or received by it and in its possession,
by means of Article 28 of the Frontex
Regulation.
The practical arrangements in Frontex
regarding public access to the documents
of the Agency are laid down in Decision
3/2014 of Frontex’s Management Board,
a decision adopted pursuant to Article 18
of Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001.
Frontex receives requests for documents via either the contact form on the
Frontex website or directly to the Frontex
email address or ‘PAD’ mailbox. All the
requests are handled by the Legal Affairs
Unit (the LAU), which first ensures that
all applications are registered and their
receipt is acknowledged. The LAU then
involves the Frontex entities responsible for the preparation of the requested
documents. Those entities locate the requested document(s) and decide on full
access, partial access or refusal.
The LAU checks the validity of the justifications provided for possible partial
access or refusal by those entities. The
justifications are based on the exceptions provided under Article 4 of Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001. While the
responsible entities decide what is to
be disclosed or not disclosed during an
initial application, it is the LAU which
carries out the review following a confirmatory application.

62 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Access to Frontex documents in 2015
In 2015, Frontex received 60 applications
(54 initial and 6 confirmatory) for access
to documents on the basis of Regulation
(EC) No 1049/2001.
The most common requests related
to Frontex Operational Plans and evaluation reports, as well as to serious incident reports and to data on illegal border
crossing. Other requests pertained to
Standard Operating Procedures, Framework Partnership agreements, email
correspondence between Frontex and
external stakeholders, Codes of Conduct, debriefing interviews, Working
Arrangements with third countries, and
the Frontex Programme of Work.
The profile of the applicants varied,
with almost 50% consisting of academics (students, researchers, professors).
The rest were mostly journalists, while a
significant number of applicants did not
state their function and reached Frontex
through the AsktheEU website.
In 2015, Frontex began to review its
internal rules implementing Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001, and aims to
have a new Management Board Decision adopted in 2016 in order to simplify
its procedures in-house to increase transparency and provide access to documents
in a more efficient manner.
Finally, in 2015, Frontex saw an increase in Public Access to Documents
applications, receiving almost double
the number of requests compared to the
previous year. Additionally, most applications contained several sub-requests,
amounting often to a request for a very
large number of documents.

Statistics relating to the application
of Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 for 2015
Total applications

60

Initial requests

54

Full access granted

12

Partial access

32

Access refused

6

Ongoing

1

No answer provided

1 requestor withdrew his
application.

Applications not processed

2 requestors did not prove
EU citizenship /residence,
a prerequisite for beneficiaries
of the right of access. Frontex
retains discretion on whether or
not to grant access to documents
to third country nationals.

Further details:
Of the six refusals, two were based on
Frontex not possessing the documents
requested.
Full access includes cases where the applicants were referred to the Frontex
website.
Confirmatory requests

6

Full access granted

0

Partial access

3

Access refused

1

Ongoing

2

Justifications for refusal
Article 4.1(a) Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001
Protection of the public interest as regards the public security
of the Community or a Member State

4

Article 4.1(a) Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001
Protection of the public interest as regards the international
relations of the Community or a Member State

1

No document available

2

Partial access (with blanking out of limited
parts of the text) was based on:
Article 4.1 (a)
Protection of the public interest as regards the public
security of the Community or a Member State
Article 4.1 (b)
Protection of the integrity of the individual, in
particular in accordance with Community legislation
regarding the protection of personal data

Appropriations 2015
Budget item
(amounts in EUR 1 000)

Original Amended
Budget Budget
Transfer of
Available
2015
2015 appropriations appropriations Commitments
(A)

(B)

(C)

(D)

(E)

a

(E)/(D)

Title 1 Staff

21 476

1 292

-1 553

-7%

21 215

21 215

Title 2 Other Administrative

10 432

-1 128

-718

-7%

8 586

8 437

Title 3 Operational Activities

82 145

29 083

2 271

3%

113 499

113 465

114 053

29 247

0

30 Operations

52 300

39 709

3 676

7%

95 685

95 685

3000 Land b orders

9 200

0

305

3%

9 505

9 505

3010 Sea borders

31 100

36 209

3 091 10%

70 400

70 400

3020 Air borders

2 500

0

80

3%

2 580

2 580

3050 Return co-operation

9 500

3 500

200

2%

13 200

13 200

2 030

-200

-205 -10%

1 625

480

151

-17

-4%

614

312 EUROSUR

9 300

-456

-99

-1%

320 Training

4 400

-80

850

80

1 400

To be Carried Forward
Payments
(F)

(C2)1 (C5)2 (C8)3

(F)/(D) (G)

(I)

Unused

(J) (J)/(D) (K)c (K)/(D)
b

99%

0

4

146

150

1%

0

0%

5 231

61%

0

39

3 207

3 246

38%

149

2%

100% 73 243

65%

0

61 40 490 40 551

36%

33

0%

143 117 100% 99 543

69%

0

105 43 843 43 948

31%

182

0%

100% 61 048

64%

0

6 34 735 34 741

36%

0

0%

100%

6 878

72%

0

6

2 682

28%

0

0%

100% 41 821

59%

0

0 28 622 28 622

41%

0

0%

100%

1 979

77%

0

0

607

607

24%

0

0%

100% 10 370

79%

0

0

2 830

2 830

21%

0

0%

1 619

100%

1 208

74%

0

0

411

411

25%

6

0%

606

99%

357

58%

0

32

399

431

70%

8

1%

8 745

8 736

100%

6 491

74%

0

24

2 266

2 289

26%

9

0%

-943 -21%

3 377

3 377

100%

1 892

56%

0

0

1 485

1 485

44%

0

0%

-38

-4%

892

885

99%

539

60%

0

0

345

345

39%

7

1%

0

-55

-4%

1 345

1 345

100%

862

64%

0

0

483

483

36%

0

0%

10 000

-10 000

0

0%

0

0

0%

0

0%

0

0

0

0

0%

0

0%

351 Operational IT projects

520

0

53 10%

573

573

100%

334

58%

0

0

238

238

42%

0

0%

352 European Day for Border Guards

350

-13

0%

337

334

99%

311

92%

0

0

22

22

7%

3

1%

360 External relations 3rd countries and IBPC

420

-108

-92 -22%

220

220

100%

129

59%

0

0

91

91

41%

0

0%

361 External relations Int'l Organisations and THB

55

0

0%

55

55

100%

48

87%

0

0

7

7

13%

0

0%

362 Fundamental Rights Officer

40

0

-10 -25%

30

30

101%

22

74%

0

0

8

8

27%

0

-1%

Grand total regular budget

143 300

100% 21 069

(H)

Total

98%

Breakdown of appropriation in Title 3

310 Risk analysis
311 Frontex Situation Centre

330 Research & Development
340 Pooled Resources
350 Misc. operational activities

1
2
3

a
b
c

0
0

2 676

Non-automatic (C2)
Internal Assigned revenue (C5)
Automatic (C8)
(D)=(A)+(B)+(C)
(J)=(G)+(H)+(I)
(K)=(D)-(E)-(G)

63 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

Breakdown of Staff by Unit as on 31 December 2015
2011
Division

Unit

CA

OPD

CBD

CA

TA

SNE

CA

TA

2014
SNE

CA

TA

2015
TA

SNE

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

0

3

0

26

11

0

28

10

0

26

12

1

28

12

0

28

16

0

Finance and Procurement

7

10

0

5

11

0

6

11

0

7

12

0

5

13

0

ICT

6

17

0

6

16

0

6

17

0

6

18

0

6

18

0

Legal Affairs

1

3

1

1

2

1

1

2

1

1

2

1

1

3

2

Operations Division Office

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

2

0

11

23

35

11

23

34

11

25

30

11

27

30

10

28

33

Frontex Situation Centre

9

11

4

8

11

7

8

10

6

8

12

7

7

9

8

Risk Analysis

8

17

18

8

17

21

7

15

19

8

18

19

7

17

18

Joint Operations Unit

SNE

2013

-

Human Resources and Services
ADM

2012

-

Administration Office

TA

SNE

CA

Capacity Building Division Office

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

1

-

Training

3

9

7

3

8

7

3

9

7

3

8

7

3

9

7

Pooled Resources

1

5

5

1

5

4

1

5

5

1

5

5

1

5

5

R&D

1

12

1

1

11

2

1

11

1

1

11

2

1

11

2

Internal Audit/Quality Management

3

2

0

3

2

0

2

2

0

1

1

0

1

1

0

Directorate

3

7

2

3

6

2

2

7

1

3

8

0

3

2

3

Executive Support

6

14

5

6

15

5

8

16

5

11

15

6

4

11

3

85

141

78

84

137

83

82

142

76

89*

149*

77*

79

149

81

Total

CA – contract agent, SNE – seconded national expert, TA – temporary agent

Breakdown of Temporary Agents as on 31 December 2015
2014

2015

Authorised under
the EU Budget

Filled as of
31/12/2014

Authorised under
the EU Budget

Filled as of
31/12/2015

Function group
and grade

Permanent
Posts

AD 16
AD 15
AD 14
AD 13
AD 12
AD 11
AD 10
AD 9
AD 8
AD 7
AD 6
AD 5

-

1
1
4
11
8
6
8
43
8
6
2

-

2
4
12
6
6
17
31
13
3
1

-

1
1
4
11
8
6
8
55
29
21
13

-

0
1
4
8
8
7
2
46
9
7
3

AD total

-

98

-

95

-

157

-

95

AST 11
AST 10
AST 9
AST 8
AST 7
AST 6
AST 5
AST 4
AST 3
AST 2
AST 1

-

5
11
14
17
4
4
-

-

8
11
14
14
3
4
-

-

5
11
12
20
14
5
-

-

0
0
0
4
10
11
20
5
4
0
0

Temporary
Posts

Permanent
Posts

Temporary
Posts

Permanent
Posts

Temporary
Posts

Permanent
Posts

Temporary
Posts

AST total

55

-

54

70

-

54

Total

153

-

149

227

-

149

64 of 64
Frontex · General Report 2015

The European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation at the External
Borders of the Member States of the
European Union
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

Print version:
TT-AE-16-001-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-56-7
ISSN 2314-940X
doi:10.2819/2924

Online version:
TT-AE-16-001-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-57-4
ISSN 2314-940X
doi:10.2819/638557

Warsaw, March 2016

