Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2016/0106(COD)

Procedure completed
14/03/2017 Decision to enter into interinstitutional negotiations confirmed
by plenary (Rule 69c)

Entry/Exit System (EES)
Amending Regulation (EC) No 767/2008 2004/0287(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1077/2011 2009/0089(COD)
See also 2016/0105(COD)
Subject
7.10.04 External borders crossing and controls, visas
Legislative priorities
Joint Declaration 2017

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
20/04/2016

DÍAZ DE MERA
GARCÍA CONSUEGRA
Agustín
Shadow rapporteur

FAJON Tanja

HALLA-AHO Jussi

MLINAR Angelika

VERGIAT
Marie-Christine

ALBRECHT Jan Philipp

VON STORCH Beatrix
Committee for opinion
BUDG

Rapporteur for opinion

Budgets

Appointed
25/04/2016

HOHLMEIER Monika
Committee for opinion on the legal basis
JURI

Rapporteur for opinion

Legal Affairs

Appointed
19/04/2017

GUTELAND Jytte

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Migration and Home Affairs

Commissioner
AVRAMOPOULOS Dimitris

Key events
06/04/2016

Legislative proposal published

COM(2016)0194

Summary

09/05/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

09/12/2016

Debate in Council

27/02/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

27/02/2017

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

08/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

27/03/2017

Debate in Council

25/10/2017

Debate in Parliament

25/10/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

20/11/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

30/11/2017

Final act signed

30/11/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

09/12/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0057/2017

Summary

T8-0411/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0106(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EC) No 767/2008 2004/0287(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1077/2011 2009/0089(COD)
See also 2016/0105(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 087-p2; Treaty on the Functioning
of the EU TFEU 077-p2; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU
088-p2-a1

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/06162

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0194

06/04/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0114

07/04/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0115

07/04/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0116

07/04/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

N8-0141/2016
OJ C 463 13.12.2016, p. 0014

21/09/2016

EDPS

PE592.408

30/11/2016

EP

PE587.729

09/12/2016

EP

Committee draft report
Committee opinion

BUDG

Summary

Amendments tabled in committee

PE597.482

13/01/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE597.483

13/01/2017

EP

A8-0057/2017

08/03/2017

EP

PE603.073

14/06/2017

EP

T8-0411/2017

25/10/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Opinion on the legal basis

JURI

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

Summary

Summary

Final act
Regulation 2017/2226
OJ L 327 09.12.2017, p. 0020

2016/0106(COD) - 06/04/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to propose a revised version of the Entry/Exit System (EES) to speed-up, facilitate and reinforce border check procedures for
non-EU nationals travelling to the EU.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: in February 2013, the Commission tabled a package of legislative proposals on Smart Borders to modernise the Schengen
areas external border management. Since then, technical, financial and operational concerns on certain aspects of the design of the systems
have been brought to light.
Therefore, the Commission has decided to:
revise its 2013 proposal for a Regulation for the establishment of an Entry/Exit System (EES);
revise its 2013 proposal for Regulation amending the Schengen Borders Code to integrate the technical changes that result from the
new proposal for a Regulation establishing an Entry/Exit System (EES);
withdraw its 2013 proposal for a Regulation for a Registered Traveller Programme (RTP).
CONTENT: this proposal is part of the broader 'Smart Borders Package', addressing the role of information systems in enhancing external
border management, internal security and the fight against terrorism and organised crime. It seeks to modernise external border management
by improving the quality and efficiency of controls and support Member States with the increasing numbers of travellers entering and exiting
the EU.
The main differences between this revised proposal and the 2013 proposals are as follows:
Single system: only one system is proposed, the Entry Exit System.
Scope of the new Entry Exit System: the scope of the new Entry Exit System includes border crossings by all third country nationals visiting
the Schengen area for a short stay (maximum 90 days period in any period of 180 days), both visa-required and visa-exempt travellers, or
eventually, on the basis of a touring visa (up to one year).
The system will register the name, type of travel document and biometrics and the date and place of entry and exit. This will facilitate the
border crossing of bona fide travellers, detect over-stayers and identify undocumented persons in the Schengen area. The EES will also
record refusals of entry of third country nationals falling within its scope.
Interoperability: this should be ensured between the EES and VIS in order to achieve more efficiency and rapidity at border checks.
Biometric identifiers: while the 2013 EES proposals were relying on ten fingerprints, the revised EES proposals suggests a combination of four
fingerprints and the facial image as biometric identifiers introduced from the start of operations of the EES. The four fingerprints are used at
enrolment to check if the third country national was already registered in the system while the facial image allows for a quick and reliable
(automatic) verification at subsequent entry that the individual subject to the border control is the one already registered in the EES.
The Entry-Exit System will replace the current system of manual stamping of passports which is time consuming, does not provide reliable
data on border crossings and does not allow the detection of over-stayers or address cases of loss or destruction of travelling documents.
Data protection and data retention period: there is a significant reduction in the volume of personal data recorded in EES: 26 data items are to
be recorded in EES instead of 36. Appropriate data protection safeguards and strict access rights are foreseen in accordance with EU data
protection rules. The retention time for stored data is five years. This extended period shall reduce the re-enrolment frequency.
The facilitation of border crossings: the approach for facilitation is based on the implementation of self-service systems and e-gates, which will
allow third country nationals to initiate the procedure for border clearance, to be completed by providing additional information to the border
guard on request. The use of these accelerators (introduced in the proposal amending the Schengen Borders Code) is optional for Member
States, open to most of the travellers and does not require the development of any new system.

In addition there will be a harmonised legal basis (again introduced in the amendments to the Schengen Borders Code) for the establishment
of national Registered Travellers Programmes by Member States, on a voluntary basis.
Law enforcement access: from the start of operations, Member States' law enforcement authorities and Europol will have access to the EES,
under strictly defined conditions.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: in the 2013 proposals, EUR 1.1 billion was set aside as an indicative amount for the development of an EES
and an RTP. For the revised proposal, based on the preferred option of a single EES system including the law enforcement access, the
amount needed has been estimated at EUR 480 million.

2016/0106(COD) - 08/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the report by Agustín DÍAZ DE MERA GARCÍA CONSUEGRA (EPP, ES)
on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing an Entry/Exit System (EES) to register entry and
exit data and refusal of entry data of third country nationals crossing the external borders of the Member States of the European Union and
determining the conditions for access to the EES for law enforcement purposes and amending Regulation (EC) No 767/2008 and Regulation
(EU) No 1077/2011.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading, following the ordinary legislative procedure,
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Subject matter: the amended text stipulated that the proposed Regulation establishes an 'Entry/Exit System' (EES) for the recording and
storage of information on the date, time and place of entry and exit of third country nationals crossing the external borders of the Member
States, for the calculation of the duration of their authorised stay, and for the generation of alerts to Member States when authorised periods
for stay have expired as well as for the recording of the date, time and place of refusal of entry of third country nationals whose entry for a
short stay {or on the basis of a touring visa} has been refused as well as the authority of the Member State which refused the entry and the
reasons for refusal.
Scope: for the purposes of the prevention, detection and investigation of terrorist offences or of other serious criminal offences, this Regulation
also lays down in its Chapter IV the conditions and limitations under which Member States' designated law enforcement authorities and the
European Police Office (Europol) may obtain access for consultation of the EES.
Definitions: Members proposed to clarify the following terms:
designated law enforcement authorities shall mean the authorities responsible for the prevention, detection or investigation of terrorist
offences or of other serious criminal offences designated by the Member States;
touring visa shall mean an authorisation issued by a Member State with a view to an intended stay in the territory of two or more
Member States for a duration of 12 months in any 15 month period, provided that the applicant does not stay for more than 90 days in
any 180 day period in the territory of the same Member State.
Purpose of the EES: the amended text stated that in order to facilitate border crossing for third-country nationals who frequently travel and
have been pre-vetted, Member States may establish national facilitation programmes and connect them to the EES. The EES shall enable the
national competent authorities to have access to information on previous short stays or refusals of entry for the purposes of the examination of
applications for access to national facilitation programmes and the adoption of decisions.
Interoperability between the EES and the VIS and Europol: the idea of strengthened interoperability is outlined in a recital. Members also
stipulated that access to the EES as a tool for the purpose of identifying an unknown suspect, perpetrator or suspected victim of a terrorist
offence or other serious criminal offence shall be allowed where certain conditions are met and the consultation, as a matter of priority, of the
data stored in the databases that are technically and legally accessible by Europol has not made it possible to verify the identity of the person
concerned. Since fingerprint data of visa-holding third-country nationals are only stored in the VIS, a request for consultation of the VIS on the
same data subject may be submitted in parallel to a request for consultation of the EES.
Development and operational management: according to the text, eu-LISA shall play an important role in the development and maintenance of
the EES. It shall be the controller responsible for the security of the web service, for the security of the personal data it contains and the
process to extract the personal data from the central system into the web service.
By developing and implementing the Central System, the National Uniform Interfaces, the Secure Communication Channel between the EES
Central System and the VIS Central System, and the secure and encrypted Communication Infrastructure, eu-LISA shall:
perform a risk assessment as part of the development of the EES;
follow the principles of privacy by design and by default during the entire lifecycle of the system development;
update the risk assessment for the VIS to take into account the new connection with the EES and follow up by implementing any
additional security measures highlighted by the updated risk assessment.
Personal data for visa holders: the border authority shall create an individual file of the third country national subject to a visa requirement to
cross the external borders by entering the following data:
type and number of the travel document or documents and three letter code of the issuing country of the travel document or
documents;
the facial image with sufficient image resolution and quality to be used in automated biometric matching, where possible extracted
electronically from the eMRTD or the VIS, and where this is not possible, taken live.
Where a visa holding third country national benefits from the national facilitation programme of a Member State, the Member State concerned
may insert a notification in the individual file of that third country national specifying the national facilitation programme concerned.
According to Members, knowing whether a person has been pre-vetted and accepted to a national facilitation programme in one of the
Member States would be a valuable piece of information to border guards.

Biometrics: the amended text stated that border guards shall, when capturing biometric data for the EES, fully respect human dignity, in
particular in the event of difficulties encountered in the capturing of facial images or the taking of fingerprints.
Retention period for data storage: Members proposed that each entry/exit record or refusal of entry record linked to an individual file shall be
stored in the EES Central System for two years (as opposed to the Commissions five years) following the date of the exit record or of the
refusal of entry record, as applicable.
Data protection: the report stressed that data retrieved from the EES may be kept in national files only where necessary in an individual case,
in accordance with the purpose of the EES and relevant Union law, in particular on data protection, and for no longer than necessary in that
individual case. A Member State may keep the alphanumeric data which that Member State entered into the EES, in accordance with the
purposes of the EES in its national entry exit system in full respect of Union Law.
Reporting: the report noted that every quarter, eu-LISA shall publish statistics on the EES showing in particular the number, nationality, age,
gender, duration of stay and border crossing point of entry of over stayers, of third country nationals who were refused entry, including the
grounds for refusal, and of third country nationals whose stays were revoked or extended as well as the number of third country nationals
exempt from the requirement to give fingerprints.
Lastly, Members suggested enhancing rules on reporting back to the Parliament and the Council during and after the development of the EES,
including an obligatory update on budgetary and cost developments, to ensure full parliamentary scrutiny and oversight of the process and to
minimise the risk of cost overruns and delays.

2016/0106(COD) - 25/10/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 477 votes to 139 with 50 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council establishing an Entry/Exit System (EES) to register entry and exit data and refusal of entry data of
third country nationals crossing the external borders of the Member States of the European Union and determining the conditions for access to
the EES for law enforcement purposes and amending Regulation (EC) No 767/2008 and Regulation (EU) No 1077/2011.
The European Parliaments position adopted at first reading, following the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal
as follows:
Purpose: the proposed regulation aims to establish an Entry/Exit System (EES) for:
the recording and storage of the date, time and place of entry and exit of thirdcountry nationals crossing the borders of the Member
States at which the EES is operated;
the calculation of the duration of the authorised stay of such third-country nationals;
the generation of alerts to Member States when the authorised stay has expired; and
the recording and storage of the date, time and place of refusal of entry of third-country nationals whose entry for a short stay has
been refused.
Scope: in order to verify compliance with the provisions on the authorised period of stay on the territory of the Member States, the EES will
apply to third country nationals crossing the external borders of the Schengen area, both those requiring a visa and those visa-exempt,
admitted for a short stay of 90 days in any 180 day period.
The system will replace the obligation to stamp the passports of third-country nationals, which is applicable to all Member States.
Implementation: the amended text provides that the EES should be operated at the external borders of the Member States that apply the
Schengen acquis in full. It will also be operated by Member States not yet applying the Schengen acquis in full, but for whom:
the verification in accordance with the applicable Schengen evaluation procedure has already been successfully completed;
passive access to the Visa Information System (VIS) has been granted;
the provisions of the Schengen acquis relating to the Schengen Information System (SIS), have been put into effect in accordance
with the relevant Act of Accession.
Accordingly, Bulgaria and Romania will operate the EES.
Data: the EES should record and process alphanumeric data and biometric data primarily for the purposes of improving the management of
external borders, preventing irregular immigration and facilitating the management of migration flows. It will also be possible to access
personal EES data in order to contribute to the prevention, detection and investigation of terrorist offences and of other serious criminal
offences. Any search must be duly justified and proportionate in the light of the interest invoked.
Four fingerprints per visa-exempt thirdcountry national should be registered in the EES, if physically possible. The fingerprints of visa-holding
third-country nationals should be checked against the VIS. The facial image of both visa-exempt and visa holding third-country nationals
should be registered in the EES.
The data retention period is set at three years. If there is no exit record following the date of expiry of the period of authorised stay, the data
shall be stored for a period of five years.
The use of the EES, including the capturing of biometric data, must be in accordance with the safeguards laid down in the Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union and in the United
Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Access to data: data stored in the EES will be accessible to border authorities, consular officers dealing with visas and authorities that check,
within the territory of the Member States whether the conditions for entry to, or stay on, the territory of the Member States are fulfilled.
For the purposes of the prevention, detection and investigation of terrorist offences or of other serious criminal offences, Member States
designated authorities and Europol may obtain access to the EES for consultation.
Technical architecture of the EES: the EES will be comprised of the following:

a Central System (EES Central System) which operates a computerised central database of biometric and alphanumeric data;
a National Uniform Interface in each Member State, enabling the connection of the EES Central System to the national border
infrastructures in Member States in a secure manner;
a Secure Communication Channel between the EES Central System and the VIS Central System;
a secure and encrypted Communication Infrastructure between the EES Central System and the National Uniform Interfaces;
a web service to allow: (i) thirdcountry nationals to verify at any moment the remaining authorised stay; (ii) carriers to verify whether
third-country nationals holding a Schengen short-stay visa issued for one or two entries have already used the number of entries
authorised by their visa;
a data repository established at central level in order to enable the generation of statistics and reporting.
Eu -LISA shall establish a Secure Communication Channel between the EES Central System and the VIS Central System to enable
interoperability between the EES and the VIS.
Communication of data to third countries: the amended text provides for the possibility of transferring personal data obtained by Member
States to third countries: (i) in an exceptional case of urgency; (ii) where there is an imminent danger associated with a terrorist offence or
where there is an imminent danger to the life of a person associated with a serious criminal offence. An imminent danger to the life of a person
should be understood as covering a danger arising from a serious criminal offence committed against that person such as grievous bodily
injury, illicit trade in human organs and tissue, kidnapping, illegal restraint and hostage-taking, sexual exploitation of children and child
pornography, and rape.
Such data should only be transferred to a third country if the reciprocal provision of any information on entry/exit records held by the
requesting third country to the Member States operating the EES is ensured.

