Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2186(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2015 discharge: European Banking Authority (EBA)

Subject
8.70.03.05 2015 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
CONT

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

Appointed
05/08/2016

AYALA SENDER Inés
Shadow rapporteur

ZDECHOVSKÝ Tomáš

FITTO Raffaele

ALI Nedzhmi

DE JONG Dennis

JÁVOR Benedek

VALLI Marco
KAPPEL Barbara
Committee for opinion
ECON

Rapporteur for opinion

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
15/09/2016

LOONES Sander

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
11/07/2016

Non-legislative basic document published

04/10/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

22/03/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

28/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

26/04/2017

Debate in Parliament

27/04/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

27/04/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st

COM(2016)0475

Summary

A8-0079/2017

Summary

T8-0163/2017

Summary

reading/single reading
27/04/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

29/09/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2186(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/07502

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2016)0475

11/07/2016

EC

Summary

N8-0115/2016
OJ C 449 01.12.2016, p. 0072

13/09/2016

CofA

Summary

Committee draft report

PE593.863

03/02/2017

EP

Supplementary non-legislative basic
document

05873/2017

07/02/2017

CSL

PE595.630

01/03/2017

EP

PE599.877

06/03/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0079/2017

28/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0163/2017

27/04/2017

EP

Summary

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

Committee opinion

ECON

Amendments tabled in committee

Summary

Final act
Budget 2017/1654
OJ L 252 29.09.2017, p. 0198 Summary

2016/2186(DEC) - 11/07/2016 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2015, as part of
the 2015 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the European Banking Authority (EBA).
CONTENT: the organisational governance of the EU consists of institutions, agencies and other EU bodies whose expenditure is included in
the general budget of the Union.
The EU's operational expenditure of these institutions takes different forms, depending on how the money is paid out and managed.
From 2014 onwards, the Commission classifies its expenditure as follows:
Direct management: the budget is implemented directly by the Commission services.
Indirect management: the Commission confers tasks of implementation of the budget to bodies of EU law or national law, such as the
EU agencies.
Shared management: under this method of budget implementation tasks are delegated to Member States. About 80 % of the
expenditure falls under this management mode covering such areas as agricultural spending and structural actions.
This Commission document concerns the EU's consolidated accounts for the year 2015 and details how spending by the EU institutions and
bodies was carried out. The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide financial information on the activities of the institutions, agencies
and other bodies of the EU from an accrual accounting and budgetary perspective.
It is the responsibility of the Commission's Accounting Officer to prepare the EU's consolidated annual accounts and ensure that they present
fairly, in all material aspects, the financial position, the result of the operations and the cash flows of the EU institutions and bodies, including
the European Banking Authority (EBA), with a view to granting discharge.

Discharge procedure: the final step of a budget lifecycle is the discharge of the budget for a given financial year. It represents the political
aspect of the external control of budget implementation and is the decision by which the European Parliament, acting on a Council
recommendation, "releases" the Commission (and other EU bodies) from its responsibility for management of a given budget by marking the
end of that budget's existence. The European Parliament is the discharge authority within the EU.
The discharge procedure may produce three outcomes: (i) the granting; (ii) postponement or; (iii) the refusal of the discharge.
The final discharge report including specific recommendations to the Commission for action is adopted in plenary by the European Parliament
and are subject to an annual follow up report in which the Commission outlines the concrete actions it has taken to implement the
recommendations made.
Each agency is subject to its own discharge procedure, including the EBA.
The European Banking Authority: the EBA, which is located in London (UK), was established by Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the
European Parliament and of the Council and has the aim of protecting the public interest and contributing to the stability and efficiency of the
banking system in the short, medium and long term for the economy of the European Union.
As regards the EBAs accounts, these are presented in detail in the document on the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for
2015:
Commitment appropriations:
-

committed: EUR 33 million;

-

paid: EUR 33 million;

-

carried-over: 0.

Payment appropriations:
-

committed: EUR 39 million;

-

paid: EUR 35 million;

-

carried-over: EUR 3 million.

For further details on expenditure, please refer to the final accounts of the European Banking Authority.

2016/2186(DEC) - 13/09/2016 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Court of Auditors report on the annual accounts of the European Banking Authority (EBA) for the financial
year 2015, together with the Authoritys reply.
CONTENT: in accordance with the tasks conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the Court
presents to the European Parliament and to the Council, in the context of the discharge procedure, a Statement of Assurance as to the
reliability of the annual accounts of each institution, body or agency of the EU, and the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying
them, on the basis of an independent external audit.
This audit focused on the annual accounts of the European Banking Authority (EBA). In brief, the Authoritys task is to contribute to the
establishment of high-quality common regulatory and supervisory standards and practices, to contribute to the consistent application of legally
binding Union acts, to stimulate and facilitate the delegation of tasks and responsibilities among competent authorities, to monitor and assess
market developments in the area of its competence and to foster depositor and investor protection.
Statement of Assurance: pursuant to the provisions of Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the Court
has audited:
the annual accounts of the Authority, which comprise the financial statements and the reports on the implementation of the budget for
the financial year ended 31 December 2015;
the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying those accounts.
Opinion on the reliability of the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the Authoritys annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects, its
financial position as at 31 December 2015 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the
provisions of its Financial Regulation and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer.
Opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts: the Court considers that the transactions underlying the
annual accounts for the year ended 31 December 2015 are legal and regular in all material respects.
The report made a series of observations on the budgetary and financial management of the Authority, accompanied by the latters response.
The main observations may be summarised as follows:
The Courts observations:
budgetary management: the Court noted that carry-overs of committed appropriations for administrative expenditure were high at EUR
1 487 794. They mainly concerned an unresolved issue regarding the outstanding VAT to be paid on the balancing charge of the
Authoritys new building and an invoice concerning business rates by the UK Valuations Office. Weaknesses were also noted in the
estimation of IT needs, in particular concerning outsourced services, which affect the Authoritys budgetary management of related
expenses.
The Authoritys reply:
budgetary management: the Authority stated that it puts considerable effort into minimising carry-overs for justified needs. Moreover, it

noted that outsourced services are governed by properly procured framework contracts. The EBA has further improved the
documentation of its estimation of needs for procurement procedures and has reduced the IT appropriations by just EUR 4.3 % over
the course of the year.
Lastly, the Court of Auditors report also contained a summary of the key figures in 2015:
Budget: EUR 33.4 million (in payment appropriations).
Staff: 156 including officials, temporary and contract staff and seconded national experts.

2016/2186(DEC) - 07/02/2017 Supplementary non-legislative basic document
Having examined the revenue and expenditure accounts for the financial year 2015 and the balance sheet as at 31 December 2015 of the
European Banking Authority (EBA), as well as the Court of Auditors' report on the annual accounts of the Authority for the financial year 2015,
accompanied by the Authority's replies to the Court's observations, the Council recommended the European Parliament to give a discharge to
the Director of the Authority in respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2015.
The Council welcomed the Court's opinion that, in all material respects, the Authority's annual accounts present fairly its financial position as at
31 December 2015 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the provisions of the
Authority's Financial Regulation, and that the underlying transactions for 2015 are legal and regular in all material respects.
Nevertheless, it made the following remark:
financial programming: the Council noted that a high level of commitment appropriations was carried over to 2016. It encouraged the
Authority to continue improving its financial programming and monitoring of the budget implementation, in order to reduce the level of
commitments carried over to the following financial year to the minimum strictly necessary and to continue refining the estimation of
needs in order to avoid in the future the weaknesses observed by the Court.

2016/2186(DEC) - 28/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Inés AYALA SENDER (S&D, ES) on discharge in respect of the implementation of
the budget of the European Banking Authority (EBA) for the financial year 2015.
The committee called on the European Parliament to grant the Executive Director of the Authority discharge in respect of the implementation
of the EBAs budget for the financial year 2015.
Noting that the Court of Auditors stated that it had obtained reasonable assurance that the annual accounts of the Authority for the financial
year 2015 were reliable and that the underlying transactions were legal and regular, Members called on Parliament to approve the closure of
the Authoritys accounts. They made, however, a number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is
granted, in addition to the general recommendations that appear in the draft resolution on performance, financial management and control of
EU agencies:
Authoritys financial statements: Members noted that the final budget of the Authority for the financial year 2015 was EUR 33 419 863,
representing a decrease of 0.54 % compared to 2014. This was due to the Authoritys recently established nature.
Budget and financial management: Members emphasised that any potential increases in the Authority's means must be accompanied
by adequate prioritisation measures. They suggested that, as the Authority's workload is increasingly shifting from legislative tasks to
supervisory convergence and enforcement, the Authority's budget and manpower should be allocated accordingly.
Members also made a series of observations regarding commitments, carry-overs, transfers, procurement, recruitment procedures, the
prevention and management of conflicts of interests and internal audits.
As regards performance, Members took note that the Authority closely cooperates with the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions
Authority (EIOPA) and the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) across all support functions in order to reduce administrative
costs. They look forward to further efforts from the Authority to enhance cooperation with other decentralised agencies and further reduce
overhead and administrative costs.
Effects of Brexit: Members recalled that, on 23 June 2016, the citizens of the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union.
Following the outcome of the UK referendum, the Authority, whose headquarters is in London, drafted impact assessments for all support
areas, namely IT, human resources, procurement, corporate services and communications, which will be updated according to developments.
Members noted that, excluding the rental contract, there would be no financial penalties for early termination of these contracts if the
applicable notice periods of between one and three months are observed. However, Members expressed concern regarding the potential
operational and business continuity risks and related costs of a relocation decision.
Lastly, Members noted that the Authority signed a 12-year-lease with an end date of 8 December 2026 and that, under normal contractual
conditions, there is a liability to pay the full rent for the entire period. They observed, however, that the Authority negotiated a break-out clause
at the midway point of the contract, meaning that if the clause is exercised, the Authority would be relieved of the obligation to pay the rent for
the final six years.
They called on the Commission and the Council, following the triggering of the Article 50 by the Government of the United Kingdom, to make
the merits and the decision making process on the Authority's reallocation destination transparent and democratic.

2016/2186(DEC) - 27/04/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

The European Parliament decided to grant the Executive Director of the European Banking Authority (EBA) discharge in respect of the
implementation of EBAs budget for the financial year 2015.
The vote on the decision on discharge covers the closure of the accounts (in accordance with Annex IV, Article 5 (1) (a) to Parliaments Rules
of Procedure).
Noting that the Court of Auditors has stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that EBAs annual accounts for the financial year 2015
are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular, Parliament adopted by 505 votes to 122 with 5 abstentions, a resolution
containing a series of recommendations, which form an integral part of the decision on discharge and which add to the general
recommendations set out in the resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies.
These recommendations may be summarised as follows:
Authoritys financial statements: Parliament noted that the final budget of the Authority for the financial year 2015 was
EUR 33 419 863, representing a decrease of 0.54 % compared to 2014. This was due to the Authoritys recently established nature.
Budget and financial management: Parliament emphasised that any potential increases in the Authority's means must be
accompanied by adequate prioritisation measures. It suggested that, as the Authority's workload is increasingly shifting from legislative
tasks to supervisory convergence and enforcement, the Authority's budget and manpower should be allocated accordingly.
Parliament also made a series of observations regarding commitments, carry-overs, transfers, procurement, recruitment procedures, the
prevention and management of conflicts of interests and internal audits.
As regards performance, it took note that the Authority closely cooperates with the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority
(EIOPA) and the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) across all support functions in order to reduce administrative costs. It
looks forward to further efforts from the Authority to enhance cooperation with other decentralised agencies and further reduce overhead and
administrative costs.
It noted that it was a driving force behind the establishment of a new and comprehensive European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS),
including the three European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs), to ensure better financial supervision system after the financial crisis.
Effects of Brexit: Parliament recalled that, on 23 June 2016, the citizens of the United Kingdom voted to leave the European Union. Following
the outcome of the UK referendum, the Authority, whose headquarters is in London, drafted impact assessments for all support areas, namely
IT, human resources, procurement, corporate services and communications, which will be updated according to developments.
It noted that, excluding the rental contract, there would be no financial penalties for early termination of these contracts if the applicable notice
periods of between one and three months are observed. However, Parliament expressed concern regarding the potential operational and
business continuity risks and related costs of a relocation decision.
Parliament also noted that the Authority signed a 12-year-lease with an end date of 8 December 2026 and that, under normal contractual
conditions, there is a liability to pay the full rent for the entire period. It observed, however, that the Authority negotiated a break-out clause at
the midway point of the contract, meaning that if the clause is exercised, the Authority would be relieved of the obligation to pay the rent for the
final six years.
It called on the Commission and the Council, following the triggering of the Article 50 by the Government of the United Kingdom, to make the
merits and the decision making process on the Authority's reallocation destination transparent and democratic.
Financial contribution of the Authority: lastly, Parliament recalled that the Authoritys mixed financing arrangement, which relies heavily on
contributions from national competent authorities, is inadequate, inflexible, burdensome and a potential threat to its independence. It therefore
called on the Commission, in the White Paper planned for the second quarter of 2016 and in a legislative proposal to be presented by 2017, to
launch a different financing arrangement based on a separate budget line in the budget of the Union and on the complete replacement of the
contributions from national authorities by fees paid by market participants.

2016/2186(DEC) - 27/04/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the European Banking Authority (EBA) for the financial year 2015.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2017/1654 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of
the European Banking Authority for the financial year 2015.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the Executive Director of the European Banking Authority
for the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2015.
This decision is in line with the European Parliament's resolution adopted on 27 April 2017 and comprises a series of observations that form
an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 27 April 2017).
Amongst Parliaments main observations in the resolution accompanying the discharge decision, the latter acknowledged furthermore that the
euro lost significant value against the pound sterling over the course of the year, forcing the Authority to request an amending budget of EUR
1.9 million, which was adopted in August 2015, in order to enable it to meet its financial obligations.
Parliament also stressed that the Authority should establish a secure channel for whistleblowers in the framework of its action plan for the
years to come.
Effects of Brexit: Parliament welcomed the detailed information provided by the Authority to the discharge authority on its current contractual
commitments and liabilities linked to its physical presence in the UK. It noted that, excluding the rental contract, the Authority's maximum
potential contractual commitment or liability is EUR 33.16 million, but that there would be no financial penalties for early termination of these
contracts if the applicable notice periods of between one and three months are observed.
It expressed concern, however, regarding the potential operational and business continuity risks and related costs of a relocation decision,
such as the extra procurement work that may need to be carried out at short notice if the timing does not provide for a sufficient transition to a
new location.

