Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Directive

2016/0170(COD)

Procedure completed
28/04/2017 Decision to enter into interinstitutional negotiations confirmed
by plenary (Rule 69c)

Safety rules and standards for passenger ships: simplification; Commission
delegated and implementing powers
Amending Directive 2009/45/EC 2007/0257(COD)
Subject
3.20.03 Maritime transport: passengers and freight
3.20.03.01 Maritime safety

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
TRAN

Rapporteur

Transport and Tourism

Appointed
15/06/2016

AIUTO Daniela
Shadow rapporteur

POGLIESE Salvatore
Domenico

AYALA SENDER Inés

FOSTER Jacqueline

BILBAO BARANDICA
Izaskun

KOULOGLOU Stelios

TAYLOR Keith
ARNAUTU
Marie-Christine
Committee for opinion
ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

JURI

Legal Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
11/07/2016
BERGERON Joëlle

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Mobility and Transport

Commissioner
BULC Violeta

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the
Regions

Key events
06/06/2016

Legislative proposal published

COM(2016)0369

Summary

09/06/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

01/12/2016

Debate in Council

11/04/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

11/04/2017

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

21/04/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0167/2017

11/07/2017

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE609.506
GEDA/A/(2017)007854

03/10/2017

Debate in Parliament

04/10/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

23/10/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

15/11/2017

Final act signed

15/11/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

30/11/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

Summary

T8-0373/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0170(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Directive
Amending Directive 2009/45/EC 2007/0257(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 100-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

TRAN/8/06750

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0369

06/06/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0189

06/06/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0190

06/06/2016

EC

PE594.004

18/01/2017

EP

Committee draft report

PE594.091

07/02/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE601.014

14/03/2017

EP

Committee opinion

JURI

Summary

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Coreper letter confirming interinstitutional
agreement

A8-0167/2017

21/04/2017

EP

GEDA/A/(2017)007854

21/06/2017

CSL

T8-0373/2017

04/10/2017

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

Summary

Summary

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

Final act
Directive 2017/2108
OJ L 315 30.11.2017, p. 0040
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2016/0170(COD) - 06/06/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to simplify and streamline the existing EU passenger ship safety regulatory framework (safety standards).
PROPOSED ACT: Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an equal footing
with the Council.
BACKGROUND : Directive 2009/45/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council aims to attain a high level of safety and to remove
barriers to trade, by setting harmonised safety standards at an appropriate level for passenger ships and craft operating domestic services.
This Directive has brought about a common high safety level across the EU and important internal market benefits.
In the spirit of the Commission's REFIT and Better Regulation agenda and as an immediate
follow-up to the fitness check on EU passenger ship safety legislation, the Commission considers that the existing EU passenger ship safety
regulatory framework should be simplified and streamlined in order to (i) maintain EU rules where necessary and proportionate; (ii) ensure
their correct implementation; and (iii) eliminate potential overlap of obligations and inconsistencies between related pieces of legislation.
The fitness check revealed that:
the Directive currently applies only to 70 out of 1950 small ships, the key safety aspects of which have been already defined by
Member States;
several Member States certify aluminium ships under this Directive while few others do not. This creates an uneven situation resulting
from a different interpretation of the Directive's scope related to the definition of an 'equivalent material' and the applicability of the
corresponding fire safety standards.
The proposal is fully consistent with the simplification proposals amending Council Directive 98/41/EC and the proposal replacing Council
Directive 1999/35/EC
CONTENT: the Commission proposes to clarify and simplify the safety rules and standards for passenger ships so that they are easier to
update, monitor and enforce.
The main amendments proposed are as follows:
to eliminate a number of redundant, inconsistent or incorrect references, in particular related to the Intact Stability Code, High Speed
Craft Code, bow height definition, port area (aligned with the definition of a sea area), place of refuge (removed), port State (replacing
host State in line with the review of Directive 1999/35/EC), and recognised organisation;
to provide for new definitions of traditional ship, sailing ship, pleasure yacht and craft, tender, and equivalent material. In particular, the
definition of traditional ship should be better aligned with Directive 2002/59/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council18, while
preserving the current criteria of the year of built and type of material. The definition of pleasure yacht and craft should be further
aligned with the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS Convention);
to clarify the definition of equivalent material to avoid the non-uniform application arising from the interpretation of the Directive's scope
related to the definition of aluminium as an equivalent material and the applicability of the corresponding fire safety standards. Ships
built from such materials have to be certified according to this Directive;
to exclude ships below 24 metres from the scope of the Directive, and to clarify that the Directive does not apply to sailing ships,
tenders and ships referred to in the SPS code (including offshore supply vessels);
to simplify the definitions of sea areas C and D (references to the criteria of 'where the shipwrecked persons can land' and 'distance to
place of refuge' removed), and to clarify that the sea areas is established by Member States in such a manner that the inner border of
sea area D is clearly delimited;
to update the reference to the host State (replaced by port State), to clarify that the conversion requirement is meant to apply to all
ships (when converted in a passenger ships), not only to existing passenger ones and to insert a new date of application for ships built

in equivalent material before the entry into force of the Directive;
to increase transparency and to facilitate the notification of exemptions, equivalencies and additional safety measures by Member
States, by providing for the establishment of a database by the Commission. It should include the notified measures in their draft and
adopted form;
to clarify that only ships fulfilling the requirements of this Directive are provided with a Passenger ship Safety Certificate;
to align Directive 2009/45/EC with the provisions of the Treaty on the Functioning of the EU with regard to the power to adopt
delegated and implementing acts conferred on the Commission.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2016/0170(COD) - 21/04/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Transport and Tourism adopted the report by Daniela AIUTO (EFDD, IT) on the proposal for a directive of the European
Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2009/45/EC on safety rules and standards for passenger ships.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading, following the ordinary legislative procedure,
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Ship-carried tenders: these are used to ferry passengers from passenger ships (primarily cruise ships) directly to shore and back, undertaking
the shortest sea route. Members considered that they are not appropriate, and should not be used, for other types of services such as coastal
sightseeing excursions. Such excursions should be undertaken by ships that meet the requirements for passenger ships of the coastal State.
The Commission should assess the need for common European requirements, including mandatory provisions, for ship carried tenders and
should issue specific guidelines before 2020, in order to inter alia facilitate the harmonisation of rules and standards between Member States.
Sailing ships: in order to maintain harmonised safety levels for sailing ships in Europe, Members suggested that the Commission assess and
issue common requirements for this category, publishing specific guidelines by 2020.
Off-shore service ships: according to Members, Member States should actively support the International Maritime Organisations (IMO) work as
regards the definition of adequate safety standards for offshore vessels.
These vessels which carry workers require different and specific rules on safety.
Smaller ships below 24 metres: in determining the specific standards for smaller ships, Member States should act in accordance with
guidelines to be published by the Commission. In doing so, they should take into consideration other international agreements and
conventions by the IMO, and should avoid introducing additional requirements that go beyond existing international rules.
Aluminium: Members considered that aluminium should be regarded as an equivalent material to steel in all Member States. Given that the
national rules in place for aluminium ships ensure a high level of safety for passengers sailing domestically, Member States should be allowed
to keep their current stricter fire prevention methods.
The amended text provides that a Member State that has more than 60 passenger ships made from aluminium alloy flying its flag may exempt,
until 8 years after the transposition date, passenger ships of Classes B, C and D which are made from aluminium alloy from the provisions of
this Directive, provided there is no reduction in the level of safety.
Transparency: any exemption, equivalency or additional safety measure taken by the Member States should be published on a publically
accessible website. The general modalities of access to and use of the respective database should be specified in due time by the
Commission, through an appropriate delegated act.
Safety standards and ship crew: in order to maintain a high level of safety throughout a passenger ships voyage, Members suggested that
account be taken of not only the vessels physical structure and equipment but also the link between safety, shipboard living, working
conditions and training of the crew. The Directive should spell out that the EU needs to take a proactive approach in this role, including in the
international framework, in order to monitor and improve the social dimension of workers on the ships.
Greece: Greece should be allowed to derogate from the requirement of establishing sea areas. In particular, it should be allowed to classify
passenger ships according to the specific sea route that they operate, while maintaining the same criteria for classes of passenger ships and
the same safety standards.

2016/0170(COD) - 04/10/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 659 votes to 12, with 17 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Directive 2009/45/EC on safety rules and standards for passenger ships.
Improving the application of Directive 2009/45/EC should aim at maintaining a high level of safety, and hence of passenger confidence ,
through common safety standards.
The European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as
follows:
Scope: the amended text specifies that Member States which do not have seaports and which have no passenger ships or craft flying their flag
that fall within the scope of this Directive may derogate from the provisions of this Directive.
As long as these conditions are met, those Member States would not be obliged to transpose this Directive.
Those Member States which intend to avail themselves of such derogation shall communicate to the Commission if the conditions are met and

shall inform the Commission annually thereafter of any subsequent change.
Categorisation of sea areas and classes of passenger ships: the sea areas shall be divided into different categories, namely areas A, B, C and
D, the characteristics of which are specified in the Directive.
Each Member State shall: (i) establish, and update when necessary, a list of the sea areas within its jurisdiction; (ii) determine the inner border
of the sea area closest to the line of its coast; (iii) publish the list in a public database available on the Internet site of the competent maritime
authority; (iv) notify to the Commission when modifications are made to the list.
Passenger ships shall be divided into different classes (A, B, C and D) depending on the sea area in which they may operate.
Aluminium ships: an amendment provides that a Member State which has, on the date of entry into force of the Directive, more than 60
passenger ships built in aluminium alloy flying its flag may, up to 12 years after the date of transposition, exempt from the provisions of the
Directive Class B, C and D passenger ships built in aluminium, provided that the level of safety is not compromised.
Passenger ships below 24 meters in length: these vessels shall be excluded from the scope of that Directive and should be subject to specific
safety standards determined by Member States. When defining these standards, Member States shall comply with the guidelines to be
published by the Commission. Those guidelines should take into consideration any international agreements and conventions by the IMO, as
appropriate, and should avoid introducing additional requirements that go beyond existing international rules.
Ship-carried tenders are used to ferry passengers from passenger ships directly to shore and back, taking the shortest safe sea route. They
are not appropriate, and shall not be used, for other types of services such as coastal sightseeing excursions . Such excursions shall be
undertaken by ships that meet the requirements for passenger ships of the coastal State. Member States and the Commission shall promote
discussion at the IMO with a view to reviewing the guidelines in order to increase safety. The Commission shall assess the need to make the
guidelines mandatory.
Sailing ships: in order to maintain a harmonised level of safety for sailing ships in Europe, Parliament suggested that the Commission should
assess and define the common requirements for this category of passenger ship by 2020.
Offshore installations served by vessels: Member States are called on to actively support the work of the International Maritime Organisation
(IMO) in defining appropriate safety standards for offshore vessels. These ships carry workers who require different and specific safety rules.
Safety standards and ship crew: in order to maintain a high level of safety throughout a passenger ships voyage, the amended text stressed
for account to be taken of the link between safety, shipboard living, working conditions and training, including training related to cross-border
rescue and emergency operations in line with international requirements. The social dimension for seafarers on board ship should be
improved.
Greece: Greece shall be allowed to derogate from the requirement of establishing sea areas. In particular, it shall be allowed to classify
passenger ships according to the specific sea route that they operate, while maintaining the same criteria for classes of passenger ships and
the same safety standards.

