Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2276(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Online platforms and the digital single market

Subject
2.40 Free movement of services, freedom to provide
3.30.06 Information and communication technologies
3.30.25 International information networks and society, internet

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Rapporteur

Industry, Research and Energy

Appointed
17/06/2016

JUVIN Philippe

17/06/2016

VIRKKUNEN Henna
Shadow rapporteur

BLANCO LÓPEZ José

GUTIÉRREZ PRIETO
Sergio

DALTON Daniel

VAN BOSSUYT
Anneleen

KALLAS Kaja

MLINAR Angelika

DE JONG Dennis

MATIAS Marisa

REDA Julia

REIMON Michel

BORRELLI David

ZULLO Marco
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

17/06/2016
VIRKKUNEN Henna
Shadow rapporteur

BLANCO LÓPEZ José

GUTIÉRREZ PRIETO
Sergio

DALTON Daniel

VAN BOSSUYT
Anneleen

KALLAS Kaja

MLINAR Angelika

DE JONG Dennis

MATIAS Marisa

REDA Julia

REIMON Michel

BORRELLI David

ZULLO Marco
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI

Legal Affairs

Appointed

16/02/2017
LE GRIP Constance

Key events
25/05/2016

Non-legislative basic document published

24/11/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

24/11/2016

Referral to joint committee announced in
Parliament

18/05/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

31/05/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

09/06/2017

Debate in Council

14/06/2017

Debate in Parliament

15/06/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

15/06/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/06/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

COM(2016)0288

Summary

A8-0204/2017

Summary

T8-0272/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2276(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052; Rules of Procedure
of the European Parliament EP 055

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CJ18/8/08311

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2016)0288

25/05/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0172

26/05/2016

EC

Committee draft report

PE599.814

28/02/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE602.752

27/03/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE602.753

27/03/2017

EP

PE601.100

08/05/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0204/2017

31/05/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0272/2017

15/06/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)574

20/11/2017

Committee opinion

JURI

Summary

2016/2276(INI) - 25/05/2016 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to present a targeted approach in order to respond to questions related to online platforms.
BACKGROUND: in its communication setting out a strategy for the digital single market , the Commission committed itself to undertaking a
comprehensive assessment of the role of platforms, including in the sharing economy, and of online intermediaries.
Online platforms play a key role in innovation and growth in the Digital Single Market. They have revolutionised access to information and have
connected buyers and sellers in a better and more efficient way. The growing importance of the digital economy linked with the diversity and
fast changing nature of platform ecosystems also raise new policy and regulatory challenges.
A number of globally competitive platforms originated in Europe, for example Skyscanner and BlaBlaCar. However, on the whole, the EU
currently represents only 4% of the total market capitalisation of the largest online platforms: the vast majority of platforms originate in the US
and Asia.
Creating the right framework conditions and the right environment is essential to retain, grow and foster the emergence of new online platforms
in Europe.
CONTENT: based on the results of a wide-ranging public consultation, the Commission Communication: (i) outlines the key issues identified in
the assessment of online platforms; (ii) presents the Commissions position on both the innovation opportunities and the regulatory challenges
presented by online platforms, and sets out its approach to supporting their further development in Europe.
This communication underlines the need to adopt policy and regulatory approaches that respond directly to the challenges, and which are
flexible and future-proof. Where appropriate, self-regulation and co-regulation can often achieve better outcomes for enabling the development
of strong platform ecosystems in Europe and can complement or reinforce the existing legislation that already governs certain activities of
online platforms.
As a general rule, when elaborating responses to issues related to online platforms, the Commission will take the following principles into
account:
1) A level playing field for comparable digital services: many online platforms have challenged conventional business models. Yet these new
services are not subject to the same rules as traditional telecommunications services.
As a general principle, comparable digital services should be subject to the same or similar rules, duly considering opportunities for reducing
the scope and extent of existing regulation. To achieve a level playing field, there may be a need to simplify, modernise and lighten existing

regulation, but avoid imposing a disproportionate burden on new as well as traditional business models.
The Commission will apply these principles to the current reviews of the EU telecoms rules and as part of the review of the ePrivacy Directive
in 2016, for example when it reviews rules relating to confidentiality regarding OTT online communications services.
(2) Responsible behaviour of online platforms: compared with 2010, children aged 11 to 16 are now up to 20% more likely to be exposed to
hate messages. Children are also more easily exposed to adult material online, often with unrestricted access. As of July 2015, more than 400
hours of video content was uploaded to YouTube every minute. Rights holders across several content sectors claimed that their content is
used by some online platforms without authorisation.
The dialogue with IT companies towards a code of conduct on illegal hate speech online, the EU Internet Forum on terrorism content and the
CEO Coalition to make the internet a better place for children are important examples of multi-stakeholder engagement processes aimed at
finding common solutions to voluntarily detect and fight illegal or harmful material online.
The Commission will maintain the existing intermediary liability regime. It intends to:
suggest, in its proposal for an updated Audio-visual Media Services Directive, that video sharing platforms put in place measures to
protect minors from harmful content and to protect everyone from incitement to hatred;
achieve, in the next copyright package, a fairer allocation of value generated by the online distribution of copyright protected content;
encourage coordinated EU-wide self regulatory efforts by online platforms;
explore the need for guidance on the liability of online platforms when putting in place voluntary, good-faith measures to fight illegal
content online;
review the need for formal notice-and-action procedures.
3) Confidence, transparency and fairness: a 2016 Eurobarometer survey on online platforms showed that 72% of responding consumers were
concerned about the data collected about them or their activities. Over 75% of respondents among the general public consider that more
transparency is needed, in particular on how platform remuneration influences the listing of search engine results, on identification of the
actual supplier of services or products, and on possible misleading practices including fake reviews.
Commission action will focus on:
a legislative proposal revising the Regulation on Consumer Protection Cooperation, to facilitate more efficient enforcement of EU
consumer law in cross-border situations;
the review of the guidance on the Unfair Commercial Practices Directive, an update of existing consumer protection rules in relation to
platforms, and monitoring the implementation of the principles for comparison tools ;
encouraging online platforms to recognise other electronic identification (eID) means that offer the same reassurance as their own.
4) Safeguarding a fair and innovation-friendly business environment: the Commission will carry out a targeted fact-finding exercise on B2B
practices in the online platforms environment, e.g. (voluntary) dispute resolution mechanisms, transparency and better information measures
or guidance. In particular, the Commission will engage closely with stakeholders and public authorities. By spring 2017, the Commission will
determine whether additional EU action is needed.
5) Keeping markets open and non-discriminatory to foster a data-driven economy: as part of the free flow of data initiative scheduled for the
end of 2016, the Commission will consider options for effective approaches, including technical standards, to facilitate switching and portability
of data among different online platform and cloud computing services, both for business and private users.
The Commission considers it important to ensure that future developments of digital technologies remain open.

2016/2276(INI) - 31/05/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy and the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted an
own-initiative report by Henna VIRKKUNEN (EPP, FI) and Philippe JUVIN (EPP, FR) on online platforms and the digital single market.
The report has been adopted pursuant to Rule 55 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament (Joint committee meetings).
Members noted that the evolving development and use of internet platforms for a wide set of activities, including commercial activities and
sharing goods and services, have changed the ways in which users and companies interact with content providers, traders and other
individuals offering goods and services.
However, online platforms present new policy and regulatory challenges.
While welcoming the different initiatives already proposed under the Digital Single Market Strategy for Europe, Members stressed the
importance of coordination and consistency between these initiatives. Although many EU policies also apply to online platforms, in some cases
the legislation is not enforced properly or is interpreted in a different manner in the Member States. In this respect, Members called for an
effective and attractive regulatory environment for the development of online and digital business in Europe.
Definition of platforms: the report stated that one single EU definition or one size fits all approach would not help the EU succeed in the
platform economy due to factors such as the great variety of types of existing online platforms and their areas of activity, as well as the
fast-changing environment of the digital world.
Members are aware of the importance of avoiding the fragmentation of the EU internal market which could occur through a proliferation of
regional or national rules and definitions, as well as of the need to provide certainty and a level playing field for both businesses and
consumers.
Therefore, they called for online platforms to be distinguished and defined in relevant sector-specific legislation at EU level according to their
characteristics, classifications and principles and following a problem-driven approach.
The report welcomed the Commission's ongoing work on online platforms, including consultations of stakeholders and carrying out an impact
assessment. It called on it to propose, if necessary, regulatory or other measures based on this in-depth analysis.

Members considered that a clear difference should be made between B2C and B2B platforms, in light of the emerging B2B online platforms
which are key to the development of the industrial internet, such as cloud-based services or data-sharing platforms enabling communication
between internet of things (IoT) products. The Commission should address the barriers in the single market that are hindering the growth of
such platforms.
Fair competition: the report stressed the importance of fair and effective competition between online platforms in order to promote consumer
choice and avoid the creation of monopolies or dominant positions that distort markets. There is a need for net neutrality and fair and
non-discriminatory access to online platforms as a prerequisite for innovation and a truly competitive market. The Commission is urged to
streamline the funding schemes for related initiatives facilitating the digitisation process.
Clarifying the liability of intermediaries: the report noted that the current EU intermediary limited liability regime is one of the issues raised by
certain stakeholders and that it should be further clarified. Guidance is needed from the Commission on the implementation of the intermediary
liability framework in order to allow online platforms to comply with their responsibilities and the rules on liability, enhance legal certainty, and
increase user confidence.
The Commission is called on to develop further steps to that effect, recalling that platforms not playing a neutral role as defined in the
e-commerce Directive cannot claim liability exemption.
Members urged online platforms to strengthen measures to tackle illegal and harmful content online and welcomed the Commission's intention
to propose measures for video-sharing platforms in order to protect minors and for taking down content related to hate speech.
They considered that the liability rules for online platforms should allow the tackling of issues related to illegal content and goods in an efficient
manner, for instance by applying due diligence while maintaining a balanced and innovation-friendly approach.
They also stressed the importance of taking action against the dissemination of fake news and called on the online platforms to provide users
with tools to denounce fake news in such a way that other users can be informed that the veracity of the content has been contested.
The Commission is called on to analyse in depth the current situation and legal framework with regard to fake news, and to verify the
possibility of legislative intervention to limit the dissemination and spreading of fake content.
Moreover, Members stressed the need for online platforms to combat illegal goods and content and unfair practices (e.g. the reselling of
entertainment tickets at extortionate prices), through regulatory measures complemented by effective self-regulatory measures (e.g. through
clear terms of use and appropriate mechanisms to identify repeat offenders, or by setting up specialised content moderation teams and tracing
dangerous products) or hybrid measures.
As regards data ownership, the report noted that compliance with the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) and the Network and
Information Security (NIS) Directive is essential. There is a need to inform users of the exact nature of the data collected and the ways it will be
used.
Informing and empowering citizens and consumers: the report underlined that the internet of the future cannot succeed without users' trust in
online platforms. Online platforms are encouraged to offer customers clear, comprehensive and fair terms and conditions and ensure
user-friendly ways of presenting their terms and conditions, processing of data, legal and commercial guarantees and possible costs.
Lastly, Members called for an assessment of current legislation and self-regulation mechanisms in order to determine whether they provide
adequate protection to users, consumers and businesses, against the backdrop of an increasing number of complaints and the investigations
opened by the Commission into several platforms.

2016/2276(INI) - 15/06/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 393 votes to 146 with 74 abstentions a resolution on online platforms and the digital single market.
Members considered that e-platforms are beneficial to the digital economy and to today's society because they offer consumers a wider range
of choices and create new markets. However, they posed new policy and regulatory challenges.
Although many EU policies also apply to online platforms, in some cases the legislation is not correctly applied or interpreted differently across
the Member States. In this regard, Members called for an effective and attractive regulatory environment to help develop digital and online
activities in Europe.
Definition of platforms: Parliament agreed that one single EU definition or one size fits all approach would not help the EU succeed in the
platform economy due to the wide variety of platform types and their areas of activity, as well as the rapidly changing environment of the digital
world.
However, MEPs are aware of the importance of avoiding the fragmentation of the EU's internal market as well as of the need to provide
certainty and a level playing field for both businesses and consumers.
They therefore suggested that e-platforms should be distinguished and defined in the relevant sectoral legislation at EU level according to their
characteristics, classifications and principles and following a problem-driven approach. They called on the Commission to propose, where
appropriate, regulatory or other measures based on a thorough impact assessment.
Parliament believed that a clear distinction should be drawn between B2C and B2B platforms
in light of the emerging B2B online platforms which are key to the development of the industrial internet, such as cloud-based services or
data-sharing platforms enabling communication between internet of things (IoT) products. The Commission should address barriers in the
single market that hinder the growth of these platforms.
A level playing field: the resolution stressed the importance of fair and effective competition between online platforms in order to promote
consumer choice and to avoid the creation of monopolies or dominant positions that distort markets. Network neutrality and equitable and
non-discriminatory access to online platforms is a prerequisite for innovation and a truly competitive market.
Members urge the Commission to prioritise actions that allow European start-ups and online platforms to emerge and scale up.

Clarifying intermediaries' liability: Parliament noted that the current limited liability regime for intermediaries was one of the issues raised by
some stakeholders and needed to be clarified. It stressed the following points:
the Commission should provide guidance to enable online platforms to comply with their responsibilities, improve legal certainty and
increase user confidence;
platforms should strengthen measures to combat illegal and harmful online content: Members welcomed the Commission's intention to
propose measures for video sharing platforms to protect and remove content related to hate speech;
liability rules for on-line platforms should address issues related to illegal content and goods: the Commission should define and clarify
notification and withdrawal procedures to combat such content;
platforms should provide users with tools to report false news so that other users are informed: the Commission should analyse the
possibility of legislative intervention to limit the spread of false content.
In addition, Members stressed the need to:
set up online platforms to combat illegal goods and content and unfair practices (for example, resale of entertainment tickets at
exorbitant prices) through regulatory measures supplemented by regulatory measures, (e.g. to identify repeat offenders, or by setting
up specialised content moderation teams and tracing dangerous products) or hybrid measures;
ensure compliance with the General Data Protection Regulation and the Directive on Network and Information Security, underlining
the need to inform users of the exact nature of the data collected and the ways they will be used.
Informing and empowering citizens and consumers: the resolution underlined that the internet of the future cannot succeed without users trust
in online platforms. Online platforms should offer customers clear, comprehensive and fair terms and conditions and ensure user-friendly ways
of presenting their terms and conditions, processing of data, legal and commercial guarantees and possible costs, while avoiding complex
terminology.
Lastly, Members called for an assessment of current legislation and self-regulatory mechanisms to determine whether they provide adequate
protection for users, consumers and businesses in the context of a growing number of complaints and investigations initiated by the
Commission concerning several platforms.

