Procedure file
Basic information
2016/0061(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure completed

Enhanced cooperation in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the
recognition and enforcement of decisions on property regimes of
international couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property regimes
and property consequences of registered partnerships

Subject
4.10.02 Family policy, family law, parental leave
7.40.02 Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
15/03/2016

CAVADA Jean-Marie
Shadow rapporteur

VOSS Axel

GEBHARDT Evelyne

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

HAUTALA Heidi
Committee for opinion
LIBE

FEMM

Rapporteur for opinion

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Justice and Consumers

Appointed

Commissioner
JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
02/03/2016

Initial legislative proposal published

28/04/2016

Legislative proposal published

12/05/2016

Debate in Council

24/05/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

25/05/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

30/05/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

07/06/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

COM(2016)0108

Summary

08112/2016

Summary

A8-0192/2016

Summary

07/06/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

10/06/2016

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

10/06/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

16/06/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0241/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0061(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 329-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/05942

Documentation gateway
Initial legislative proposal

COM(2016)0108

02/03/2016

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE580.491

29/03/2016

EP

Legislative proposal

08112/2016

28/04/2016

CSL

Summary

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0192/2016

30/05/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0241/2016

07/06/2016

EP

Summary

Final act
Decision 2016/954
OJ L 159 16.06.2016, p. 0016 Summary

2016/0061(NLE) - 02/03/2016 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to authorise enhanced cooperation in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions on
the property regimes of international couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of
registered partnerships.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the Union has set itself the objective of maintaining and developing an area of freedom, security and justice in which the free
movement of persons is ensured. Currently citizens face different practical problems with asset planning when they are in an international
marriage or partnership. The problem is that it is very difficult for people to know which courts have jurisdiction and which laws are applicable
to their personal situation and the situation of their property. As a result, they face unintended, and disadvantageous, consequences not only in
the daily management of their assets but also when the couple separates or a member of the couple dies.
On 16 March 2011, the Commission adopted a proposal for a Council Regulation on jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and
enforcement of decisions in matters of matrimonial property regimes and a proposal for a Council Regulation on jurisdiction, applicable law
and the recognition and enforcement of decisions regarding the property consequences of registered partnerships.
The European Parliament delivered its favourable opinion and comments on the two proposals on 10 September 2013.
However, the Council concluded at its meeting of 3 December 2015 that it would not be possible to reach an EU-wide agreement in relation to
both regulations within a reasonable period of time.

To date, the Commission has received requests from 17 Member States indicating their wish to establish enhanced cooperation: Sweden,
Belgium, Greece, Croatia, Slovenia, Spain, France, Portugal, Italy, Malta, Luxembourg, Germany, the Czech Republic, the Netherlands,
Austria, Bulgaria and Finland.
The Commission concluded that all the legal conditions set by the Treaties for the authorisation of the establishment of enhanced cooperation
are fulfilled. It considered that the benefits of establishing enhanced cooperation are numerous compared to the option of keeping the status
quo and that the advantages of establishing enhanced cooperation in this area outweigh any possible disadvantage.
CONTENT: the draft Council Decision ? based on Article 329(1), of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) ? seeks to
authorise enhanced cooperation between 17 requesting Member States in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and
enforcement of decisions on the property regimes of international couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property regimes and the
property consequences of registered partnerships.
Proposals for specific measures implementing the enhanced cooperation are submitted together with this proposal.
According to the Commission, enhanced cooperation would bring citizens the following benefits:
treating the property regimes of couples coherently under a single applicable law and by one single authority;
enabling international couples to choose the law to be applied to their property;
increasing legal certainty for international couples by applying - as a general rule - the law of the State with which the couple has the
closest connection;
enabling citizens to have various procedures handled by the same court and thereby avoid parallel proceedings and conflicting judicial
decisions;
improving predictability for international couples by simplifying procedures for the recognition and enforcement of decisions and the
circulation of authentic instruments throughout the EU.
Enhanced cooperation shall be open at any time to all Member States, in accordance with Article 328 of the TFEU.

2016/0061(NLE) - 28/04/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to authorise enhanced cooperation in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions on
the property regimes of international couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of
registered partnerships.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: on 16 March 2011, the Commission adopted a proposal for a Council Regulation on jurisdiction, applicable law and the
recognition and enforcement of decisions in matters of matrimonial property regimes, and a proposal for a Council Regulation on jurisdiction,
applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions regarding the property consequences of registered partnerships.
Given that it was impossible to reach an agreement within a reasonable period by the Union as a whole for the adoption of the regulations, 18
Member States indicated that they wished to establish enhanced cooperation: Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Germany, Greece,
Spain, France, Croatia, Italy, Cyprus, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, Slovenia, Finland and Sweden.
CONTENT: the draft Council Decision seeks to authorise enhanced cooperation between 18 requesting Member States in the area of
jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions on the property regimes of international couples, covering both
matters of matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships.
Enhanced cooperation aims to develop judicial cooperation in civil matters having cross-border implications based on the principle of mutual
recognition of judgments, and to ensure the compatibility of the rules applicable in the Member States concerning conflict of laws.
Enhanced cooperation should provide a clear and comprehensive legal framework in the area of the property regimes of international couples,
covering both matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships, in the participating Member States,
ensure adequate solutions for citizens in terms of legal certainty, predictability and flexibility, and facilitate the circulation of decisions and
authentic instruments between the participating Member States.
For further details, please refer to the summary of the Commissions initial legislative proposal from 2.3.2016.

2016/0061(NLE) - 30/05/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the report by Jean-Marie CAVADA (ADLE, FR) on the draft Council decision authorising enhanced
cooperation in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions on the property regimes of international
couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships.
The committee recommended the European Parliament to give its consent to the draft Council decision.
In a short justification accompanying the recommendation, it is recalled that the decision to have recourse to enhanced cooperation in the area
of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions in the matter of property regimes of international couples,
covering both matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships, has been taken since negotiations
between all Member States, on the Commissions initial proposals of 2011, reached stalemate.
In the area of family law, legislative acts are adopted by the Council acting unanimously after consulting the European Parliament. Parliament
had given its consent in 2013 to the 2011 draft acts, but by the end of 2015 it became clear that it would not be possible for all Member States
to agree to the proposals.

Enhanced cooperation was therefore clearly the ideal solution, since 23 Member States agreed in principle to the adoption of these two acts.
In early 2016, the Commission therefore drew up, using the enhanced cooperation procedure, new proposals for acts.
According to members, enhanced cooperation in the in the area of the property regimes of international couples meets the conditions set out.
It is clearly in accordance with the objectives of the Union and in the interest of its citizens.
This recommendation therefore proposed that Parliament consents to enhanced cooperation in this area.

2016/0061(NLE) - 07/06/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 550 votes to 68, with 36 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision authorising
enhanced cooperation in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions on the property regimes of
international couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships.
In line with the recommendation made by the Committee on Legal Affairs, Parliament gave its consent to the draft Council Decision.
The draft Council Decision seeks to authorise enhanced cooperation between 18 requesting Member States (Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech
Republic, Germany, Greece, Spain, France, Croatia, Italy, Cyprus, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, Slovenia, Finland
and Sweden) in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions on the property regimes of
international couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships.
Enhanced cooperation aims to develop judicial cooperation in civil matters having cross-border implications based on the principle of mutual
recognition of judgments, and to ensure the compatibility of the rules applicable in the Member States concerning conflict of laws.

2016/0061(NLE) - 09/06/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to authorise enhanced cooperation in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions on
the property regimes of international couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of
registered partnerships.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2016/954 authorising enhanced cooperation in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the
recognition and enforcement of decisions on the property regimes of international couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property
regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships.
CONTENT: the Council Decision authorises enhanced cooperation between 18 requesting Member States in the area of jurisdiction,
applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions on the property regimes of international couples, covering both matters of
matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships: Belgium, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Germany,
Greece, Spain, France , Croatia, Italy, Cyprus, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, Austria, Portugal, Slovenia, Finland and Sweden.
To recall, on 16 March 2011, the Commission adopted a proposal for a Council Regulation on jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition
and enforcement of decisions in matters of matrimonial property regimes, and a proposal for a Council Regulation on jurisdiction, applicable
law and the recognition and enforcement of decisions regarding the property consequences of registered partnerships.
Given that it was concluded that it would not be possible to reach an agreement within a reasonable period by the Union as a whole for the
adoption of the regulations, the 18 Member States requested enhanced cooperation.
Enhanced cooperation should:
provide a clear and comprehensive legal framework in the area of the property regimes of international couples, covering both
matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships, in the participating Member States;
ensure adequate solutions for citizens in terms of legal certainty, predictability and flexibility;
facilitate the circulation of decisions and authentic instruments between the participating Member States.
Enhanced cooperation aims to develop judicial cooperation in civil matters having cross-border implications based on the principle of mutual
recognition of judgments, and to ensure the compatibility of the rules applicable in the Member States concerning conflict of laws. It respects:
(i) the Treaties and Union law in this area; (ii) the competences, rights and obligations of those Member States that do not participate in it; (iii)
principles enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
Enhanced cooperation shall be open, at any time, to all Member States, in accordance with Article 328 TFEU.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 9.6.2016.

