Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2067(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Implementation of the common security and defence policy (based on the
annual report from the Council to the European Parliament on the common
foreign and security policy)

Subject
6.10.02 Common security and defence policy (CSDP); WEU, NATO

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
01/02/2016

PAŞCU Ioan Mircea
Shadow rapporteur

DANJEAN Arnaud

VAN ORDEN Geoffrey

RADOŠ Jozo

LÖSING Sabine

VALERO Bodil

Key events
19/04/2016

Debate in Council

28/04/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

24/10/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

03/11/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

22/11/2016

Debate in Parliament

23/11/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

23/11/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

23/11/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2067(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A8-0317/2016

Summary

T8-0440/2016

Summary

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 132-p1

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/06326

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE582.127

29/07/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE589.209

15/09/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0317/2016

03/11/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0440/2016

23/11/2016

EP

Summary

2016/2067(INI) - 03/11/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Ioan Mircea PA?CU (RO, S&D) on the implementation of the Common
Security and Defence Policy (based on the Annual Report from the Council to the European Parliament on the Common Foreign and Security
Policy).
The strategic context: Members noted that the European security environment has deteriorated considerably, becoming more fluid, more
complex, more dangerous and less predictable. The lack of communication when reacting to threats constitutes one of the vulnerabilities of the
Unions action. Europe lacks the resilience to effectively tackle hybrid threats, which often have a cross-border dimension. The EU should be
prepared to deal with structural changes in the international security landscape. Members noted with concern that terrorism being carried out
by radical Islamist organisations and individuals is targeting Europe on an unprecedented scale, bringing the European way of life under
pressure. The EU is called upon to adapt to these security challenges, in particular by using the existing CSDP tools more efficiently, in
coherence with other external and internal instruments.
A strong preventive policy based on comprehensive deradicalisation programmes is called for.
A revised and more robust CSDP: Members are convinced that, as a result, a thorough and substantial revision of the CSDP is needed in
order to enable the EU and its Member States to contribute in a decisive way to the security of the Union, to the management of international
crises and to asserting the EUs strategic autonomy.
A successful revision of the CSDP will have to fully integrate the EU Member States in the process from the very beginning in order to avoid
the risk of deadlocks in the future. Members called on the Member States and the EU for appropriate investment in security and defence.
The report emphasised that the establishment of permanent structured cooperation will make it possible to develop self-defence or a
permanent structure for self-defence which can strengthen crisis management operations.
It underlined that the CSDP should be based on a strong collective defence principle and efficient financing and that it should be implemented
in coordination with international institutions in the field of security and defence, and in full complementarity with NATO. The EU should
encourage the Member States to meet NATO capacity goals, which require a minimum level of defence spending of 2 % of GDP.
Members welcomed the presentation by the VP/HR of the Global Strategy for the European Unions Foreign and Security Policy (EUGS) as a
necessary and positive development for the institutional framework in which the CFSP and the CSDP will operate and develop. However, they
regretted the low involvement of Member States in preparing the EUGS.
Members underlined the fact that the appropriate resources need to be allocated for the implementation of the EUGS and for an effective and
more robust CSDP. They also reiterated their previous calls for the development of a European Defence White Book and urged the Council to
prepare this document without delay.
The CSDP and the integrated approach to crises: Members stressed the importance of creating a permanent EU headquarters for civilian and
military CSDP missions and operations, from where an integrated operational staff would support the entire planning cycle, from the initial
political concept to detailed plans. The report stressed that this would not be a replication of NATO structures, but instead would constitute the
necessary institutional arrangement to strengthen CSDP missions and operations planning and conduction capabilities.
On funding, Members called for more flexibility in the EU's financial rules, in order to support its ability to respond to crises. They also called for
a revision of the Athena mechanism in order to extend its scope to all costs related, first, to rapid reaction operations and deployment of the
EU Battlegroups, and then to all military operations.
European defence cooperation: Members considered that the development of a stronger defence industry would strengthen the strategic
autonomy and technological independence of the EU. They are convinced that enhancing the EUs status as a security provider in Europe's
neighbourhood needs adequate, sufficient capabilities and a competitive, efficient and transparent defence industry.
The report underlined the need to further deepen cyber defence cooperation and to ensure full cyber-resilience of CSDP missions. The
Council is urged to incorporate cyber defence as an integral part of its defence debates.
Lastly, Members welcomed the Preparatory Action for CSDP-related research and asked for adequate funding for the remainder of the current
multiannual financial framework (MFF). They supported the development of an EU Defence Research Programme under the next MFF
(2021-2027). They called for European law to be reformed to allow European defence industries to benefit from the same state aids as those
enjoyed by US industries.

2016/2067(INI) - 23/11/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 386 votes to 237, with 74 abstentions, a resolution on the implementation of the Common Security and
Defence Policy (based on the Annual Report from the Council to the European Parliament on the Common Foreign and Security Policy).
The strategic context: Members recalled that the European security environment has deteriorated considerably, becoming more fluid, more
complex, more dangerous and less predictable. The lack of communication when reacting to threats constitutes one of the vulnerabilities of the
Unions action.
Europe lacks the resilience to effectively tackle hybrid threats, which often have a cross-border dimension. Therefore, the EU should be
prepared to deal with structural changes in the international security landscape and with challenges that include interstate conflicts, state
collapse and cyber-attacks, as well as with the security implications of climate change.
Parliament noted with concern that terrorism being carried out by radical Islamist organisations and individuals is targeting Europe on an
unprecedented scale, bringing the European way of life under pressure. The EU is called upon to adapt to these security challenges, in
particular by using the existing CSDP tools more efficiently, in coherence with other external and internal instruments.
Members called for better cooperation and coordination between Member States, especially in the field of counter-terrorism and they called for
a strong preventive policy based on comprehensive deradicalisation programmes.
A revised and more robust CSDP: Parliament is convinced that, as a result, a thorough and substantial revision of the CSDP is needed in
order to enable the EU and its Member States to contribute in a decisive way to the security of the Union, to the management of international
crises and to asserting the EUs strategic autonomy.
A successful revision of the CSDP will have to fully integrate the EU Member States in the process from the very beginning in order to avoid
the risk of deadlocks in the future. Parliament called on the Member States and the EU for appropriate investment in security and defence.
The resolution emphasised that the establishment of permanent structured cooperation will make it possible to develop self-defence which can
strengthen crisis management operations.
It underlined that the CSDP should be based on a strong collective defence principle and efficient financing and that it should be implemented
in coordination with international institutions in the field of security and defence, and in full complementarity with NATO. The EU should
encourage the Member States to meet NATO capacity goals, which require a minimum level of defence spending of 2 % of GDP .
Members welcomed the roadmap on CSDP presented by the VP/HR. While underlining the need to reinforce the military component of the
CSDP, Parliament strongly supported that Member States coordinate investment in security and defence, as well as increasing financial
support for defence research at EU level.
Members also welcomed the presentation by the VP/HR of the Global Strategy for the European Unions Foreign and Security Policy (EUGS)
as a necessary and positive development for the institutional framework in which the CFSP and the CSDP will operate and develop. They
regretted the low involvement of Member States in preparing the EUGS.
In this regard, Parliament reiterated its previous calls for the development of a European Defence White Book and urged the Council to
prepare this document without delay.
The CSDP and the integrated approach to crises: Members stressed the importance of creating a permanent EU headquarters for civilian and
military CSDP missions and operations, from where an integrated operational staff would support the entire planning cycle, from the initial
political concept to detailed plans. The report stressed that this would not be a replication of NATO structures, but instead would constitute the
necessary institutional arrangement to strengthen CSDP missions and operations planning and conduction capabilities.
Parliament welcomed the idea of regionalised CSDP missions present in the Sahel, notably because it corresponds to the will of countries in
the sub-region to increase cooperation in the field of security through the G5 Sahel platform. It also considered that the EU should coherently
support the Member States involved in the coalition against the self-styled Islamic State by setting up a CSDP operation, focused on training,
in Iraq.
On funding, Parliament called for more flexibility in the EU's financial rules, in order to support its ability to respond to crises. It also called for a
revision of the Athena mechanism in order to extend its scope to all costs related, first, to rapid reaction operations and deployment of the EU
Battlegroups, and then to all military operations.
European defence cooperation: Parliament considered that the development of a stronger defence industry would strengthen the strategic
autonomy and technological independence of the EU. It is convinced that enhancing the EUs status as a security provider in Europe's
neighbourhood needs adequate, sufficient capabilities and a competitive, efficient and transparent defence industry.
The resolution underlined the need to further deepen cyber defence cooperation and to ensure full cyber-resilience of CSDP missions. The
Council is urged to incorporate cyber defence as an integral part of its defence debates.
Lastly, Parliament welcomed the Preparatory Action for CSDP-related research and asked for adequate funding for the remainder of the
current multiannual financial framework (MFF). It supported the development of an EU Defence Research Programme under the next MFF
(2021-2027). It called for European law to be reformed to allow European defence industries to benefit from the same state aids as those
enjoyed by US industries.

