Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2309(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

2016 Commission report on Montenegro

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Montenegro, from 06/2006

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/10/2016

TANNOCK Charles
Shadow rapporteur

KOVATCHEV Andrey

ANDROULAKIS Nikos

RADOŠ Jozo

LUNACEK Ulrike

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

Key events
19/01/2017

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/02/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

15/03/2017

Debate in Parliament

16/03/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

16/03/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

16/03/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2309(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A8-0050/2017

Summary

T8-0094/2017

Summary

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/08483

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE595.414

10/01/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE595.415

08/02/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0050/2017

02/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0094/2017

16/03/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)390

22/08/2017

2016/2309(INI) - 02/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Charles TANNOCK (ECR, UK) on the 2016 Commission Report on
Montenegro.
Members stated that further progress has been made in the accession negotiations and that Montenegro is currently considered to be the
most advanced in its accession process. They encouraged Montenegro to accelerate the pace of reforms, to increase its efforts towards
meeting all benchmarks and to continue focusing on the fundamentals of the accession process. They stressed that it is essential to deliver
concrete results with a strong and sustainable implementation record.
Elections in Montenegro: Members commended the competent authorities for holding parliamentary elections on 16 October 2016 in an
orderly manner in which fundamental freedoms were generally respected. However, they regretted the alleged attempts by Russia to influence
developments in Montenegro and expressed concern about the serious incidents, including an alleged coup détat, that occurred on 16 October
2016, and called on the Vice-President of the European Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy
(VP/HR), and on the Commission, to follow closely ongoing investigations by the competent authorities.
Reforms: Members called for measures to allocate the appropriate budgetary resources for public administration reform strategys
implementation, as well as to rationalise public administration. They noted progress in judiciary reform, including improved institutional
capacities but remained concerned about undue influence on judicial independence, especially with regard to the appointment of judges.
On the institutional and parliamentary level, Members are deeply concerned about the polarised domestic climate and the boycott of
parliamentary activities by members of the opposition. They invited the opposition to take advantage of the Montenegrin Prime Ministers offer
of participation in the government in exchange for ending the boycott. They also reiterated the need for all political forces to reengage in
constructive dialogue and cooperation within the Montenegrin parliament.
War crimes: while noting some progress in the follow-up of war crimes, Members called on the competent authorities to effectively investigate,
prosecute, try and punish war crimes as well as to fight impunity in line with international standards.
Fight against corruption: Members welcomed the further strengthening of the anti-corruption framework, inter alia by making the
Anti-Corruption Agency (ACA) fully operational and by appointing special anti-corruption prosecutors. They considered it essential to ensure
their independence in investigations.
They stressed the need to continue to develop the track record in organised crime cases, especially as regards trafficking in human beings,
drugs and money laundering, to ensure stronger inter-agency cooperation and to further intensify regional and international cooperation in the
fight against organised crime.
Members welcomed the new strategy to combat violent extremism in 2016-2018, which complements the national strategy for preventing and
combating terrorism, money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
Minorities: Members noted some progress in improving the situation of minorities. They welcomed the adoption of a 2016-2020 strategy and
action plan for the social inclusion of the Roma and Egyptian communities. They called for an appropriate budget to be allocated so that the
action plan may be implemented properly. They encouraged the competent authorities to continue to strengthen efforts to safeguard the rights
of LGBTI people.
As regards women, Members remained concerned about continued gender-based domestic and sexual violence, the lack of prosecutions and
the proper sentencing of perpetrators in line with international standards. They called for measures to establish adequate protection services
and to implement the 2016-2020 strategy on combating domestic violence.
Freedom of the media: Members remained concerned about the state media freedom in Montenegro. Once again, they urged the competent
authorities to resolve the long-pending cases of violence against, intimidation of and threats made to journalists.
Employment: Members noted the modest decline in unemployment. They welcomed the new 2016-2020 national strategy for employment and
human resources development and the accompanying 2016 action plan even though they continued to express concern about high youth

unemployment and poor labour mobility.
Environment: Members stressed the need to reinforce implementation efforts, in particular in water quality, nature protection and waste
management, as well as related administrative capacities at all levels. They expressed concern about significant delays in establishing
protection over the potential Natura 2000 site of Ulcinj Salina.
Neighbourhood: Members encouraged Montenegro to continue to address, in a constructive and neighbourly spirit, outstanding bilateral issues
with its neighbours, including the unresolved border demarcation issues with Serbia and Croatia.

2016/2309(INI) - 16/03/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 471 votes to 98, with 41 abstentions, a resolution on the 2016 Commission Report on Montenegro.
Parliament stated that further progress has been made in the accession negotiations and that Montenegro is currently considered to be the
most advanced in its accession process.
It encouraged Montenegro to increase its efforts towards meeting all benchmarks and to continue focusing on the fundamentals of the
accession process. It stressed that it is essential to deliver concrete results with a strong and sustainable implementation record.
Elections in Montenegro: Parliament commended the competent authorities for holding parliamentary elections on 16 October 2016 in an
orderly manner in which fundamental freedoms were generally respected. It regretted the need for the temporary shutdown of internet
communication platforms on election day as well as the hacking of the website of the Centre for Democratic Transition (CDT) a few days
before the elections. It called on the competent authorities to address shortcomings and investigate the alleged procedural irregularities,
including alleged abuses of state funds and abuse of office.
Parliament expected that the independence of the State Election Commission (SEC) be sustained and recalled that an improvement of the
electoral process is required in order to build full confidence in the electoral process. Parliament noted with regret that the opposition has not
recognised the results of the elections. It recognised the attempts by external actors to discredit the electoral process and the difficulties this
has caused. It expected the new government to maintain the political commitment to the reform process and invites all political parties to
re-engage in a constructive dialogue.
Parliament noted with concern the alleged attempts by Russia to influence developments in Montenegro, as this pattern of behaviour in the
region could imply further destabilisation of the Western Balkans. It is also concerned about the serious incidents, including an alleged coup
détat, that occurred on 16 October 2016, and called on the Vice-President of the European Commission / High Representative of the Union for
Foreign Affairs and Security Policy (VP/HR), and on the Commission, to follow closely ongoing investigations by the competent authorities.
Reforms: Parliament called for measures to allocate the appropriate budgetary resources for public administration reform strategys
implementation, as well as to rationalise public administration. It noted progress in judiciary reform, including improved institutional capacities
but remained concerned about undue influence on judicial independence, especially with regard to the appointment of judges.
On the institutional and parliamentary level, Parliament expressed deep concern about the polarised domestic climate and the boycott of
parliamentary activities by members of the opposition. It invited the opposition to take advantage of the Montenegrin Prime Ministers offer of
participation in the government in exchange for ending the boycott. It also reiterated the need for all political forces to reengage in constructive
dialogue and cooperation within the Montenegrin parliament.
War crimes: while noting some progress in the follow-up of war crimes, Parliament called on the competent authorities to effectively
investigate, prosecute, try and punish war crimes as well as to fight impunity in line with international standards.
Fight against corruption: Parliament welcomed the further strengthening of the anti-corruption framework, inter alia by making the
Anti-Corruption Agency (ACA) fully operational and by appointing special anti-corruption prosecutors. It considered it essential to ensure their
independence in investigations.
It also stressed the need to continue to develop the track record in organised crime cases, especially as regards trafficking in human beings,
drugs and money laundering, to ensure stronger inter-agency cooperation and to further intensify regional and international cooperation in the
fight against organised crime.
Members welcomed the new strategy to combat violent extremism in 2016-2018, which complements the national strategy for preventing and
combating terrorism, money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
Minorities: Parliament noted some progress in improving the situation of minorities, including the completion of several legislative reforms to
ensure greater alignment with EU and international human rights standards. Parliament expressed concern about the double discrimination
faced by women and girls in the Roma community and about the access of the Roma community, Egyptian minorities and Ashkali people to
healthcare, education, housing and employment. It encouraged the competent authorities to continue to strengthen efforts to safeguard the
rights of LGBTI people. It also called on the competent authorities to make further efforts to raise awareness about anti-discrimination among
the general public.
It also remained concerned that most public buildings, including medical centres and university faculties, are still not accessible to people with
disabilities.
Members called for further measures to protect the multi-ethnic identity of the Boka Kotorska region.
As regards women, Parliament remained concerned about continued gender-based domestic and sexual violence, the lack of prosecutions
and the proper sentencing of perpetrators in line with international standards. It called for measures to establish adequate protection services
and to implement the 2016-2020 strategy on combating domestic violence.
Freedom of the media: Parliament remained concerned about the state media freedom in Montenegro. Once again, it urged the competent
authorities to resolve the long-pending cases of violence against, intimidation of and threats made to journalists.
Employment: Members noted the modest decline in unemployment. They welcomed the new 2016-2020 national strategy for employment and
human resources development and the accompanying 2016 action plan even though they continued to express concern about high youth

unemployment and poor labour mobility.
Environment: Parliament called on the competent authorities to undertake the necessary protection and conservation measures in relation to
Lake Skadar in order to maintain its ecological characteristics including its ecological integrity. It called on the government to ensure that the
transformation of national parks into a state-owned limited company will have no adverse effects on their protection. It recognised, in this
context, the concerns expressed in the framework of the Ramsar and Bern conventions regarding the special-purpose spatial plan for the
Skadar Lake National Park, including the Porto Skadar Lake project. Members expressed concern about significant delays in establishing
protection for areas which are identified as potential Natura 2000 network areas such as the Skadar Lake National Park and recalled the need
for sound and strategic environmental impact assessments in line with the EU acquis and international standards.
Neighbourhood: Parliament welcomed Montenegros proactive participation and continued constructive role in good-neighbourly cooperation. It
encouraged further cooperation in this regard. It also encouraged it to continue to address, in a constructive and neighbourly spirit, outstanding
bilateral issues with its neighbours, including the unresolved border demarcation issues with Serbia and Croatia, as early as possible in the
accession process.
It reiterated its call for authorities to help resolve the succession issues relating to the legacy of the former Socialist Federal Republic of
Yugoslavia (SFRY) and welcomed the border demarcation agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina and the ratification of the border
demarcation agreement with Kosovo.
Lastly, it urged Montenegro to comply with the EU common positions on the integrity of the Rome Statute and related EU guiding principles on
bilateral immunity agreements.

