Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2078(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Responsible ownership and care of equidae

Subject
3.10.04.02 Animal protection

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AGRI

Rapporteur

Agriculture and Rural Development

Appointed
23/02/2016

GIRLING Julie
Shadow rapporteur

MELO Nuno

DENANOT Jean-Paul

MÜLLER Ulrike

HAZEKAMP Anja

SEBASTIA TALAVERA
Jordi Vicent

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Agriculture and Rural Development

ANDRIUKAITIS Vytenis Povilas

Key events
12/05/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

25/01/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

01/02/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/03/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/03/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

14/03/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/03/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2078(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A8-0014/2017

Summary

T8-0065/2017

Summary

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AGRI/8/06482

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE589.295

16/09/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE594.022

16/11/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0014/2017

01/02/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0065/2017

14/03/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)390

22/08/2017

2016/2078(INI) - 01/02/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted an own-initiative report by Julie GIRLING (ECR, UK) on the responsible
ownership and care of equidae.
Members recognised the considerable economic, environmental and social contribution equidae make throughout the EU. The equid sector
within the EU is worth over EUR 100 billion per annum and created approximately 900 000 jobs.
The estimated 7 million equidae in the European Union perform varied roles: sources of milk and meat, they are also competition and
recreational animals to working animals in transport, tourism, rehabilitation and education therapies, research animals, and wild and semi-feral
animals.
Against this background, Members called for greater EU-level acknowledgement of the equid sector, and its benefits for the rural economy,
and for it to be incorporated to a greater extent into the various CAP components.
They encouraged Member States to create an environment in which on-farm businesses are viable.
European guidelines: the Commission is called upon to develop European guidelines on good practice in the equid sector for various users
and specialists.
These guidelines should:
consider the multifunctional role of equidae by including guidance on responsible breeding, animal health and welfare and the benefits
of equid sterilisation, work in tourism, agriculture and forestry, species-appropriate transport and slaughter and protection against
fraudulent practices, including doping;
be accessible in a variety of formats and languages to breeders, equid societies, farms, stables, sanctuaries, transporters and
slaughterhouses.
Sustainable tourism: Members called on the Commission to recommit to the development of a European charter for sustainable and
responsible tourism, with the dissemination of clear information to help tourists and stakeholders make welfare-friendly choices when deciding
whether or not to use the services of working equidae.
Protection of animals and responsible ownership: the Commission is called upon to establish new reference centres for the protection of
animals and to improve levels of full compliance with, and consistent enforcement of, legislation, along with the dissemination of information
and best practice relating to animal welfare.
The Commission is called upon to :
propose a shortened maximum journey limit for all movements of horses for slaughter;
enhance scientific research in order to develop humane methods of slaughter better suited to equidae.
Members recalled the principle that any cruel, abusive treatment by any owner, trainer, groom or other person must not be tolerated anywhere,
under any circumstances. Members States are called upon to apply stricter legislation regarding the mistreatment and to properly investigate
reports of inhumane practices and welfare violations vis-à-vis equidae.
Lastly, the report stressed the need to clarify the VAT law applying to the equine sector in order to foster the development of a growth- and
jobs-oriented equine sector.

2016/2078(INI) - 14/03/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 656 votes to 10, with 27 abstentions, a resolution on the responsible ownership and care of equidae.

Members recognised the considerable economic, environmental and social contribution equidae make throughout the EU. The equid sector
within the EU is worth over EUR 100 billion per annum and created approximately 900 000 jobs.
Recognition of the sector: the estimated 7 million equidae in the European Union perform varied roles: sources of milk and meat, they are also
competition and recreational animals to working animals in transport, tourism, rehabilitation and education therapies, research animals, and
wild and semi-feral animals.
Against this background, Parliament called for greater EU-level acknowledgement of the equid sector, and its benefits for the rural economy,
and for it to be incorporated to a greater extent into the various CAP components. It encouraged Member States to create an environment in
which on-farm businesses are viable.
European guidelines: the Commission is called upon to develop European guidelines on good practice in the equid sector for various users
and specialists.
These guidelines should:
consider the multifunctional role of equidae by including guidance on responsible breeding, animal health and welfare and the benefits
of equid sterilisation, work in tourism, agriculture and forestry, species-appropriate transport and slaughter and protection against
fraudulent practices, including doping;
be accessible in a variety of formats and languages to breeders, equid societies, farms, stables, sanctuaries, transporters and
slaughterhouses.
Member States are urged to establish voluntary labour guidelines including daily working hours and rest periods to protect working equidae
from overwork and economic exploitation.
Sustainable tourism: Parliament called on the Commission to recommit to the development of a European charter for sustainable and
responsible tourism and to issue guidance on welfare-friendly tourism models with regard to working equidae.
Protection of animals and responsible ownership: Members stressed that equid owners should have a minimum level of knowledge of equid
husbandry, and that with ownership comes a personal responsibility for the standard of health and welfare of the animals in their care.
Parliament underlined the importance of Animal Welfare Reference Centres for the protection and welfare of the animals and called on the
Commission to:
encourage and collect exchanges of good practices and educational programmes of different Member States in terms of animal
welfare;
conduct regular audits of the slaughterhouses on their territory that are licensed to take equidae and increase the number of
inspections on donkey and horse milk farms;
ensure the proper application and effective and uniform enforcement of existing EU legislation on animal transport and propose a
shortened maximum journey limit for all movements of horses for slaughter;
promote exchanges of good practices to facilitate rational use of medicines for equidae;
enhance scientific research in order to develop humane methods of slaughter better suited to equidae.
Members recalled the principle that any cruel, abusive treatment by any owner, trainer, groom or other person must not be tolerated anywhere,
under any circumstances. Members States are called upon to apply stricter legislation regarding the mistreatment and to properly investigate
reports of inhumane practices and welfare violations vis-à-vis equidae.
Lastly, the resolution stressed the need to clarify the VAT law applying to the equine sector in order to foster the development of a growth- and
jobs-oriented equine sector. It also called on the Commission and the Member States to support the work of the European Horse Network and
the European State Stud Association, as they play an important role in the development of the European horse sector.

