Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2174(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2015 discharge: European Food Safety Authority (EFSA)

Subject
8.70.03.05 2015 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

CONT

Appointed
05/08/2016

AYALA SENDER Inés
Shadow rapporteur

ZDECHOVSKÝ Tomáš

FITTO Raffaele

ALI Nedzhmi

DE JONG Dennis

JÁVOR Benedek

VALLI Marco
KAPPEL Barbara
Committee for opinion
ENVI

Rapporteur for opinion

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Appointed
31/08/2016

LA VIA Giovanni

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
11/07/2016

Non-legislative basic document published

04/10/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

22/03/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

29/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

26/04/2017

Debate in Parliament

27/04/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

27/04/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st

COM(2016)0475

Summary

A8-0098/2017

Summary

T8-0168/2017

Summary

reading/single reading
27/04/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

29/09/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2174(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/07477

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2016)0475

11/07/2016

EC

Summary

N8-0120/2016
OJ C 449 01.12.2016, p. 0097

13/09/2016

CofA

Summary

PE592.293

31/01/2017

EP

Supplementary non-legislative basic
document

05873/2017

07/02/2017

CSL

Committee draft report

PE593.881

07/02/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE599.885

06/03/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0098/2017

29/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0168/2017

27/04/2017

EP

Summary

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

Committee opinion

ENVI

Summary

Final act
Budget 2017/1669
OJ L 252 29.09.2017, p. 0225 Summary

2016/2174(DEC) - 11/07/2016 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2015, as part of
the 2015 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).
CONTENT: the organisational governance of the EU consists of institutions, agencies and other EU bodies whose expenditure is included in
the general budget of the Union.
The EU's operational expenditure of these institutions takes different forms, depending on how the money is paid out and managed.
From 2014 onwards, the Commission classifies its expenditure as follows:
Direct management: the budget is implemented directly by the Commission services.
Indirect management: the Commission confers tasks of implementation of the budget to bodies of EU law or national law, such as the
EU agencies.
Shared management: under this method of budget implementation tasks are delegated to Member States. About 80 % of the
expenditure falls under this management mode covering such areas as agricultural spending and structural actions.
This Commission document concerns the EU's consolidated accounts for the year 2015 and details how spending by the EU institutions and
bodies was carried out. The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide financial information on the activities of the institutions, agencies
and other bodies of the EU from an accrual accounting and budgetary perspective.
It is the responsibility of the Commission's Accounting Officer to prepare the EU's consolidated annual accounts and ensure that they present
fairly, in all material aspects, the financial position, the result of the operations and the cash flows of the EU institutions and bodies, including
the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), with a view to granting discharge.

Discharge procedure: the final step of a budget lifecycle is the discharge of the budget for a given financial year. It represents the political
aspect of the external control of budget implementation and is the decision by which the European Parliament, acting on a Council
recommendation, "releases" the Commission (and other EU bodies) from its responsibility for management of a given budget by marking the
end of that budget's existence. The European Parliament is the discharge authority within the EU.
The discharge procedure may produce three outcomes: (i) the granting; (ii) postponement or; (iii) the refusal of the discharge.
The final discharge report including specific recommendations to the Commission for action is adopted in plenary by the European Parliament
and are subject to an annual follow up report in which the Commission outlines the concrete actions it has taken to implement the
recommendations made.
Each agency is subject to its own discharge procedure, including the EFSA.
The European Food Safety Authority: the Authority, which is located in Parma, was established by Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the
European Parliament and of the Council in order to provide scientific opinions and scientific and technical support for the legislation and
policies which have a direct or indirect impact on food and feed safety.
As regards the Authoritys accounts, these are presented in detail in the document on the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union
for 2015:
Commitment appropriations:
-

committed: EUR 81 million;

-

paid: EUR 81 million;

-

carried-over: 0.

Payment appropriations:
-

committed: EUR 87 million;

-

paid: EUR 79 million;

-

carried-over: EUR 8 million.

For further details on expenditure, please refer to the final accounts of the EFSA.

2016/2174(DEC) - 13/09/2016 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Court of Auditors report on the annual accounts of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) for the year
2015, together with the Authoritys reply.
CONTENT: in accordance with the tasks conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the Court
presents to the European Parliament and to the Council, in the context of the discharge procedure, a Statement of Assurance as to the
reliability of the annual accounts of each institution, body or agency of the EU, and the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying
them, on the basis of an independent external audit.
This audit concerned, amongst others, the annual accounts of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA). In brief, the Authoritys main tasks
are to supply the scientific information needed for Union legislation to be drawn up concerning food and food safety, to collect and analyse
data that allow risks to be identified and monitored and to provide independent information on these risks.
Statement of assurance: pursuant to the provisions of Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the Court
has audited:
the annual accounts of the Authority, which comprise the financial statements and the reports on the implementation of the budget for
the financial year ended 31 December 2015, and
the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying those accounts.
Opinion on the reliability of the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the Authoritys annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects, its
financial position as at 31 December 2015 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the
provisions of its Financial Regulation and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer.
Opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the transactions underlying the annual
accounts for the year ended 31 December 2015 are legal and regular in all material respects.
The report also makes a series of observations on the budgetary and financial management of the Authority, accompanied by the latters
response. The main observations may be summarised as follows:
The Courts observations:
internal controls: the Court noted that the Authority has not yet put in place a clear and comprehensive financial ex-post control
strategy covering all areas of operations and specifying the frequency and scope of such controls.
The Authoritys reply:
internal controls: the Authority noted that the internal control system are always perfectible, hence EFSA will consider the Courts
comment and whether this optional and additional control step fits for purpose in a risk-based assessment environment.
Lastly, the Court of Auditors report contains a summary of the Authoritys key figures in 2015:
Budget: EUR 78.8 million.

Staff: 434 including officials, temporary and contract staff and seconded national experts.

2016/2174(DEC) - 07/02/2017 Supplementary non-legislative basic document
Having examined the revenue and expenditure accounts for the financial year 2015 and the balance sheet as at 31 December 2015 of the
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), as well as the Court of Auditors' report on the annual accounts of the Authority for the financial year
2015, accompanied by the Authority's replies to the Court's observations, the Council recommended the European Parliament to give a
discharge to the Executive Director of the Authority in respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2015.
The Council welcomed the Court's opinion that, in all material respects, the Authority's annual accounts present fairly its financial position as at
31 December 2015 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the provisions of the
Authority's Financial Regulation, and that the underlying transactions for 2015 are legal and regular in all material respects.
Nevertheless, some observations were made by the Council:
assessments and internal controls: the Council noted the Court's observation that the Authority has not yet put in place a
comprehensive financial ex-post control strategy. It invited the Authority to establish and implement such a strategy. It welcomed the
measures taken by the Authority thus far regarding its internal controls.

2016/2174(DEC) - 29/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Inés AYALA SENDER (S&D, ES) on discharge in respect of the implementation of
the budget of the European Food Safety Authority (ESFA) for the financial year 2015.
The committee called on the European Parliament to grant the Executive Director of the Authority discharge in respect of the implementation
of the Authoritys budget for the financial year 2015.
Noting that the Court of Auditors stated that it had obtained reasonable assurance that the annual accounts of the Authority for the financial
year 2015 were reliable and that the underlying transactions were legal and regular, Members called on Parliament to approve the closure of
the Authoritys accounts. They made, however, a number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is
granted, in addition to the general recommendations that appear in the draft resolution on performance, financial management and control of
EU agencies:
Authoritys financial statements: Members noted that the final budget for the financial year 2015 was EUR 79 659 347. The entire
budget derived from the Union budget.
Budget and financial management: Members noted that the amount of unused appropriations was EUR 1 089 million. This
under-execution corresponded to the unused assigned revenue (the Authoritys outturn of 2014), which was reused in 2016.
Members also made a series of observations regarding procurement and recruitment procedures, as well as internal audits and controls.
As regards conflicts of interest, Members stressed that experts with financial interests linked to companies whose substances are evaluated by
the Authority shall not be allowed to sit in the Authority's scientific panels or working groups, and that no such expert should be appointed by
the Authority before two years after his/her interests have expired. Members stated that the Authority should be endowed with a sufficient
budget to hire independent in-house experts with no conflicts of interest. They called on the Authority to incorporate into its new independence
policy a two-year cooling-off period for all material interests related to the companies whose products are assessed by the Authority and to any
organisations funded by them.
They regretted that the Authority has not included research funding in the list of interests to be covered by the two-year cooling-off period and
called on it to swiftly implement the measure in line with the discharge authority's repeated requests. They acknowledged the fact that, since
the adoption of its 2011 policy on independence, the Authority assesses and validates 100 % of the declarations of interest submitted by its
experts, which on average corresponds to a grand total ranging from 6000 to 7000 declarations of interest per year. Members insisted that the
Authority implement its independence policy consistently, and in particular for panel chairs and vice-chairs.
They noted that, after the matter was brought to the attention of the Authority by the discharge authority, all declarations of interest of
Management Board members are now published on the Authoritys website.
In addition, they noted that, pending the adoption of implementing rules on whistleblowing, the Authority implemented in January 2016 a new
standard operating procedure on the handling of requests by whistle-blowers facing retaliation. They called on the Authority to report to the
discharge authority on the establishment and implementation of its whistleblowing rules.
Lastly, Members noted that the Authority launched in 2015 the Transparency and Engagement in Risk Assessment project to provide clarity
regarding, and further develop approaches towards transparency and engagement in, its scientific processes. They also noted that in July
2016, the Authoritys Management Board endorsed a new approach to stakeholder engagement, which enables the Authority to interact with a
large range of stakeholders through a variety of channels in order to broaden outreach to representative organisations, including consumer
bodies and other civil society actors in the food chain. In this respect, Members considered that the Authority should continue paying special
attention to public opinion, and commit itself, as much as possible, to openness and transparency.

2016/2174(DEC) - 27/04/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the in European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) in respect of the budget for the financial year 2015.
NON- LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2017/1669 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget
of the European Food Safety Authority for the financial year 2015.

CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the Executive Director of the European Food Safety
Authority the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2015.
This decision is in line with the European Parliament's resolution adopted on 27 April 2017 and comprises a series of observations that form
an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 27 April 2017).
Amongst Parliaments main observations in the resolution accompanying the discharge decision, it noted that, pending the adoption of
implementing rules on whistleblowing, the Authority implemented in January 2016 a new standard operating procedure on the handling of
requests by whistleblowers facing retaliation. It acknowledged the fact that the Authority is awaiting further guidance from the Commission
before formulating its internal whistleblowing rules. Parliament welcomed that the Authority adopted its anti-fraud strategy and a related action
plan in March 2015, and that an implementation report submitted to the management board in December 2016 indicated that all actions had
been implemented.
In 2015, the Authority established a liaison office in Brussels to improve communication and dialogue with Union institutions, the media and
stakeholders which was welcomed by the Parliament.

2016/2174(DEC) - 27/04/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament decided by 488 votes to 129, with 10 abstentions, to grant discharge to the Executive Director of the European Food
Safety Authority (EFSA) in respect of the implementation of the Authoritys budget for the financial year 2015.
The vote on the decision on discharge covers the closure of the accounts (in accordance with Annex IV, Article 5 (1)(a) to Parliaments Rules of
Procedure).
Noting that the Court of Auditors has stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the Authoritys annual accounts for the financial
year 2015 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular, Parliament adopted by 491 votes to 115 with 11 abstentions,
a resolution containing a series of recommendations, which form an integral part of the decision on discharge and which add to the general
recommendations set out in the resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies.
These recommendations may be summarised as follows:
Authoritys financial statements: Parliament noted that the final budget for the financial year 2015 was EUR 79 659 347. The entire
budget derived from the Union budget.
Budget and financial management: It noted that the amount of unused appropriations was EUR 1 089 million. This under-execution
corresponded to the unused assigned revenue (the Authoritys outturn of 2014), which was reused in 2016.
Parliament also made a series of observations regarding procurement and recruitment procedures, as well as internal audits and controls.
As regards conflicts of interest, Parliament stressed that experts with financial interests linked to companies whose substances are evaluated
by the Authority shall not be allowed to sit in the Authority's scientific panels or working groups, and that no such expert should be appointed
by the Authority before two years after his/her interests have expired. It stated that the Authority should be endowed with a sufficient budget to
hire independent in-house experts with no conflicts of interest. Members called on the Authority to incorporate into its new independence policy
a two-year cooling-off period for all material interests related to the companies whose products are assessed by the Authority and to any
organisations funded by them. They regretted that the Authority has not included research funding in the list of interests to be covered by the
two-year cooling-off period and called on it to swiftly implement the measure in line with the discharge authority's repeated requests.
Parliament acknowledged the fact that, since the adoption of its 2011 policy on independence, the Authority assesses and validates 100 % of
the declarations of interest submitted by its experts, which on average corresponds to a grand total ranging from 6000 to 7000 declarations of
interest per year. It insisted that the Authority implement its independence policy consistently, and in particular for panel chairs and vice-chairs.
It noted that, after the matter was brought to the attention of the Authority by the discharge authority, all declarations of interest of Management
Board members are now published on the Authoritys website.
Whistleblowers: Parliament noted that the Authority implemented in January 2016 a new standard operating procedure on the handling of
requests by whistle-blowers facing retaliation. It called on the Authority to report to the discharge authority on the establishment and
implementation of its whistleblowing rules.
Transparency: Parliament noted that the Authority launched in 2015 the Transparency and Engagement in Risk Assessment project to provide
clarity regarding, and further develop approaches towards transparency and engagement in, its scientific processes. It also noted that in July
2016, the Authoritys Management Board endorsed a new approach to stakeholder engagement, which enables the Authority to interact with a
large range of stakeholders through a variety of channels in order to broaden outreach to representative organisations, including consumer
bodies and other civil society actors in the food chain. It called on the Authority to publish its list of Food Safety Organisations, as well as the
outcome of its evaluations of experts interests. In this regard, Parliament considered that the Authority should continue paying special attention
to public opinion, and commit itself, as much as possible, to openness and transparency.

