Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2238(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Private security companies

Subject
6.10.05 Peace preservation, humanitarian and rescue tasks, crisis
management

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
12/07/2016

VAUTMANS Hilde
Shadow rapporteur

ANDRIKIENĖ Laima
Liucija

FRUNZULICĂ
Doru-Claudian

VAN ORDEN Geoffrey

COUSO PERMUY
Javier

BUCHNER Klaus

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo
SCHAFFHAUSER
Jean-Luc

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs BIEŃKOWSKA Elżbieta

Key events
06/10/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

02/05/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

17/05/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

03/07/2017

Debate in Parliament

04/07/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

04/07/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0191/2017

Summary

T8-0289/2017

Summary

04/07/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2238(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/07990

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE594.042

26/01/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE600.961

20/03/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0191/2017

17/05/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0289/2017

04/07/2017

EP

Summary

2016/2238(INI) - 17/05/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Hilde VAUTMANS (ALDE, BE) on private security companies.
Eurobarometer polls showed that the EUs citizens want the EU to be more active in the field of security and defence. Private security
companies (PSCs), a term which includes private military companies, have been increasingly employed by national governments as well as
militaries and civilian agencies, both for the domestic provision of services and support for overseas deployment. More than 1.5 million private
security contractors were employed in around 40 000 private security companies (PSCs) in Europe in 2013 and these figures are on the rise.
However, the European Union does not have a regulatory framework of its own. It is therefore of vital importance to prioritise the establishment
of clear rules for interaction, cooperation and assistance between law enforcement and private security companies.
The use of PSCs in support of the military abroad: PSCs play an important complementary role in aiding the states military and civilian
agencies by closing capability gaps created by increasing demand for the use of forces abroad, while also occasionally, if circumstances allow,
providing surge capacity. However, the EU and its Member States should refrain from outsourcing military operations that involve the use of
force and weaponry, participating in hostilities and otherwise engaging in combat or combat areas, beyond legitimate self-defence. Operations
and activities outsourced to PSCs in conflict areas should be restricted to providing logistical support and the protection of installations.
Under no circumstances can the use of PSCs be a substitute for national armed forces personnel.
For states to benefit from the advantages offered by PSCs, and to ensure that they can be held accountable, a legal framework with binding
regulatory and monitoring mechanisms should be put in place at international level to regulate their use and provide sufficient control over their
activities. Clear legal distinctions should be made between the operations of private security companies and private actors directly engaged in
military activities.
The report also underlined the importance of parliamentary oversight over the state use of PSCs by Member States.
Use of PSCs by the EU: noting that the EU makes use of PSCs abroad to guard its delegations and staff and to support its civilian and military
CSDP missions, Members called on the Commission and the Council to produce an overview of where, when and for what reason PSCs have
been employed in support of EU missions. The report noted that in conflict-prone environments, employing a PSC for certain duties can have
negative side-effects for the EU, especially for its legitimacy, by accidentally associating it with armed actors in a conflict area. The various and
serious legal and political problems associated with the current practice of subcontracting in the field of military and security services are
highlighted by the Members.
Member States, the EEAS and the Commission should agree to follow the example of NATO by only contracting PSCs based in EU Member
States. In this regard, the Commission is recommended to propose common PSC contracting guidelines for the hire, use and management of
military and security contractors. These guidelines should be based both on international best practices in relation to PSC conduct and
management, in particular the Montreux document and the International Code of Conduct (ICoC).
Members called for an EU security supervisor of an EU security company to be present at EU-funded sites and EU delegations with the tasks
of ensuring the quality of the security services provided.
The regulation of PSCs: Members recommended that the Commission draw up a Green Paper with the objective of establishing basic rules of
engagement and good practices. They also recommended the creation of sector-specific EU quality standards and for the definition of PSCs to
be clarified before effective regulation of their activities is introduced, as the lack of such a definition can create legislative loopholes.

They urged the Council to add military and security services by PSCs to the Common Military List of the European Union without delay.
As for the Commission, it is urged to develop an effective European regulatory model which will inter alia:
help to harmonise legal differences between Member States by means of a directive;
re-evaluate, and thus redefine, contemporary public-private collaboration strategies;
set high-level standards for private security service providers within the EU or operating abroad;
ensure reporting of PSCs irregularities and illegalities and make it possible to hold them accountable for violations, including human
rights violations, during their activities abroad.
Lastly, the VP/HR, the Member States, the EEAS and the Commission are strongly urged to support the creation of an international convention
aimed at establishing an international legal regime to regulate relevant services provided by PSCs.

2016/2238(INI) - 04/07/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 530 votes to 147, with 19 abstentions, a resolution on private security companies.
Need for an EU regulatory framework: Eurobarometer polls showed that the EUs citizens want the EU to be more active in the field of security
and defence. Private security companies (PSCs), a term which includes private military companies, have been increasingly employed by
national governments as well as militaries and civilian agencies, both for the domestic provision of services and support for overseas
deployment.
More than 1.5 million private security contractors were employed in around 40 000 private security companies (PSCs) in Europe in 2013 and
these figures are on the rise.
However, the European Union does not have a regulatory framework of its own. It is therefore of vital importance to prioritise the establishment
of clear rules for interaction, cooperation and assistance between law enforcement and private security companies.
The use of PSCs in support of the military abroad: PSCs play an important complementary role in aiding the states military and civilian
agencies by closing capability gaps created by increasing demand for the use of forces abroad.
Members, however, considered that the EU and its Member States should refrain from outsourcing military operations that involve the use of
force and weaponry, participating in hostilities and otherwise engaging in combat or combat areas, beyond legitimate self-defence.
Operations and activities outsourced to PSCs in conflict areas should be restricted to providing logistical support and the protection of
installations, without an actual presence of PSCs in the areas where combat activities exist. Under no circumstances can the use of PSCs be a
substitute for national armed forces personnel.
Members underscored the need for PSCs to be mindful of local customs and habits. Under no circumstances should PSCs be allowed to take
part in, or conduct interrogations.
In addition, any participation by private security companies in military operations must be justified, with clearly-defined objectives that can be
verified using tangible indicators, have a fully-detailed budget and a specific start and end date, and be governed by a strict code of ethic.
For states to benefit from the advantages offered by PSCs, and to ensure that they can be held accountable, a legal framework with binding
regulatory and monitoring mechanisms should be put in place at international level to regulate their use and provide sufficient control over their
activities.
The resolution also underlined the importance of parliamentary oversight over the state use of PSCs by Member States.
Use of PSCs by the EU: noting that the EU makes use of PSCs abroad to guard its delegations and staff and to support its civilian and military
CSDP missions, Parliament called on the Commission and the Council to produce an overview of where, when and for what reason PSCs
have been employed in support of EU missions.
The resolution noted that in conflict-prone environments, employing a PSC for certain duties can have negative side-effects for the EU,
especially for its legitimacy, by accidentally associating it with armed actors in a conflict area, with negative repercussions in the case of armed
incidents.
Stressing in particular the risks posed by uncontrolled sub-contracting, Members called on the Member States, the EEAS and the Commission
to follow the example of NATO by only contracting PSCs based in EU Member States.
In this regard, Parliament recommended the Commission to propose common PSC contracting guidelines for the hire, use and management of
military and security contractors. These guidelines should be based both on the Montreux document and the International Code of Conduct
(ICoC).
Members called for an EU security supervisor of an EU security company to be present at EU-funded sites and EU delegations with the tasks
of ensuring the quality of the security services provided.
The regulation of PSCs: Members recommended:
that the Commission draw up a Green Paper with the objective of establishing basic rules of engagement and good practices;
the creation of sector-specific EU quality standards and for the definition of PSCs to be clarified before effective regulation of their
activities is introduced, as the lack of such a definition can create legislative loopholes;
the Council to add military and security services by PSCs to the Common Military List of the European Union without delay.
As for the Commission, it is urged to develop an effective European regulatory model which will inter alia:
help to harmonise legal differences between Member States by means of a directive;
re-evaluate, and thus redefine, contemporary public-private collaboration strategies;
set high-level standards for private security service providers within the EU or operating abroad;

ensure reporting of PSCs irregularities and illegalities and make it possible to hold them accountable for violations, including human
rights violations, during their activities abroad.
Lastly, the VP/HR, the Member States, the EEAS and the Commission are strongly urged to support the creation of an international convention
aimed at establishing an international legal regime to regulate relevant services provided by PSCs.

