Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2239(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Addressing human rights violations in the context of war crimes, and crimes
against humanity, including genocide

Subject
6.10.09 Human rights situation in the world

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
24/05/2016

PREDA Cristian Dan
Shadow rapporteur

GUERRERO SALOM
Enrique

KARSKI Karol

SCHAAKE Marietje

COUSO PERMUY
Javier

LOCHBIHLER Barbara

CORRAO Ignazio
Committee for opinion
FEMM

Rapporteur for opinion

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

Appointed
11/10/2016

RODRIGUES Liliana

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

International Cooperation and Development

MOGHERINI Federica

Key events
06/10/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

30/05/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

13/06/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

03/07/2017

Debate in Parliament

04/07/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

04/07/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0222/2017

Summary

T8-0288/2017

Summary

04/07/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2239(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/07991

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE599.812

02/03/2017

EP

PE601.186

15/03/2017

EP

PE601.157

03/04/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0222/2017

13/06/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0288/2017

04/07/2017

EP

Summary

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

FEMM

2016/2239(INI) - 13/06/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Cristian DAN PREDA (EPP, RO) on addressing human rights violations
in the context of war crimes, and crimes against humanity, including genocide.
Members recalled that the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, also known as atrocity crimes, are the most serious
crimes against humankind. They considered that the international community has the duty to prevent atrocity crimes from taking place, and
they welcomed the fact that the International Criminal Court is currently conducting investigations in nine countries (Georgia, Mali, Côte
d'Ivoire, Libya, Kenya, Sudan (Darfur), Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and (two investigations) the Central African Republic.
On the need to focus on the prevention of atrocity crimes: Members recalled the EU?s commitment to act on the international scene in the
name of the principles that inspired its creation: it should be of paramount importance for the EU to address and hold accountable those
responsible for severe violations of human rights reaching the gravity threshold of crimes against humanity and genocide and grave breaches
of international humanitarian law reaching the level of war crimes.
Members called for the EU and its Member States to use all their political weight to prevent any act that could be considered a crime of atrocity
from taking place, to respond in an efficient and coordinated manner in cases where such crimes occur and, to mobilise all necessary
resources to bring to justice all those responsible, as well as to assist the victims and support stabilisation and reconciliation processes.
They called on the international community to establish instruments that can minimise the warning response gap in order to prevent the
emergence, re-emergence and escalation of violent conflict, such as the EUs early warning system.
The committee called for the EU to step up its efforts to develop a coherent and efficient approach to identifying and responding in a timely
fashion to crisis or conflict situations that might lead to an atrocity crime being committed. They also underlined the need for countries and
regions at risk of conflict to have skilled and trustworthy security forces.
Overall, Members called for further efforts from the EU and the Member States to develop capacity-building programmes for the security sector
.
On supporting the investigation and prosecution of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes: overall, Members reiterated their full
support for the ICC, the Rome Statute, the Office of Prosecutor, the Prosecutors proprio motu powers, and the progress made in initiating new
investigations as an essential means of fighting impunity for atrocity crimes. They reaffirmed that accession to the ICC and Rome Statute is
crucial and called on the states which have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute, in order to support accountability and reconciliation as
key elements in preventing future atrocities.
They also drew attention to the importance of ensuring sufficient financial contributions to the Court for its effective functioning.
Members stressed the essential role of the European Parliament in monitoring EU action in this matter, and encouraged Member States to
amend Article 83 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union in order to add atrocity crimes to the list of crimes for which the EU
has competences.
Members went on to recall their strong condemnation of the atrocities committed by the Assad regime in Syria, which can be considered as
serious war crimes and crimes against humanity, and they deplored the climate of impunity for perpetrators of such crimes in Syria.

On the fight against impunity of non-state actors: the report encouraged the EU and its Member States to fight against impunity and to lend
active support to international efforts to bring to justice members of non-state groups such as Boko Haram, ISIS/Daesh and any other actors
committing crimes against humanity. They called for the development of a clear approach to the prosecution of ISIS/Daesh fighters and their
abettors, including by using the expertise of the EU network for investigation and prosecution of genocide.
The EU and its Member States should support the prosecution of members of non-state groups such as ISIS/Daesh by seeking a consensus
within the UN Security Council to confer jurisdiction to the ICC.
Similarly, the EU should explore and support, at international level and through all means, options to investigate and prosecute all crimes
committed by all parties to the Syrian conflict, including ISIS/Daesh, such as the establishment of an International Criminal Tribunal for Iraq
and Syria. In addition, Members encouraged all necessary actions to effectively sever funding to ISIS/Daesh and urged the EU to impose
sanctions on those countries or authorities that directly or indirectly facilitate the flow of resources to ISIS/Daesh.
Gender dimension in addressing human rights violations in the context of war crimes: Members highlighted the critical need to eradicate
sexual and gender-based violence by addressing their widespread and systematic use as a weapon of war against women and girls. They
urged all countries to develop national action programmes (NAPAs) in line with UN Security Council Resolution 1325, together with strategies
to combat violence against women, and called for a global commitment to ensure the implementation of the resolution.
The report pointed to the need to ensure the safety of women and girls from the outset of each emergency or crisis and in post-conflict
situations through all available means, such as access to the full range of sexual and reproductive health services, including legal and safe
abortion, for victims of rape in a war context. It called on the Commission, the Member States and the competent international authorities to
take appropriate measures on the prohibition of all forms of sexual violence.

2016/2239(INI) - 04/07/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 541 votes to 32, with 119 abstentions, a resolution on addressing human rights violations in the context
of war crimes, and crimes against humanity, including genocide.
Parliament recalled that the crime of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes, also known as atrocity crimes, are the most serious
crimes against humankind. It considered that the international community has the duty to prevent atrocity crimes from taking place, and it
welcomed the fact that the International Criminal Court is currently conducting investigations in nine countries (Georgia, Mali, Côte d'Ivoire,
Libya, Kenya, Sudan (Darfur), Uganda, the Democratic Republic of Congo and (two investigations) the Central African Republic.
On the need to focus on the prevention of atrocity crimes: Parliament recalled the EU?s commitment to act on the international scene in the
name of the principles that inspired its creation: it should be of paramount importance for the EU to address and hold accountable those
responsible for severe violations of human rights reaching the gravity threshold of crimes against humanity and genocide and grave breaches
of international humanitarian law reaching the level of war crimes.
It stressed the urgent need for the international community to step up its efforts to monitor and respond to any (potential) conflict that may give
rise to acts that may be considered as a criminal atrocity.
Parliament called on the EU and its Member States to use all their political weight to prevent any act that could be considered a crime of
atrocity from taking place, to respond in an efficient and coordinated manner in cases where such crimes occur and, to mobilise all necessary
resources to bring to justice all those responsible, as well as to assist the victims and support stabilisation and reconciliation processes.
It called on the international community to establish instruments that can minimise the warning response gap in order to prevent the
emergence, re-emergence and escalation of violent conflict, such as the EUs early warning system.
Parliament called for the EU to step up its efforts to develop a coherent and efficient approach to identifying and responding in a timely fashion
to crisis or conflict situations that might lead to an atrocity crime being committed. It also underlined the need for countries and regions at risk
of conflict to have skilled and trustworthy security forces.
Overall, Parliament called for further efforts from the EU and the Member States to develop capacity-building programmes for the security
sector
On supporting the investigation and prosecution of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes: overall, Parliament reiterated its full
support for the ICC, the Rome Statute, the Office of Prosecutor, the Prosecutors proprio motu powers, and the progress made in initiating new
investigations as an essential means of fighting impunity for atrocity crimes. It reaffirmed that accession to the ICC and Rome Statute is crucial
and called on the states which have not yet done so to ratify the Rome Statute, in order to support accountability and reconciliation as key
elements in preventing future atrocities.
It also drew attention to the importance of ensuring sufficient financial contributions to the Court for its effective functioning.
Members stressed the essential role of the European Parliament in monitoring EU action in this matter, and encouraged Member States to
amend Article 83 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union in order to add atrocity crimes to the list of crimes for which the EU
has competences.
Parliament went on to recall its strong condemnation of the atrocities committed by the Assad regime in Syria, which can be considered as
serious war crimes and crimes against humanity, and it deplored the climate of impunity for perpetrators of such crimes in Syria.
Parliament deplored the widespread lack of respect for international humanitarian law and the alarming rate of loss of civilian lives and attacks
against civilian infrastructure in armed conflicts around the world. It urged the international community to convene an international conference
to prepare a new international mechanism for tracking and collecting data, and for publicly reporting on violations in the course of armed
conflicts. It reiterated its request to the VP/HR to present, on an annual basis, a public list of alleged perpetrators of attacks on schools and
hospitals, for the purpose of defining appropriate EU action to halt such attacks.
On the fight against impunity of non-state actors: Parliament encouraged the EU and its Member States to fight against impunity and to lend
active support to international efforts to bring to justice members of non-state groups such as Boko Haram, ISIS/Daesh and any other actors
committing crimes against humanity. It called for the development of a clear approach to the prosecution of ISIS/Daesh fighters and their

abettors, including by using the expertise of the EU network for investigation and prosecution of genocide.
The EU and its Member States should support the prosecution of members of non-state groups such as ISIS/Daesh by seeking a consensus
within the UN Security Council to confer jurisdiction to the ICC.
Similarly, the EU should explore and support, at international level and through all means, options to investigate and prosecute all crimes
committed by all parties to the Syrian conflict, including ISIS/Daesh, such as the establishment of an International Criminal Tribunal for Iraq
and Syria. In addition, Members encouraged all necessary actions to effectively sever funding to ISIS/Daesh and urged the EU to impose
sanctions on those countries or authorities that directly or indirectly facilitate the flow of resources to ISIS/Daesh.
Gender dimension in addressing human rights violations in the context of war crimes: Parliament highlighted the critical need to eradicate
sexual and gender-based violence by addressing their widespread and systematic use as a weapon of war against women and girls. It urged
all countries to develop national action programmes (NAPAs) in line with UN Security Council Resolution 1325, together with strategies to
combat violence against women, and called for a global commitment to ensure the implementation of the resolution.
Parliament pointed to the need to ensure the safety of women and girls from the outset of each emergency or crisis and in post-conflict
situations through all available means, such as access to the full range of sexual and reproductive health services, including legal and safe
abortion, for victims of rape in a war context. It called on the Commission, the Member States and the competent international authorities to
take appropriate measures on the prohibition of all forms of sexual violence.

