Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2072(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Coherent EU policy for cultural and creative industries

Subject
4.45.08 Cultural and artistic activities, books and reading, arts

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Rapporteur

Industry, Research and Energy

Appointed
14/03/2016

EHLER Christian

14/03/2016

MORGANO Luigi
Shadow rapporteur

WENTA Bogdan
Brunon

BLANCO LÓPEZ José

BAREKOV Nikolay

MCCLARKIN Emma

DIACONU Mircea

MLINAR Angelika

FERREIRA João

MICHELS Martina

REIMON Michel

ADINOLFI Isabella

BORRELLI David
BILDE Dominique
CULT

Culture and Education

14/03/2016
EHLER Christian

MORGANO Luigi
Shadow rapporteur

WENTA Bogdan
Brunon

14/03/2016

BLANCO LÓPEZ José

BAREKOV Nikolay

MCCLARKIN Emma

DIACONU Mircea

MLINAR Angelika

FERREIRA João

MICHELS Martina

REIMON Michel

ADINOLFI Isabella

BORRELLI David
BILDE Dominique
Committee for opinion
JURI

Rapporteur for opinion

Legal Affairs

Appointed
24/05/2016

COMODINI CACHIA
Therese

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Education, Youth, Sport and Culture

NAVRACSICS Tibor

Key events
28/04/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/04/2016

Referral to joint committee announced in
Parliament

10/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/11/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

12/12/2016

Debate in Parliament

13/12/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

13/12/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

13/12/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2072(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

A8-0357/2016

Summary

T8-0486/2016

Summary

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052; Rules of Procedure
of the European Parliament EP 055

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CJ23/8/06352

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE583.957

23/06/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE587.702

09/09/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE589.132

09/09/2016

EP

PE587.490

14/10/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0357/2016

30/11/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0486/2016

13/12/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)243

04/07/2017

Committee opinion

JURI

2016/2072(INI) - 30/11/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy and the Committee on Culture and Education adopted the own-initiative report by Christian
EHLER (EPP, DE) and Luigi MORGANO (S&D, IT) on a coherent EU policy for cultural and creative industries.
Members stressed that cultural and creative industries (CCIs) in Europe provide more than 12 million full-time jobs, which amounts to 7.5 % of
the EUs work force, creating approximately EUR 509 billion in value added to GDP. CCIs in the EU employ 2.5 times more people than
automotive manufacturers and five times more than the chemical industry.
Members called on the Commission to develop a comprehensive, coherent and long-term industrial policy framework for the creative and
cultural sector and provide framework conditions for fostering innovation as well as sufficient financing.
Framework conditions and fostering innovation: Members called on the Commission to introduce an umbrella scheme that bridges the gap
between R&D, European creative content production and technological innovation in the media field. They believed that such an umbrella
scheme would foster the production of creative and competitive EU services, and commercial and employment opportunities, and enhance
access to market for SMEs and start-ups. They called the Commission and Member States to promote cross-sectoral cooperation by
establishing learning labs, and creative clusters and networks in order to foster interaction between micro-enterprises, SMEs and large
enterprises and between non-profit organisations and commercial companies.
Copyright: Members urged the Commission, in view of the ongoing copyright reform, to create balanced legal solutions that are adapted to
very small enterprises and micro-enterprises, creators, and right holders, in order to make it clear that liability exemptions can only apply to
genuinely neutral and passive online service providers, and not to services that play an active role in distributing, promoting and monetising
content at the expense of creator. Highlighting the fact that piracy and counterfeiting remain a serious concern for the innovation sector,
Members underlined the need to monitor and strengthen the application of existing enforcement rules across the EU, through the introduction
of tougher sanctions and the promotion of a system of guarantees on traceability as a deterrent for counterfeiters as well as increasing the
damages and compensation awarded to right holders.
Digitisation of the cultural and creative industries: Members emphasised the opportunities that new ICTs such as big data, cloud computing,
the Internet of things offer the economy and society, especially when integrated with sectors such as CCIs. They stressed, however that, in
order for CCIs to fully seize the potential for growth and jobs of new technologies, the completion of the Digital Single Market must be a
priority. Digitisation and media convergence should create new opportunities for funding, and access, distribution and promotion of European
works.
Working conditions in the cultural and creative sector: Members pointed out that the atypical employment (part-time and fixed-duration
contracts, temporary work and economically dependent self-employment) of cultural and creative workers, specifically in the media and culture
sector, is commonplace. They also underlined the need to remove obstacles to mobility of workers in this sector. They urged the Commission
to provide an appropriate solution to improve mobility within the EU for CCI workers and ease visa procedures for exchanges with third
countries.
The report also called for a legal and institutional framework for creative artistic activity through the adoption or application of a number of
measures with respect to contracts, means of collective representation, social security, and sickness insurance.
Education, skills, and training: Members highlighted the potential of CCIs regarding youth employment and reindustrialization. They called on
the Commission and Member States to include the CCIs in the Youth Employment Initiative and to provide funds to facilitate careers,
entrepreneurship and training in this sector. They also called on the Commission and Member States to secure the preservation of European
savoir-faire and to safeguard and promote the craft trades linked to the CCS, and place a stronger focus on vocational training and a highly
skilled workforce in order to attract talent. Members called for measures to encourage carriers in this sector. They called, too, for the creation
of a European award for creative and cultural industries.

Financing: Members called on the Commission to work on mainstreaming EU support for cultural and creative industries, including funding.
They noted that the mid-term review of the MFF and the implementation reports of EU programmes should be regarded as two interconnected
parts of the same process. Particularly in the case of Creative Europe, Horizon 2020 and the Structural Funds (ERDF and ESF), the role and
impact of CCIs should be specifically evaluated and further promoted. Members stressed that this process should provide a solid and coherent
basis for the revision of the MFF and the future EU programme's architecture post 2020.
In the meantime, Members called on the Commission to fully exploit potential synergies existing between EU policies, so as to effectively use
the funding available under EU programmes such as Horizon 2020, the Connecting Europe Facility, Erasmus +, EaSI, Creative Europe and
COSME and the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIFs) to support more projects in the field of CCIs.
Lastly, Members called on the Commission to establish the CCIs as a horizontal priority within EU funding schemes and programmes,
particularly in Horizon 2020, EaSI and the ESIFs.

2016/2072(INI) - 13/12/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 540 votes to 77, with 85 abstentions, a resolution on a coherent EU policy for cultural and creative
industries.
Parliament stressed that cultural and creative industries (CCIs) in Europe provide more than 12 million full-time jobs, which amounts to 7.5 %
of the EUs work force, creating approximately EUR 509 billion in value added to GDP. CCIs in the EU employ 2.5 times more people than
automotive manufacturers and five times more than the chemical industry.
Parliament called on the Commission to develop a comprehensive, coherent and long-term industrial policy framework for the creative and
cultural sector and provide framework conditions for fostering innovation as well as sufficient financing.
Framework conditions and fostering innovation: Parliament called on the Commission to introduce an umbrella scheme that bridges the gap
between R&D, European creative content production and technological innovation in the media field. It believed that such an umbrella scheme
would foster the production of creative and competitive EU services, and commercial and employment opportunities, and enhance access to
market for SMEs and start-ups. It called on the Commission to establish an appropriate legal framework, including copyright, for the value
chain in the digital age, which takes into account the specificities of the sector.
It also called the Commission and Member States to promote cross-sectoral cooperation by establishing learning labs, and creative clusters
and networks in order to foster interaction between micro-enterprises, SMEs and large enterprises and between non-profit organisations and
commercial companies.
Copyright: Parliament called urged the Commission, in view of the ongoing copyright reform, to create balanced legal solutions that are
adapted to the digital age, including in partnership with industry and consumer groups, which will support and meet the interests of SMEs, very
small enterprises and micro-enterprises, creators, right holders, right users, freelancers and consumers alike in order to make it clear that
liability exemptions can only apply to genuinely neutral and passive online service providers and not to services that play an active role in
distributing, promoting and monetising content at the expense of creators.
Recalling the fact that piracy and counterfeiting remain a serious concern for the innovation sector, Parliament underlined the need to monitor
and strengthen the application of existing enforcement rules across the EU, through the introduction of tougher sanctions.
It called on the Commission to propose effective measures to fight online piracy, in particular to ensure that online services which host content
apply effective means in order to remove unlicensed content from their services and to take action to prevent this content, once removed, from
reappearing.
It called for the introduction of tougher sanctions and the promotion of a system of guarantees on traceability as a deterrent for counterfeiters
as well as increasing the damages and compensation awarded to right holders.
Preservation of European cultural policy: Parliament insisted on the need to keep cultural and audiovisual services outside the scope of the
negotiating mandate for general free trade agreements, while pointing out that cultural and creative works have a dual and intrinsic value.
Digitisation of the cultural and creative industries: Parliament emphasised the opportunities that new ICTs such as big data, cloud computing,
the Internet of things offer the economy and society, especially when integrated with sectors such as CCIs. It stressed, however that, in order
for CCIs to fully seize the potential for growth and jobs of new technologies, the completion of the Digital Single Market must be a priority.
Digitisation and media convergence should create new opportunities for funding, and access, distribution and promotion of European works.
Working conditions in the cultural and creative sector: Parliament pointed out that the atypical employment (part-time and fixed-duration
contracts, temporary work and economically dependent self-employment) of cultural and creative workers, specifically in the media and culture
sector, is commonplace. It also underlined the need to remove obstacles to mobility of workers in this sector.
Parliament called on the Member States to develop or implement a legal and institutional framework for creative artistic activity through the
adoption or application of a number of coherent and comprehensive measures with respect to contracts, means of collective representation,
social security, sickness insurance, direct and indirect taxation and compliance with European rules, in order to improve the mobility of artists
across the EU.
The resolution pointed to the existing average EU gender pay gap (16.1 % in 2014) and pension gap (40.2 %), and stressed that women face
the same barriers in the cultural and creative industries as in other economic sectors, in particular as regards gender pay and pension gaps,
access to finance, stereotypes, training and lifelong learning.
Education, skills, and training: Parliament highlighted the potential of CCIs regarding youth employment and reindustrialization. It called on the
Commission and Member States to include the CCIs in the Youth Employment Initiative and to provide funds to facilitate careers,
entrepreneurship and training in this sector. It also called on the Commission and Member States to secure the preservation of European
savoir-faire and to safeguard and promote the craft trades linked to the CCS, and place a stronger focus on vocational training and a highly
skilled workforce in order to attract talent. Parliament also called for measures to encourage carriers in this sector.
Parliament also called for the creation of a European award for creative and cultural industries designed along the same lines as the

Franco-German Prize for Creative and Cultural Industries.
It encouraged the Member States to undertake initiatives such as the cultural bonus launched by the Italian Government and endowed with
EUR 500, made available to all 18-year-olds legally resident in Italy, and to be spent only on culturally enriching activities such as museums,
galleries, archaeological and heritage sites, books and films.
Financing: Parliament noted the success of tax relief schemes for the cultural and creative sector existing in certain Member States. It
encouraged all Member States, therefore, to introduce such schemes.
It called on the Commission to work on mainstreaming EU support for cultural and creative industries, including funding. It noted that the
mid-term review of the MFF and the implementation reports of EU programmes should be regarded as two interconnected parts of the same
process. Particularly in the case of Creative Europe, Horizon 2020 and the Structural Funds (ERDF and ESF), the role and impact of CCIs
should be specifically evaluated and further promoted. Members stressed that this process should provide a solid and coherent basis for the
revision of the MFF and the future EU programme's architecture post 2020.
In the meantime, Members called on the Commission to fully exploit potential synergies existing between EU policies, so as to effectively use
the funding available under EU programmes such as Horizon 2020, the Connecting Europe Facility, Erasmus +, EaSI, Creative Europe and
COSME and the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIFs) to support more projects in the field of CCIs.
Parliament stressed the need to increase the budget of Creative Europe and the Guarantee Facility in order to effectively support European
cultural and creative expressions.
Parliament called on the Commission to establish the CCIs as a horizontal priority within EU funding schemes and programmes, particularly in
Horizon 2020, EaSI and the ESIFs.
Lastly, Parliament called for the promotion of intellectual property asset protocols facilitating the valuation of intellectual property rights (IPRs)
and to adopt the necessary mechanisms in order to increase the bankability of IPRs and the recognition of their full value as assets.

