Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2160(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2015 discharge: EU general budget, European External Action Service
(EEAS)

Subject
8.70.03.05 2015 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

CONT

Appointed
08/08/2016

JÁVOR Benedek
Shadow rapporteur

MARINESCU
Marian-Jean

IVAN Cătălin Sorin

CZARNECKI Ryszard

THEURER Michael

DE JONG Dennis

VALLI Marco
ALIOT Louis
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

AFET

Appointed
08/09/2016

BALČYTIS Zigmantas
Development

DEVE

INTA

International Trade

AFCO

European Commission

Constitutional Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
11/07/2016

Non-legislative basic document published

04/10/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

22/03/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

COM(2016)0475

Summary

30/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

26/04/2017

Debate in Parliament

27/04/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

27/04/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/04/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

29/09/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0122/2017

Summary

T8-0152/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2160(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/07214

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2016)0475

11/07/2016

EC

PE594.061

02/02/2017

EP

Committee draft report

PE593.846

06/02/2017

EP

Supplementary non-legislative basic
document

05876/2017

17/02/2017

CSL

Amendments tabled in committee

PE600.917

07/03/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0122/2017

30/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0152/2017

27/04/2017

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

AFET

Summary

Summary

Final act
Budget 2017/1620
OJ L 252 29.09.2017, p. 0124 Summary

2016/2160(DEC) - 11/07/2016 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2015, as part of
the 2015 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the EU Institutions: European External Action Service.
Legal reminder: the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the year 2015 have been prepared on the basis of the
information presented by the institutions and bodies under Article 148(2) of the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the
European Union.
(1) Governance and budgetary principles: the organisational governance of the EU consists of institutions, agencies and other EU bodies. The
main institutions in the sense of being responsible for drafting policies and taking decisions are the EP, the European Council, the Council and
the Commission.
The EU Budget finances a wide range of policies and programmes throughout the EU. In accordance with the priorities set by the European
Parliament and the Council in the Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF), the Commission carries out specific programmes, activities and
projects in the field.
The budget is prepared by the Commission and usually agreed in mid-December by the Parliament and the Council, based on the procedure

of Art. 314 TFEU.
According to the principle of budget equilibrium, the total revenue must equal total expenditure (payment appropriations) for a given financial
year.
EU revenues: the EU has two main categories of funding: own resources revenues and sundry revenues. Own resources can be divided into
traditional own resources (such as custom levies), the own resource based on value added tax (VAT) and the resource based on gross
national income (GNI). Sundry revenues arising from the activities of the EU (e.g. competition fines) normally represent less than 10 % of total
revenue. Own resources revenue make up the vast majority of EU funding.
Expenditure of the EU institutions: the EU's operational expenditure of these institutions takes different forms, depending on how the money is
paid out and managed.
From 2014 onwards, the Commission classifies its expenditure as follows:
Direct management: the budget is implemented directly by the Commission services.
Indirect management: the Commission confers tasks of implementation of the budget to bodies of EU law or national law, such as the
EU agencies.
Shared management: under this method of budget implementation tasks are delegated to Member States. About 80 % of the
expenditure falls under this management mode covering such areas as agricultural spending and structural actions.
Consolidated annual accounts of the EU: this Commission document concerns the EU's consolidated accounts for the year 2015 and details
how spending by the EU institutions and bodies was carried out. The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide financial information on
the activities of the institutions, agencies and other bodies of the EU from an accrual accounting and budgetary perspective.
It also presents the accounting principles applicable to the European budget (in particular, consolidation).
The document also presents the different financial actors involved in the budget process (accounting officers, internal officers and authorising
officers) and recalls their respective roles in the context of the tasks of sound financial management.
Audit and discharge: the EUs annual accounts and resource management are audited by the European Court of Auditors, its external auditor,
which as part of its activities draws up for the European Parliament and the Council:
an annual report on the activities financed from the general budget, detailing its observations on the annual accounts and underlying
transactions;
an opinion, based on its audits and given in the annual report in the form of a statement of assurance, on (i) the reliability of the
accounts and (ii) the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions involving both revenue collected from taxable persons and
payments to final beneficiaries.
The discharge represents the political aspect of the external control of budget implementation and is the decision by which the European
Parliament, acting on a Council recommendation, "releases" the Commission (and other EU bodies) from its responsibility for management of
a given budget by marking the end of that budget's existence. This discharge procedure may produce three outcomes: (i) the granting; (ii)
postponement; (iii) or the refusal of the discharge.
The document also presents a series of tables and detailed technical indicators on (i) the balance sheet; (ii) the economic outturn account; (iii)
cashflow tables; (iv) technical annexes concerning the financial statements.
(2) Implementation of the EEASs appropriations for the financial year 2015: the document comprises a series of detailed tables, the most
important concerning the implementation of the budget.
As regards the EEASs expenditure, the document stated that the available appropriations in 2015 amounted to EUR 920 million, with an
implementation rate of payments of 85.53%.
As regards the budget implementation of the EESC, the Annual Activity Report 2015 stated that the 2015 was marked by following missions:
consolidation of the External Action Service and improving internal governance;
opening of an EU delegation in Tehran, Somalia (with the relocation of the Somalian Delegation from Nairobi to Mogadishu);
the objective employing at least one third of Member States diplomats;
the network of EU delegations was stable (no delegations were closed nor were any new ones opened): delegations in Liberia, Sierra
Leone, Guinea Conakry and Nigeria were affected by the Ebola crisis and some were evacuated;
improving administrative support to delegations and staff training.
Lastly, the report noted that an EEAS staff member, Mr. Ronny Piens, was killed in Bamako (Mali) in a terrorist attack.

2016/2160(DEC) - 17/02/2017 Supplementary non-legislative basic document
Based on the observations contained in the report by the Court of Auditors, the Council called on the European Parliament to grant discharge
to all of the EU institutions in respect of the implementation of their respective budgets for the financial year 2015 .
The Council welcomed that the administrative and related expenditure of the EU institutions remained free from material error with an
estimated level of error of 0.6 %, which is well below the materiality threshold. It noted with satisfaction that no serious weaknesses were
identified by the Court in the supervisory and control systems and in the examined annual activity reports.
The Council took note of a limited number of errors detected by the Court, notably in the recruitment and procurement procedures and in the
management of staff allowances.
The Council also regretted the shortcomings observed by the Court in the European External Action Service, notably concerning the
procurement procedures for low value contracts under the responsibility of delegations.
It regretted that supervisory and control systems in delegations are not yet fully sound and reliable. It called on the European External Action

Service to reinforce its guidance on the design, coordination and execution of procurement and selection procedures in delegations and to
provide more training opportunities to its staff in delegations to avoid similar weaknesses in the future.

2016/2160(DEC) - 30/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Benedek JÁVOR (Greens/EFA, HU), calling on the European Parliament to grant
the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the
European External Action Service for the financial year 2015.
Members noted that, according to the Court of Auditors, the overall level of error in Heading 5 (Administration), including the budget of the
European External Action Service (EEAS), continues to be relatively low with an estimation at 0.6 % in 2015. No significant weaknesses were
identified as regards the annual activity report and the internal control system of the EEAS.
Budget and financial management: Members noted that the total budget of the EEAS for 2015 was EUR 602.8 million, representing a total
increase of 16.2 % compared to 2014, which resulted from the transfer to its budget of EUR 71.5 million from the Commissions administrative
budget (EUR 25.2 million) and from other budget lines (up to EUR 46.3 million) to finance the common costs of the Unions delegations such as
rents, offices security and IT costs.
Members regretted the increase of the average rate of anomaly on commitments to 22.4 % in 2015 (compared to 18.3 % in 2014) at the level
of ex ante controls. They pointed out that the execution of the EEAS administrative budget remains a point of concern as certain delegations
receive budget contributions from the Commission.
EEAS actions: Members made a series of observations on the management of the EEAS:
remedy certain weaknesses found by the Court in the recruitment procedures of local agents in delegations and in procurement
procedures;
pay attention, especially in delegations, to business continuity and document management as key internal control standards;
ensure a more balanced distribution of staff: the share of Member States diplomats represents 32.9 % of the EEAS overall AD staff in
comparison to 33.8 % in 2014; this proportion is higher in delegations with 43.1 %;
reshape its conditions and recruitment policies in order to attract both genders equally for management positions, the ratio is currently
at 21.4 % / 78.6 %.
make geographical balance an important element of the EEAS human resources management, particularly with respect to the
Member States that have acceded the Union in 2004 or after;
develop the role of Union delegations, particularly facilitating and supporting coordination between Member States in providing
consular assistance;
join the future Inter-Institutional Agreement on a Mandatory Transparency Register, including for the Union delegations, insofar as this
is legally possible.
The EEAS is called upon to present a review of its human resources policy in the course of 2017, addressing issues such as gender balance
and mobility of staff between institutions, while taking also into consideration its impact in terms of human resources for the strengthening of
the Union external action and visibility through the Union global strategy.
Members called on the EEAS for an overhaul of its building policies in line with the recommendations made by the Court of Auditors. They
supported the implementation of a medium and long term strategy to identify all possible options in this area from investment priorities or
possibilities of purchases to renting renewals or to the sharing of premises with Member States, taking into account staff projections and policy
planning and development.
Members urged the EEAS to reinforce its management control and monitoring tools of all the costs incurred in the building policy in order to
ensure an accurate overview and follow-up of all the expenditure in this area.
Lastly, Members stated that the security of the EEAS and of its delegations needs to be further strengthened. They called on the EEAS to give
priority to it when choosing buildings and spaces for its delegations.

2016/2160(DEC) - 27/04/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the European External Action Service (EEAS) for the financial year 2015.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2017/1620 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the general
budget of the European Union for the financial year 2015, Section X European External Action Service.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security
Policy discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European External Action Service for the financial year 2015.
This decision is in line with the European Parliament's resolution adopted on 27 April 2017 and comprises a series of observations that form
an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 27 April 2017).
Amongst Parliaments main observations in the resolution accompanying the discharge decision, the latter called on the EEAS to remedy
certain weaknesses found by the Court in the recruitment procedures of local agents in delegations (i.e. a lack of transparency as regards
certain steps of the procedure) and in procurement procedures (notably incorrect appraisals of offers compared to technical specifications or
use of the incorrect procurement procedure) organised by delegations.

2016/2160(DEC) - 27/04/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

The European Parliament decided to grant discharge to the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy discharge
in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European External Action Service for the financial year 2015.
In its resolution accompanying the decision on discharge, adopted by 512 votes to 120 with 3 abstentions, Parliament welcomed the fact that
the overall level of error in the administrative budget has been estimated by the Court of Auditors at 0.5 % and that no significant weaknesses
were identified as regards the annual activity report and the internal control system of the EEAS;
Budget and financial management: Parliament noted that the total budget of the EEAS for 2015 was EUR 602.8 million, representing a total
increase of 16.2 % compared to 2014, which resulted from the transfer to its budget of EUR 71.5 million from the Commissions administrative
budget (EUR 25.2 million) and from other budget lines (up to EUR 46.3 million) to finance the common costs of the Unions delegations such as
rents, offices security and IT costs.
Members regretted the increase of the average rate of anomaly on commitments to 22.4 % in 2015 (compared to 18.3 % in 2014) at the level
of ex ante controls. They pointed out that the execution of the EEAS administrative budget remains a point of concern and invited all the
stakeholders to further refine and simplify the budget sources and arrangements.
EEAS actions: Parliament made a series of observations on the management of the EEAS:
remedy certain weaknesses found by the Court in the recruitment procedures of local agents in delegations and in procurement
procedures;
pay attention, especially in delegations, to business continuity and document management as key internal control standards,
particularly for the availability and reliability of information used for various management purposes;
ensure a more balanced distribution of staff: the share of Member States diplomats represents 32.9 % of the EEAS overall AD staff in
comparison to 33.8 % in 2014; this proportion is higher in delegations with 43.1 %;
reshape its conditions and recruitment policies in order to attract both genders equally for management positions, the ratio is currently
at 21.4 % / 78.6 %.
make geographical balance an important element of the EEAS human resources management, particularly with respect to the
Member States that have acceded the Union in 2004 or after;
develop the role of Union delegations, particularly facilitating and supporting coordination between Member States in providing
consular assistance;
join the future Inter-Institutional Agreement on a Mandatory Transparency Register, including for the Union delegations, insofar as this
is legally possible.
The EEAS is called upon to:
present a review of its human resources policy in the course of 2017, addressing issues such as gender balance and mobility of staff
between institutions;
overhaul its building policies notably as regards the need for consistency and improved selecting of delegation buildings. Members
welcomed the increase in co-location projects of Union delegations and encouraged the EEAS to further seek ways to extend this
good practice;
give priority to strengthening the security of the EEAS and when choosing buildings and spaces for its delegations.
Lastly, the EEAS should improve its communication policy towards Union citizens.

