Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2179(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2015 discharge: European Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders (Frontex)

Subject
8.70.03.05 2015 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

CONT

Appointed
05/08/2016

AYALA SENDER Inés
Shadow rapporteur

ZDECHOVSKÝ Tomáš

FITTO Raffaele

ALI Nedzhmi

DE JONG Dennis

JÁVOR Benedek

VALLI Marco
KAPPEL Barbara
Committee for opinion
Foreign Affairs

AFET

LIBE

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

12/10/2016
JEŽEK Petr

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
11/07/2016

Non-legislative basic document published

04/10/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

22/03/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

31/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

26/04/2017

Debate in Parliament

COM(2016)0475

Summary

A8-0137/2017

Summary

27/04/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

27/04/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/04/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

29/09/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0186/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2179(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/07487

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2016)0475

11/07/2016

EC

Summary

N8-0138/2016
OJ C 449 01.12.2016, p. 0208

13/09/2016

CofA

Summary

Committee draft report

PE593.859

06/02/2017

EP

Supplementary non-legislative basic
document

05873/2017

07/02/2017

CSL

PE595.380

15/02/2017

EP

PE600.899

07/03/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0137/2017

31/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0186/2017

27/04/2017

EP

Summary

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

Committee opinion

LIBE

Amendments tabled in committee

Summary

Final act
Budget 2017/1723
OJ L 252 29.09.2017, p. 0324 Summary

2016/2179(DEC) - 11/07/2016 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2015, as part of
the 2015 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders (Frontex).
CONTENT: the organisational governance of the EU consists of institutions, agencies and other EU bodies whose expenditure is included in
the general budget of the Union.
The EU's operational expenditure of these institutions takes different forms, depending on how the money is paid out and managed.
From 2014 onwards, the Commission classifies its expenditure as follows:
Direct management: the budget is implemented directly by the Commission services.
Indirect management: the Commission confers tasks of implementation of the budget to bodies of EU law or national law, such as the
EU agencies.
Shared management: under this method of budget implementation tasks are delegated to Member States. About 80 % of the
expenditure falls under this management mode covering such areas as agricultural spending and structural actions.
This Commission document concerns the EU's consolidated accounts for the year 2015 and details how spending by the EU institutions and
bodies was carried out. The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide financial information on the activities of the institutions, agencies
and other bodies of the EU from an accrual accounting and budgetary perspective.

It is the responsibility of the Commission's Accounting Officer to prepare the EU's consolidated annual accounts and ensure that they present
fairly, in all material aspects, the financial position, the result of the operations and the cash flows of the EU institutions and bodies, including
the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders (Frontex), with a view to granting discharge.
Discharge procedure: the final step of a budget lifecycle is the discharge of the budget for a given financial year. It represents the political
aspect of the external control of budget implementation and is the decision by which the European Parliament, acting on a Council
recommendation, "releases" the Commission (and other EU bodies) from its responsibility for management of a given budget by marking the
end of that budget's existence. The European Parliament is the discharge authority within the EU.
The discharge procedure may produce three outcomes: (i) the granting; (ii) postponement or; (iii) the refusal of the discharge.
The final discharge report including specific recommendations to the Commission for action is adopted in plenary by the European Parliament
and are subject to an annual follow up report in which the Commission outlines the concrete actions it has taken to implement the
recommendations made.
Each agency is subject to its own discharge procedure, including Frontex.
FRONTEX: the Agency, which is located in Warsaw (PL), was established by Council Regulation (EC) No 2007/2004, amended by Regulation
(EC) No 863/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council. Its main task is to coordinate Member States' activities in the field of the
management of external borders and to set up European Border Guard Teams (EBGT) to be deployed during joint operations.
As regards Frontexs accounts, these are presented in detail in the document on the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for
2015:
Commitment appropriations:
-

committed: EUR 152 million;

-

paid: EUR 151 million;

-

carried-over: EUR 1 million.

Payment appropriations:
-

committed: EUR 180 million;

-

paid: EUR 125 million;

-

carried-over: EUR 50 million.

For further details on expenditure, please refer to final accounts of Frontex.

2016/2179(DEC) - 13/09/2016 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Court of Auditors report on the annual accounts of the European Agency for the Management of
Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States (Frontex) for the financial year 2015, together with the Agencys replies.
CONTENT: in accordance with the tasks conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the Court
presents to the European Parliament and to the Council, in the context of the discharge procedure, a Statement of Assurance as to the
reliability of the annual accounts of each institution, body or agency of the EU, and the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying
them, on the basis of an independent external audit.
This audit focused on the annual accounts of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of
the Member States (Frontex). The Agencys task is to coordinate the Member States activities in the field of the management of external
borders (support for operational cooperation, technical and operational assistance, and risk analysis).
Statement of Assurance: pursuant to the provisions of Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the Court
has audited:
the annual accounts of the Agency, which comprise the financial statements and the reports on the implementation of the budget for
the financial year ended 31 December 2015;
the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying those accounts.
Opinion on the reliability of the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the Agencys annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects, its
financial position as at 31 December 2015 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the
provisions of its Financial Regulation and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer. However, it gave a qualified
opinion on the reliability of the accounts. The Agency underestimated the cost incurred in 2015, but not yet invoiced, for prefinanced services
related to maritime surveillance by EUR 1 723 336. This underestimation affected the accrued charges and resulted in a material misstatement
in the Agencys balance sheet and statement of financial performance.
Opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts: the Court considers that the transactions underlying the
annual accounts for the year ended 31 December 2015 are legal and regular in all material respects.
The report made a series of observations on the budgetary and financial management of the Agency, accompanied by the latters response.
The main observations may be summarised as follows:
The Courts observations:
legality and regularity of the transactions: the Court stated that the ex post audit to Iceland carried out by the Agency in October 2015
detected irregular payments totalling EUR 1.4 million related to the depreciation of a vessel participating in seven joint operations from
2011 to 2015. The Icelandic coastguard had claimed reimbursement of depreciation for that vessel even though it had exceeded the

useful life provided for in the Agencys guidelines. Whilst the Agency has the right to recover irregular payments made in the last 5
years, it announced the recovery of only the payments made since January 2015, amounting to EUR 600 000. The Court recalled that
the Commission, under ISF Borders and Visa, reimburses Member States purchases of means, such as vehicles or vessels as well as
running costs such as fuel consumption or maintenance. The Agency also reimburses such costs to participants in joint operations.
There is therefore an unaddressed risk of double funding;
budgetary management: the Court noted that the level of carry-overs for committed appropriations was high for administrative and
operational expenditure due to IT contracts extending beyond the year-end.
costs declared: the Court recalled that States participating in border operations declare the costs incurred on the basis of cost claim
sheets which comprise fixed expenses (depreciation and maintenance), variable expenses (mostly fuel) and mission expenses (mostly
allowances and other crew expenses). The costs declared are based on real values and follow national standards leading to divergent
approaches among participating states which creates a particularly burdensome system for all parties involved. The Court in its
Special Report 12/2016 recommended that agencies should use simplified cost options whenever appropriate to avoid such
inefficiencies.
The Agencys replies:
legality and regularity of the transactions: the Agency stated that it will further improve its procedure for estimating the costs to be
accrued. The implementing rules to the Frontex Financial Regulation provide that the Authorising Officer may waive recovery of an
established amount where recovery is inconsistent with the principle of proportionality. The Agency will continue its efforts to reduce
the amounts of carry-overs in view of honouring better the annuality principle. The Authorising Officer announced the recovery of EUR
600 000. He also announced not to reimburse EUR 200 000due in 2016;
budgetary management: Frontex acknowledged the explanations provided by the Court on the amounts of carry-overs;
costs declared: the Agency agreed with the Court that reimbursing costs based on real values is cumbersome and the introduction of
unit costs is a viable option, which the Agency will pursue. Furthermore, the proposal for the Border and Coast Guard Agency may
likely remove the obligation to use grants, which will pave the way for using new funding mechanisms for the Agency beyond grants.
Lastly, the Court of Auditors report also contained a summary of the Agencys key figures in 2015:
Budget: EUR 145.3 million (in commitment appropriations).
Staff: 309 including officials, temporary and contract staff and seconded national experts.

2016/2179(DEC) - 07/02/2017 Supplementary non-legislative basic document
Having examined the revenue and expenditure accounts for the financial year 2015 and the balance sheet at 31 December 2015 of the
European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States (Frontex), as well as the
Court of Auditors' report on the annual accounts of the Agency for the financial year 2015, accompanied by the Agency's replies to the Court's
observations, the Council recommended the European Parliament to give a discharge to the Executive Director of the Agency in respect of the
implementation of the budget for the financial year 2015.
The Council welcomed the Court's opinion that the transactions underlying the Agency's annual accounts for the year ended on 31 December
2015 are legal and regular in all material respects.
However, the Council regretted that the Court issued a qualified opinion on the reliability of the Agency's accounts due to the underestimation
of costs incurred in 2015 of services related to maritime surveillance that resulted in a material misstatement in the Agency's balance sheet
and statement of financial performance. The Council called on the Agency to fully recover irregular payments identified by the Court related to
the depreciation of a vessel participating in joint operations. It also called on the Agency to address the risks of double funding of the same
actions under the Internal Security Fund.
The Council made the following observations:
financial programming: the Council noted that a high level of commitment appropriations was carried over to 2016. It encouraged the
Agency to continue improving its financial programming and monitoring of the budget implementation, in order to reduce the level of
commitments carried over to the following financial year to the minimum strictly necessary;
reimbursement of costs: the Council noted the cumbersome system of reimbursing costs based on real values. It invited the Agency to
consider simplified cost options in order to achieve its policy objectives more efficiently;
recruitment: the Council encouraged the Agency to continue improving its recruitment procedures in order to ensure transparency and
equal treatment of candidates;
monitoring balances: the Council recommended the Agency to continue monitoring supplier balances more regularly and to improve
the documentation supporting the expenditure claimed by cooperating countries, including by audit certificates, to ensure the legality
and regularity of transactions;
associated countries: the Council invited the Agency to continue refining the calculation of contributions from Schengen associated
countries (Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Iceland and Norway) to reflect better the related legal provisions.

2016/2179(DEC) - 31/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Inés AYALA SENDER (S&D, ES) on discharge in respect of the implementation of
the budget of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the
European Union (Frontex) for the financial year 2015.
The committee called on the European Parliament to grant the Executive Director of the Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of
the Agencys budget for the financial year 2015.
Noting that the Court of Auditors stated that it had obtained reasonable assurance that the annual accounts of the Agency for the financial year
2015 were reliable and that the underlying transactions were legal and regular, Members called on Parliament to approve the closure of the

Agencys accounts. They made, however, a number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is granted,
in addition to the general recommendations that appear in the draft resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU
agencies:
Agencys financial statements: Members noted that the final budget of the European Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union (now European Border and Coast Guard Agency)
for the financial year 2015 was EUR 143.3 million, representing an increase of 46.31 % compared to 2014. The increase was mainly
due to two amendments for the relevant operations in the Mediterranean amounting to EUR 28 million.
Reliability of the accounts: Members noted that the Court issued a qualified opinion on the reliability of the Agencys accounts. The
basis being the underestimation of the cost incurred in 2015 but not yet invoiced for pre-financed services related to maritime
surveillance by EUR 1 723 336. They acknowledged that the Agency has already taken corrective measures to prevent such issues
from taking place in the future. They noted, in the Courts opinion, except for the effects of the matter regarding the underestimation of
the incurred but not yet invoiced costs, the Agencys annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects, its financial position as at
31 December 2015 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the provisions of its
financial regulation and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer.
Members detected however irregular payments in Iceland as well as double funding relating to the Internal Security Fund (ISF).
Members also made a series of observations regarding the budget and financial management, commitments and carry-overs, the prevention
and management of conflicts of interests, transfers and internal audits.
The report recalled that in previous years the high and constantly increasing number of grant agreements, as well as the magnitude of related
expenditure to be verified by the Agency, indicated that a more efficient and cost-effective alternative funding mechanism could be used to
finance the Agencys operational activities. Members acknowledged that the Agencys new founding regulation has removed the term grants as
the contractual instrument for the operational activities between the Agency and the institutions of the Members States. They hoped that this
modification will allow the Agency to streamline the financial management of its operational activities.
Lastly, they welcomed both the contribution of the Agency to saving more than 250 000 people at sea in 2015 and the support provided to
national authorities in hotspot areas in relation to the identification and registration of migrants, return-related activities and Union internal
security.

2016/2179(DEC) - 27/04/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament decided to grant discharge to the Executive Director of the European Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union (Frontex) in respect of the implementation of the Agencys
budget for the financial year 2015.
The vote on the discharge decision covers the closure of the accounts (in accordance with Annex IV, Article 5(1)(a) to its Rules of Procedure).
Noting that the Court of Auditors issued a statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts and the legality and regularity of the
underlying transactions for the financial year 2015, Parliament adopted by 492 votes to 124, with 3 abstentions, a resolution containing a
number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is granted, in addition to the general recommendations
that appear in the resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies.
These recommendations may be summarised as follows:
Agencys financial statements: Parliament noted that the final budget of the European Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union (now European Border and Coast Guard Agency)
for the financial year 2015 was EUR 143.3 million, representing an increase of 46.31 % compared to 2014. The increase was mainly
due to two amendments for the relevant operations in the Mediterranean amounting to EUR 28 million.
Reliability of the accounts: Parliament noted that the Court issued a qualified opinion on the reliability of the Agencys accounts. The
basis being the underestimation of the cost incurred in 2015 but not yet invoiced for pre-financed services related to maritime
surveillance by EUR 1 723 336. It acknowledged that the Agency has already taken corrective measures to prevent such issues from
taking place in the future. It noted, in the Courts opinion, except for the effects of the matter regarding the underestimation of the
incurred but not yet invoiced costs, the Agencys annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects, its financial position as at 31
December 2015 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the provisions of its
financial regulation and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer. Members detected however irregular
payments in Iceland as well as double funding relating to the Internal Security Fund (ISF).
Parliament also made a series of observations regarding the budget and financial management, commitments and carry-overs, transfers and
internal audits.
It noted that Frontex did not sufficiently address the existing potential for conflicts of interest when setting up teams managing the negotiations
of joint operation grants. It called on the Agency to introduce measures and an appropriate policy to safeguard the principles of transparency
and ensure the absence of conflicts of interest on the part of negotiation teams.
Parliament recalled that in previous years the high and constantly increasing number of grant agreements, as well as the magnitude of related
expenditure to be verified by the Agency, indicated that a more efficient and cost-effective alternative funding mechanism could be used to
finance the Agencys operational activities. It acknowledged that the Agencys new founding regulation has removed the term grants as the
contractual instrument for the operational activities between the Agency and the institutions of the Members States. Members hoped that this
modification will allow the Agency to streamline the financial management of its operational activities.
Lastly, Parliament welcomed both the contribution of the Agency to saving more than 250 000 people at sea in 2015 and the support provided
to national authorities in hotspot areas in relation to the identification and registration of migrants, return-related activities and Union internal
security. It welcomed the support provided to national authorities in hotspot areas in relation to the identification and registration of migrants,
return-related activities and Union internal security and the signature of an operational cooperation agreement with Europol to deter
cross-border crime and migrant smuggling.

2016/2179(DEC) - 27/04/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the
Member States of the European Union (FRONTEX) for the financial year 2015.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2017/1723 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of
the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
(now European Border and Coast Guard Agency (Frontex)) for the financial year 2015.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the executive director of the European Border and Coast
Guard Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agency's budget for the financial year 2015.
This decision is in line with the European Parliament's resolution adopted on 27 April 2017 and comprises a series of observations that form
an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 27 April 2017).
Amongst Parliaments main observations in the resolution accompanying the discharge decision, it noted that, according to the Court's report,
Frontex did not sufficiently address the existing potential for conflicts of interest when setting up teams managing the negotiations of joint
operation grants. It called on the Agency to introduce measures and an appropriate policy to safeguard the principles of transparency and
ensure the absence of conflicts of interest on the part of negotiation teams. Formal conflict of interest policies for external experts, internal staff
and governing board members should be set up.
Parliament welcomed the contribution of the Agency to saving more than 250 000 people at sea in 2015 and the increase in the Agency's
search and rescue capacity following the tragic events of spring 2015.
As regards the headquarters, Parliament noted with satisfaction that on 23 January 2017 the Agency and the Polish Government initialled the
draft headquarters agreement.

