Procedure file
Basic information
2016/0120(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure completed

EU and Euratom/Georgia, Japan, Norway, Kyrgyzstan, Armenia,
Kazakhstan, Korea, Tajikistan, USA Agreement: continuing the International
Science and Technology Center

Subject
3.50.20 Scientific and technological cooperation and agreements
6.10.03 Armaments control, non-proliferation nuclear weapons
Geographical area
Tajikistan
Kyrgyzstan
Norway
Japan
United States
Armenia
South Korea
Georgia
Kazakhstan

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
12/07/2016

BROK Elmar
Shadow rapporteur

BENIFEI Brando

VAUTMANS Hilde
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

INTA

International Trade

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Appointed

Commissioner

Communications Networks, Content and Technology MOEDAS Carlos

Key events
26/04/2016

Initial legislative proposal published

17/05/2016

Legislative proposal published

22/06/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

29/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/12/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

JOIN(2016)0019

Summary

08558/2016

Summary

A8-0363/2016

Summary

19/01/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

19/01/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

06/02/2017

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

06/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

14/02/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0007/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0120(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 218-p6a; Treaty on European
Union TEU 037; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 180

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/06387

Documentation gateway
Document attached to the procedure

12681/2015

20/10/2015

CSL

JOIN(2016)0019

26/04/2016

ECHR

Summary

Legislative proposal

08558/2016

17/05/2016

CSL

Summary

Committee draft report

PE589.222

29/09/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0363/2016

02/12/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0007/2017

19/01/2017

EP

Summary

Initial legislative proposal

Final act
Decision 2017/248
OJ L 037 14.02.2017, p. 0001 Summary

2016/0120(NLE) - 26/04/2016 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude the Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Centre between the European Union and
Euratom acting as one Party and Georgia, Japan, the Kingdom of Norway, the Kyrgyz Republic, the Republic of Armenia, the Republic of
Kazakhstan, the Republic of Korea, the Republic of Tajikistan, and the United States of America.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the International Science and Technology Centre ('ISTC') was set up in 1994 after the collapse of the Soviet Union. It was
funded together with other Parties (USA, Canada, and Japan) through an international multilateral agreement for the purpose of
non-proliferation of scientific and technical expertise related to weapons of mass destruction (WMD). Over time, other Parties joined the
Agreement, i.e. Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kirghizstan, Republic of Korea, Norway, Russian Federation and Tajikistan.
The ISTC works at the crossroads between scientific research and non-proliferation, and has funded almost 3000 projects with a total value of
over EUR 550 million. The Union contribution amounts to approximately EUR 270 million.

In the latest years the concept and the work of the ISTC as a science centre evolved to take into account the changing proliferation landscape,
the results of threat analyses and the evolving needs of the parties. It increasingly focused on supporting projects aiming at mitigation of
broader Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear risks, not necessarily focused on scientists' redirection, but on promoting bio safety
and biosecurity, physical upgrades of laboratories as well as stimulation of networking activities among relevant scientific communities.
Following the 2010 announced withdrawal of the Russian Federation, that becomes effective on 15 July 2015, the Parties agreed that a new
Agreement needs to be put in place in order for the Centre to effectively fulfil its mandate under changed circumstances. On 21 October 2013,
the Council authorised the Commission to start negotiations. The aims set out in the negotiating directives have been fully met.
In accordance with the Council Decision (EU) 2015/1989 the Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Centre between
the European Union and Euratom acting as one Party and Georgia, Japan, Norway, the Kyrgyz Republic, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Korea,
Tajikistan, and the United States of America was signed on 9 December 2015, subject to its conclusion at a later date.
CONTENT: the Commission proposed that the Council adopt a decision aiming to conclude, on behalf of the European Union, the Agreement
continuing the International Science and Technology Centre between the European Union and Euratom acting as one Party and Georgia,
Japan, Norway, the Kyrgyz Republic, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Korea, Tajikistan, and the United States.
The Centre's core objectives as laid down in the continuation Agreement. These objectives are:
to promote the improvement of international mechanisms for the prevention of the proliferation of WMD and their delivery systems, as
well as of technologies, materials, and expertise that are key elements directly related to the development, production, use, or
enhancement of WMD or their delivery systems (including dual-use technology, materials, and expertise);
to give scientists and engineers with knowledge and skills applicable to WMD and their delivery systems, including dual-use
knowledge and skills, opportunities for training and alternative employment where their knowledge and skills can be used for peaceful
activities;
to promote a culture of security with respect to the handling and use of materials, equipment, and technology which could be used for
the design, development, production, or use of WMD or their means of delivery; and
to contribute through its activities: (i) to the development of international scientific partnership, strengthening global security, and
fostering economic growth through innovation; (ii) to basic and applied research and technology development and commercialization,
inter alia, in the fields of environment, energy, health, and nuclear, chemical, and biological safety and security; and (iii) to promoting
the further integration of scientists with technologies, material, and expertise applicable to WMD into the international scientific
community.
In line with the negotiations directives, the Agreement:
foresees that all the activities will benefit from the tax-free regime and other tax privileges in the recipient countries;
enables the funding Parties to have full access to monitor, audit, evaluate and inspect EU funded projects, including inspection of the
facilities benefiting from the funding;
sets the immunities and privileges for the ISTC staff, including for the staff working on the behalf of the European Union. The text of
Article 12 of the Agreement is fully compliant with the provision of Vienna Convention on diplomatic relations of 18 April 1961.

2016/0120(NLE) - 17/05/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude the Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Center.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Center between the European Union and the European
Atomic Energy Community ("Euratom") acting as one Party and Georgia, Japan, Norway, the Kyrgyz Republic, Armenia, Kazakhstan, the
Republic of Korea, Tajikistan, and the United States of America was signed on 9 December 2015, subject to its conclusion at a later date.
It is now necessary to approve the Agreement.
CONTENT: the draft Council Decision seeks to approve, on behalf of the European Union, the Agreement continuing the International Science
and Technology Center.
The Center's core objectives as laid down in the continuation Agreement are as follows:
to promote the improvement of international mechanisms for the prevention of the proliferation of WMD and their delivery systems, as
well as of technologies, materials, and expertise that are key elements directly related to the development, production, use, or
enhancement of WMD or their delivery systems (including dual-use technology, materials, and expertise);
to give scientists and engineers with knowledge and skills applicable to WMD and their delivery systems, including dual-use
knowledge and skills, opportunities for training and alternative employment where their knowledge and skills can be used for peaceful
activities;
to promote a culture of security with respect to the handling and use of materials, equipment, and technology which could be used for
the design, development, production, or use of WMD or their means of delivery;
to contribute through its activities: (i) to the development of international scientific partnership, strengthening global security, and
fostering economic growth through innovation; (ii) to basic and applied research and technology development and commercialization,
inter alia, in the fields of environment, energy, health, and nuclear, chemical, and biological safety and security; and (iii) to promoting
the further integration of scientists with technologies, material, and expertise applicable to WMD into the international scientific
community.
The Center shall have a Governing Board and a Secretariat, consisting of an Executive Director (who serves as the chief executive officer),
Deputy Executive Director(s), and other personnel of the Center, in accordance with the Statute of the Center.
Projects approved by the Governing Board may be financed or supported by the Center, Parties, non-governmental organizations,

foundations, academic and scientific institutions, inter-governmental organizations, and organizations in the private sector.
In line with the Agreement, the funding Parties will have full access to monitor, audit, evaluate and inspect EU funded projects, including
inspection of the facilities benefiting from the funding.
The Agreement foresees that all the activities will benefit from the tax-free regime and other tax privileges in the recipient countries.

2016/0120(NLE) - 02/12/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the report by Elmar BROK (EPP, DE) on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the
Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Center.
The committee recommended that the European Parliament give its consent to the conclusion of the Agreement.
In brief, the proposed Decision aims to conclude the Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Center (ISTC) after the
withdrawal of Russian participation, signed on 9 December 2015, requiring Parliaments consent in order to enter into force for the parts falling
under the competence of the Treaties on the European Union, and on Functioning of the EU, respectively. Parts of the Agreement falling within
the competence of the EURATOM Treaty have been already adopted by the EU, which did not require Parliaments consent.
The Agreement will ensure that the on-going and new projects shall continue with a changed membership, a broader geographical scope
possibly including the Middle East region, and a set of updated objectives more specifically targeting dual-use knowledge.
In the short justification accompanying the report, the rapporteur shared the concern about the global security and safety challenges posed by
the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (including nuclear, radiological, chemical, and biological). He therefore fully supported
measures aimed at preventing proliferating of know-how, technology and materials, as well as their means of delivery in this respect in
accordance with United Nations Security Council Resolutions, and G8 commitments, aimed at States and non-State actors attempting to
acquire or use them.
In this context, the rapporteur recommended giving consent to the Agreement providing continuation of activities of the ISTC moved to Astana,
Kazakhstan, following withdrawal of Russia from the Center in July 2015, as announced in 2010.
He reminded the Commission, VP-HR and the Council of its obligation to automatically inform the European Parliament at the start of the
negotiations including giving access to draft and adopted negotiating directives, as stipulated in Article 218 (10) TFEU, and provided for further
by EU case-law.

2016/0120(NLE) - 19/01/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 601 votes to 51, with 19 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion of the Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Center.
In line with the recommendation made by the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the European Parliament gave its consent to the conclusion of the
Agreement.
In brief, the Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Centre between the European Union and EURATOM acting as
one Party, and Georgia, Japan, Norway, Kirghizia, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Korea, Tajikistan, and the United States of America was signed on 9
December 2015, subject to its conclusion at a later date.
The proposed Decision seeks to conclude the Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Center (ISTC) after the
withdrawal of Russian participation, signed on 9 December 2015, requiring Parliaments consent in order to enter into force for the parts falling
under the competence of the Treaties on the European Union, and on Functioning of the EU, respectively.
The ISTC Continuation Agreement will ensure that the on-going and new projects shall continue with a changed membership, a broader
geographical scope possibly including the Middle East region, and a set of updated objectives more specifically targeting dual-use knowledge.

2016/0120(NLE) - 06/02/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to conclude the Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Centre.
NON LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2017/248 on the conclusion of the Agreement continuing the International Science and
Technology Center.
CONTENT: the Council approved, on behalf of the European Union, the conclusion of the Agreement continuing the International Science and
Technology Center (ISTC).
The ISTC, set up by an agreement signed in 1992 as an intergovernmental organisation, is a multilateral instrument allowing scientific
communities from several countries (the EU, Japan, the United States, South Korea, Norway, Armenia, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Kirghizstan
and Georgia) to work together on the relationship between research and security. Its headquarters is in Kazakhstan.
The Centres objectives are to:
·

promote the improvement of international mechanisms for the prevention of the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)
and their delivery systems, as well as to promote a culture of security in this area;

·

give scientists and engineers with knowledge and skills applicable to WMD and their delivery systems, including dual-use knowledge
and skills, and opportunities for training and alternative employment where their knowledge and skills can be used for peaceful
activities;

·

contribute to basic and applied research, inter alia, in the fields of environment, energy, health, and nuclear, chemical, and biological
safety and security.

The Council authorised the opening of negotiations in October 2013 by way of follow-up to the withdrawal of Russia from the ISTC. The
Agreement continuing the International Science and Technology Center was signed on 9 December 2015, subject to its conclusion at a later
date.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 6.2.2017.

