Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Decision

2016/0031(COD)

Procedure completed

Member State/third country intergovernmental agreements in the field of
energy: information exchange mechanism
Repealing Decision No 994/2012/EU 2011/0238(COD)
Subject
3.60.15 Cooperation and agreements for energy
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.40 Relations with third countries

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Rapporteur

Industry, Research and Energy

Appointed
25/02/2016

KRASNODĘBSKI
Zdzisław
Shadow rapporteur

URUTCHEV Vladimir

BALČYTIS Zigmantas

MLINAR Angelika

SYLIKIOTIS Neoklis

TARAND Indrek

BORRELLI David
SCHAFFHAUSER
Jean-Luc
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

AFET

Appointed
15/03/2016

KUKAN Eduard
INTA

International Trade

14/03/2016
BENDTSEN Bendt

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Energy

Commissioner
ARIAS CAÑETE Miguel

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the
Regions

Key events
Legislative proposal published

Summary

16/02/2016

COM(2016)0053

07/03/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

06/06/2016

Debate in Council

13/10/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

13/10/2016

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

18/10/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0305/2016

26/01/2017

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE613.653 GEDA/A/(2017)000419

01/03/2017

Debate in Parliament

02/03/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

02/03/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

21/03/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

05/04/2017

Final act signed

05/04/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

12/04/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

Summary

T8-0059/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0031(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Decision
Repealing Decision No 994/2012/EU 2011/0238(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 194-p2

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ITRE/8/05762

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0053

16/02/2016

EC

Document attached to the
procedure

SWD(2016)0027

16/02/2016

EC

Document attached to the
procedure

SWD(2016)0028

16/02/2016

EC

PE580.750

14/04/2016

NP

Reasoned opinion

AT_BUNDESRAT

Summary

Committee draft report

PE583.986

30/05/2016

EP

Reasoned opinion

PT_PARLIAMENT

PE584.132

09/06/2016

NP

Reasoned opinion

MT_PARLIAMENT

PE584.133

13/06/2016

NP

Reasoned opinion

FR_SENATE

PE584.204

15/06/2016

NP

PE585.613

01/07/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in
committee
Committee opinion

AFET

PE582.061

14/09/2016

EP

Committee opinion

INTA

PE583.920

27/09/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for
plenary, 1st reading/single
reading

A8-0305/2016

18/10/2016

EP

Coreper letter confirming
interinstitutional agreement

GEDA/A/(2017)000419

13/01/2017

CSL

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0059/2017

02/03/2017

EP

Commission response to text
adopted in plenary

SP(2017)309

16/05/2017

Summary

Summary

Final act
Decision 2017/684
OJ L 099 12.04.2017, p. 0001 Summary

2016/0031(COD) - 16/02/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish an information exchange mechanism with regard to intergovernmental agreements (IGAs) and non-binding
instruments between Member States and third countries in the field of energy.
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: Decision 994/2012/EU established an information exchange mechanism with regard to intergovernmental agreements (IGAs)
between Member States and third countries in the field of energy. The main feature of this mechanism is that the Commission carries out
compliance checks of IGAs after a Member State and a third country have concluded such agreements.
Decision No 994/2012/EU was useful for receiving information on existing intergovernmental agreements and for identifying problems posed
by them in terms of their compatibility with Union law. However, it proved ineffective in terms of ensuring compliance of intergovernmental
agreements with Union law.
The European Council in its conclusions of 19 March 2015 also called for full compliance with EU law of all agreements related to the buying
of gas from external suppliers, notably by reinforcing transparency of such agreements and compatibility with EU energy security provisions
The review of the current IGA Decision forms part of the deliverables of the Energy Union Strategy adopted in February 2015, which sets the
overall context and governance structure for a renewed EU energy policy.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: five policy options have been considered in the Impact Assessment: the option maintained was the one in which the
Commission carries out obligatory ex-ante assessments of IGAs.
CONTENT: the proposal seeks to repeal and replace Decision No 994/2012/EU and aims to:
ensure the compliance of IGAs with EU law to ensure the proper functioning of the internal market and enhance the EU's energy security; and
enhance the transparency of IGAs in order to increase the cost effectiveness of the EU's energy supply and solidarity between Member States
The IGA Decision thus applies to all energy commodity related supply and infrastructure IGAs, in particular gas, oil and electricity. Only IGAs
concerning matters within the purview of the Euratom Treaty are not covered. For these IGAs Article 103 of the Euratom Treaty provides for a
specific ex-ante procedure. The scope of the IGA Decision excludes commercial contracts between commercial entities.
The revised Decision contains the following elements:
Notification obligations with regard to intergovernmental agreements: Member States should:

inform the Commission of its intent to enter into negotiations with third country regarding conclusion of new intergovernmental
agreements or amending existing ones;
notify to Commission a draft intergovernmental agreement or amendment with all accompanying documents as soon as agreement
has been reached in the negotiations by the parties.
Assessment by the Commission: the Commission should:
perform ex-ante assessment of draft intergovernmental agreements or amendments and to inform Member State of possible doubts it
may have as to the compatibility with Union law, in particular with internal energy market legislation and Union competition law within
six week;
inform Member State of its opinion on compatibility of intergovernmental agreement or amendment with Union law within 12 weeks of
date of notification.
Member States shall not conclude proposed intergovernmental agreement or amendment until Commission informed Member State of any
doubts and its opinion.
Obligation of Member State to submit to Commission existing and future non-binding instruments with all accompanying documents. The
Commission may perform ex-post assessment of submitted non-binding instruments and inform Member State accordingly if it considers
measures implementing the non-binding instrument could conflict with Union law.
The Commission should share documents it has received with other Member States in accordance with confidentiality provisions.

2016/0031(COD) - 18/10/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted the report by Zdzis?aw KRASNOD?BSKI (ECR, PL) on the proposal for a decision
of the European Parliament and of the Council on establishing an information exchange mechanism with regard to intergovernmental
agreements and non-binding instruments between Member States and third countries in the field of energy and repealing Decision No
994/2012/EU.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Subject matter and scope: Members stated that the proposed decision should ensure the correct functioning of the internal energy market and
ensure security of supply to the Union and to help achieve the goals of the Energy Union Strategy.
Intergovernmental agreement: the definition should cover any legally binding agreement, regardless of its formal designation having a potential
impact on the operation or the functioning of the internal energy market or on the security of energy supply in the Union and which may
concern the purchase, trade, sale, transit, storage or supply of energy in or to at least one Member State, or the construction or operation of
energy infrastructure with a physical connection to at least one Member State.
Notice of negotiations: once the Member State has given the Commission such notice of negotiations, the Member State concerned shall keep
the Commission regularly informed of the progress of the negotiations. The information provided to the Commission shall include indications of
the provisions to be addressed in the negotiations, the objectives of the negotiations and other relevant information in accordance with
confidentiality provisions.
The Commission shall make the information received, with the exception of confidential parts identified and any note regarding the
incompatibility with Union law accessible to all Member States in order to ensure that the objectives of the Energy Union are achieved.
The obligation to notify to the Commission shall not apply in respect of agreements that are concluded solely between undertakings . However,
subject to fully respecting commercially sensitive information Member States should be obliged to communicate to the Commission
agreements that are concluded solely between undertakings where they are referred to explicitly in intergovernmental agreements or
non-binding instrument.
Assistance from the Commission: during the negotiations of an intergovernmental agreement, the Commission should develop, together with
Member States, optional model clauses or guidelines in order to avoid incompatibility of intergovernmental agreements with Union's energy
security objectives.
Where the Commission considers it to be necessary in view of the functioning of the internal energy market or the security of energy supply in
the Union, it shall participate in the negotiations as an observer without limiting Member States freedom of negotiations . A Member State
concerned may also request the assistance of the Commission in the negotiations
Commission representatives shall handle sensitive information received during the negotiations with due confidentiality
Commissions assessment: where the Commission finds an intergovernmental agreement or amendment to be incompatible with Union law, it
shall provide the Member State with a detailed opinion. Before signing, ratifying or agreeing to an intergovernmental agreement or
amendment, the Member State concerned shall demonstrate how the Commission's opinion has been addressed in order to ensure full
compliance with Union law. The Commission shall inform the Member State concerned of its doubts that the measures implementing the
non-binding instrument could conflict with Union law or the objectives of the Energy Union Strategy.
Before signing, ratifying or agreeing to a non-binding instrument or amendment, the Member State concerned shall demonstrate how the
Commission's opinion has been addressed.
Transparency and confidentiality: the Commission shall make information which has not been identified as confidential accessible in secure
electronic form to all other Member States as well as its summaries, together with the note regarding any incompatibility with Union law as well
as its comments regarding the compliance with the Energy Union Strategy.
IT systems: by 1 year after the date of entry into force of this Decision, the Commission shall, on the basis of best practices and after
consulting Member States, develop an aggregated information system which, while protecting the confidentiality of sensitive information,
guarantees increased transparency of the main elements of intergovernmental agreements so as to establish an indicative benchmark which

can be used by Member States in negotiations in order to prevent the abuse of dominant positions by third countries.

2016/0031(COD) - 02/03/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 542 votes to 87, with 19 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council on establishing an information exchange mechanism with regard to intergovernmental agreements
and non-binding instruments between Member States and third countries in the field of energy and repealing Decision No 994/2012/EU.
The European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as
follows:
Subject-matter and scope: the amended text stipulated that the Decision establishes a mechanism for the exchange of information between
Member States and the Commission with regard to intergovernmental agreements in the field of energy, in order to ensure the functioning of
the internal energy market and enhance the security of energy supply in the Union. Members stressed the importance of transparency and
compliance with Union law to ensure the energy stability of the Union.
Intergovernmental Agreement: the definition covers any legally binding agreement, regardless of its formal designation, between one or more
Member States and one or more third countries, or between one or more Member States and an international organisation, which concerns:
(a) the purchase, trade, sale, transit, storage or supply of energy in or to at least one Member State; or (b) the construction or operation of
energy infrastructure with a physical connection to at least one Member State.
Notification obligations: when a Member State intends to enter into negotiations with a third country or an international organisation in order to
amend an intergovernmental agreement or to conclude a new intergovernmental agreement, the Member State concerned should keep the
Commission regularly informed of the progress of the negotiations. The information provided to the Commission shall include an indication of
the provisions to be addressed in the negotiations and the objectives of the negotiations in accordance with the provisions on confidentiality.
Where the ratified intergovernmental agreement refers explicitly to other texts, the Member State concerned shall also submit those other texts
in so far as they contain elements which concern the purchase, trade, sale, transit, storage or supply of energy in or to at least one Member
State or the construction or operation of energy infrastructure with a physical connection to at least one Member State.
Moreover, where a Member State negotiates an intergovernmental agreement relating to electricity and has been unable to reach a firm
conclusion as to the compatibility with Union law, it shall notify to the Commission the draft agreement for ex-ante assessment, as soon as an
agreement has been reached by the parties on all the main elements of that draft, but before the closure of formal negotiations.
Where a Member State is in doubt as to whether an agreement constitutes an intergovernmental agreement and thus whether it is to be
notified, the Member State shall consult the Commission without delay.
Assistance from the Commission: the Commission services may provide it with advice on how to avoid incompatibility with Union law of the
intergovernmental agreement. Such advice may include relevant optional model clauses and guidance that the Commission develops in
consultation with Member States.
The Commission services may also draw the attention of the Member State concerned to the relevant Union energy policy objectives,
including on the Energy Union. The Commission may request to participate in the negotiations as an observer where it considers this to be
necessary. The Commissions participation shall be subject to the written approval of the Member State concerned.
Assessment by the Commission: the Commission shall, within five weeks of the date of notification of the complete draft intergovernmental
agreement or amendment, inform the Member State concerned of any doubts it may have as to the compatibility with Union law of the draft
intergovernmental agreement or amendment.
Before signing, ratifying or agreeing to an intergovernmental agreement or amendment, the Member State concerned shall take utmost
account of the Commission's opinion.
Notification with respect to non-binding instruments: in the interest of transparency, Member States shall submit to the Commission
non-binding instruments which set out the conditions for energy supply, such as volumes and prices, or for the development of energy
infrastructures.
If a non-binding instrument or an amendment refers explicitly to other texts, the Member State should also be able to submit those other texts.
Model clauses: by one year after the date of entry into force of this Decision, the Commission shall, on the basis of best practices and in
consultation with Member States, develop optional model clauses and guidance, including a list of examples of clauses that do not respect
Union law and should therefore not be used.

2016/0031(COD) - 05/04/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to address the shortcomings of the current mechanism for the exchange of information on international energy contracts.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2017/684 of the European Parliament and of the Council on establishing an information exchange
mechanism with regard to intergovernmental agreements and non-binding instruments between Member States and third countries in the field
of energy, and repealing Decision No 994/2012/EU.
CONTENT: this Decision establishes a mechanism for the exchange of information between Member States and the Commission with regard
to intergovernmental agreements in the field of energy. It repeals Decision No 994/2012/EU which has proved to be ineffective in terms of
ensuring the compliance of intergovernmental agreements with Union law.
The European Parliament, in its resolution of 15 December 2015 entitled Towards a European Energy Union, stressed the need to enhance
the coherence of the Union's external energy security policies and greater transparency in energy-related agreements.
The main elements of the Decision are the following:

Interinstitutional Agreement: the definition covers any legally binding agreement, regardless of its formal designation, between one or
more Member States and one or more third countries, or between one or more Member States and an international organisation,
which concerns:
the purchase, trade, sale, transit, storage or supply of energy in or to at least one Member State; or
the construction or operation of energy infrastructure with a physical connection to at least one Member State.
Notification obligations: when a Member State intends to enter into negotiations with a third country or an international organisation in order to
amend an intergovernmental agreement or to conclude a new intergovernmental agreement, it shall inform the Commission in writing of its
intention at the earliest possible moment before the envisaged opening of the negotiations . It shall keep the Commission regularly informed of
the progress of the negotiations.
Where that draft agreement or amendment refers explicitly to other texts, the respective Member State shall also submit those other texts in so
far as they contain elements which concern the purchase, trade, sale, transit, storage or supply of gas or oil in or to at least one Member State
or the construction or operation of gas or oil infrastructure with a physical connection to at least one Member State.
Assistance from the Commission: the Commission services may provide Member States with advice on how to avoid incompatibility with Union
law of the intergovernmental agreement under negotiation. Such advice may include relevant optional model clauses and guidance that the
Commission develops in consultation with Member States.
At the request of the Member State concerned, the Commission may participate in the negotiations as an observer.
Assessment by the Commission: the Commission shall:
within 5 weeks of the date of notification of the complete draft intergovernmental agreement or amendment, including any annexes
thereto, inform the Member State concerned of any doubts it may have as to the compatibility with Union law of the draft
intergovernmental agreement;
provide the Member State concerned with its opinion on the compatibility with Union law, in particular with internal energy market rules
and Union competition law, of the draft intergovernmental agreement or amendment within 12 weeks of the date of notification.
The Member State shall not agree to the draft intergovernmental agreement or amendment until the Commission has informed the
Member State of any doubts, or, where applicable, has issued its opinion.
Before signing an intergovernmental agreement, the Member State concerned shall take utmost account of the Commission's opinion.
Non-binding instruments: they may be subject to a notification, on a voluntary basis, before or after their adoption.
Coordination among Member States: the Commission shall review developments in relation to intergovernmental agreements and striving for
consistency and coherence in the Union's external energy relations with producer, transit, and consumer countries.
By 3 May 2018, the Commission shall develop optional model clauses and guidance, including a list of examples of clauses that do not
respect Union law and should therefore not be used.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 2.5.2017.

