Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2148(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Investing in jobs and growth - maximising the contribution of European
Structural and Investment Funds: an evaluation of the report under Article
16(3) of the CPR
See also Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 2011/0276(COD)
Subject
4.15.02 Employment: guidelines, actions, Funds
4.70.01 Structural funds, investment funds in general, programmes

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
REGI Regional Development
(Associated committee)

Rapporteur

Appointed
16/02/2016

VAN NISTELROOIJ
Lambert
Shadow rapporteur

WESTPHAL Kerstin

PORĘBA Tomasz Piotr

VAN MILTENBURG
Matthijs

MICHELS Martina

ROPĖ Bronis

D'AMATO Rosa
Committee for opinion
BUDG

Rapporteur for opinion

Budgets

Appointed
18/05/2016

VIOTTI Daniele
CONT

Budgetary Control

EMPL Employment and Social Affairs
(Associated committee)

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
14/04/2016
PIRINSKI Georgi

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

25/01/2016
ZŁOTOWSKI Kosma

AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

15/03/2016
DĂNCILĂ Viorica

CULT

Culture and Education

23/02/2016
CHOUNTIS Nikolaos

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Economic and Financial Affairs

KATAINEN Jyrki

Key events
14/12/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

15/09/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

15/09/2016

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

29/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

15/12/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

15/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

16/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

16/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

16/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

COM(2015)0639

Summary

A8-0385/2016

Summary

T8-0053/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2148(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Implementation
See also Regulation (EU) No 1303/2013 2011/0276(COD)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

REGI/8/07019

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0639

14/12/2015

EC

Committee draft report

PE587.442

22/07/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE589.248

19/09/2016

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

BUDG

PE587.417

12/10/2016

EP

Committee opinion

CULT

PE582.241

14/10/2016

EP

Committee opinion

AGRI

PE587.470

14/10/2016

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE585.503

17/10/2016

EP

Committee opinion

TRAN

PE587.477

18/10/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0385/2016

15/12/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0053/2017

16/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)358

31/08/2017

2016/2148(INI) - 14/12/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: maximising the contribution of European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIF) to employment and growth as well as the
Commissions priorities for the next few years.
BACKGROUND: with a budget of EUR 454 billion for 2014-2020, the European structural and investment funds are the European Unions
(EUs) main investment policy tool. By 2023, the ESIFs will deliver a critical mass of investment in key EU priority areas, to respond to the
needs of the real economy by supporting job creation and by getting the European economy growing again in a sustainable way.
The financial crisis wiped out the gains from economic convergence achieved in several European regions and Member States since 2000,
thus reversing the trend of reducing regional disparities and poverty. Progress towards Europe 2020 targets has been uneven.
In the post-crisis period, and in a climate of declining overall investment, the Commission considers it necessary to maximise the impact of the
ESIFs, especially as they provide the majority of public investment in many countries.
The ESIFs contribute to the Investment Plan for Europe and complement the European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI). They will make
a substantial contribution to the new Commissions political priorities: the digital single market, the energy union and climate change policies,
the single market and economic governance, in line with the European Semester country-specific recommendations.
CONTENT: in accordance with the requirements of Article 16(3) of the Common Provisions Regulation, the communication presents the main
results of negotiations between Member State authorities and their partners, including regional and local actors, and the European
Commission, on their investment programmes further to the ESIF reform.
ESIF investments in the current context: the ESIFs have become more important in public investment, compensating for decreasing
investment levels: in 2014-2016, the commitments from ESIFs are expected to account for approximately 14?% of total public investment on
average, with the highest share reaching beyond 70?% in some Member States.
Following the lessons learned from previous programming periods and taking into account the need for better use of ESIFs, the 2014-2020
regulations introduced several key reforms:
there is a clear move towards a more focused policy approach, a stronger results orientation, solid framework conditions for
investments, better coordinated use of ESIF funding through the common strategic framework, and improved links between EU
priorities and regional needs;
the European Semester and country-specific recommendations play a major role: more than two-thirds of the CSRs adopted in 2014
were relevant for cohesion policy investment and have been taken into account in Member States programme priorities;
ESIFs focus on key investment areas and obstacles to growth. Furthermore, sustainable development and climate change concerns
have been mainstreamed in all ESIF funding;
in the context of the Investment Plan for Europe, the Commission strongly encourages the use of financial instruments instead of
traditional grants in ESIF funding, in areas such as SME support, CO2 reduction, environmental and resource efficiency, ICT,
sustainable transport, R&I;
the new regulatory framework provides significant possibilities for simplification, particularly in relation to common eligibility rules,
simplified cost options and e-governance;
partnership and multi-level governance have been improved for the delivery of better programmes;
there is a greater focus at local level and investment in tackling concentration of territorial challenges.
Expected results: the Commission indicates that for 2014-2020, EUR 454 billion in ESIF funding has been allocated to promote job creation
and growth. National co-financing is expected to amount to at least EUR 183 billion, with total investment reaching EUR 637 billion .
The communication gives an overview of the expected achievements of ESIF funding channelled through the 456 national (thematic) and
regional programmes and the 79 Interreg cooperation programmes.
Funding primarily concerns the following areas:
1) Research and innovation (R&I), information and communication technologies (ICT) and SME development: the ESIFs contribute EUR 121
billion to reaching the EUs smart growth objectives, and therefore to improving R&I, SME competitiveness and the digital single market. Key
figures related to the achievements expected are as follows:
129 460 companies will receive support to increase their R&I capacity. Jobs will be created for 29?370 new researchers and projects
will help companies introduce 15?370 new products to the market;
14.6 million additional households will have access to high-speed broadband with ERDF support, while 18.8 million people in rural
areas will have new or improved ICT services or infrastructure under the EAFRD.
2) Environment, climate change, energy and transport: the ESIFs will support the development of the energy union by more than doubling the
funds allocated to the low-carbon economy, to EUR 45 billion for 2014-20. The focus will be on energy efficiency.
Environmental protection will continue to receive substantial support expanded in scope, and geared towards innovative solutions. This will
help the water and waste management sectors across many Member States to regenerate cities, support nature protection, aid EU industries
to become more resource efficient, and contribute to reaching the EU circular economy objectives.
Investments in climate change adaptation and risk prevention include a broad range of measures, including flood prevention and
ecosystem-based measures such as green infrastructure which aim at protecting 13.3 million people from floods and 11.8 million from forest
fires while making a positive impact on jobs and growth.
In the area of transport, ESIFs will: (i) finance infrastructure projects aiming to close missing links and remove bottlenecks, especially in the
less developed Member States and regions; (ii) provide considerable support for making transport in Europe more efficient and greener.

3) Employment, social inclusion and education: a total of EUR 120 billion, predominantly funded by the European Social Funds but with the
support of the other ESI Funds as well, will be invested in this area. This support for employment is expected to improve the job finding
chances of 10 million unemployed people and ensure that 2.3 million people are in employment, including self-employment.
Most Member States will invest in vocational education and training to improve both the relevance of education and training systems and the
transition from education to work and life-long learning. Most funding in this area will however be concentrated on preventing early school
leaving. It is expected that 4.1 million under-25-year-olds will be supported and 2.9 million people will gain a qualification.
Implementing the youth employment initiative (YEI) is expected to help 3.1 million unemployed or inactive participants complete a YEI project.
4) Strengthening institutional capacity and efficient public administration: the ESIFs support the creation of stable and predictable institutions
that are also able to react to societal challenges, open for dialogue with the public, and embrace technological change in the delivery of better
services. 17 Member States will invest EUR 4.2 billion (ESF/ERDF) in institutional capacity building, depending on their individual needs.

2016/2148(INI) - 15/12/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Regional Development adopted an own-initiative report by Lambert van NISTELROOIJ (EPP, NL) on investing in jobs and
growth maximising the contribution of European Structural and Investment Funds: an evaluation of the report under Article 16(3) of the
Common Provisions Regulation (CPR).
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, exercising its prerogative as an associated committee under Rule 54 of Parliaments Rules
of Procedure, has also given an opinion on the report.
Members recalled that with a budget of EUR 454 billion for the period 2014-2020, the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESI Funds)
are the EUs main investment policy tool and are a vital source of public investment in many Member States. They made the following
recommendations:
Sharing results, communication and visibility: the report highlighted the need to improve communication on and the visibility of ESI Funds, with
greater focus on participation by stakeholders and recipients, and on involving citizens in the design and implementation of cohesion policy.
The key communication on cohesion policy projects should focus on European added value, solidarity and the visibility of success stories. The
Commission, Member States, regions and cities were urged to communicate more on both the achievements of cohesion policy and the
lessons to be learned.
Thematic concentration: Members stressed the need to the circumstances of urban or rural regions, the lagging regions, transition regions and
regions with permanent natural or geographical handicaps, and appropriate support policies should be drawn up for the development of these
areas.
The report recommended allowing sufficient flexibility for Member States and regions to support new policy challenges, such as those relating
to immigration, as well as the broadly understood digital dimension of cohesion policy. Furthermore, Members drew attention to the energy
union strategy, the circular economy strategy, and the EUs commitments under the Paris climate change agreement, as the ESI Funds have
an important role to play in delivery.
They supported the gradual shift of focus from one based on major infrastructure-related projects towards one based on stimulating the
knowledge economy, innovation and social inclusion. They were of the opinion that the ESI Funds should be used to create and boost quality
jobs, as well as quality lifelong learning and vocational (training systems, including school infrastructure.
The Commission should pay more attention to the impact of cohesion policy on promoting employment and reducing unemployment. For their
part, Member States should intensify their efforts in order to achieve substantial and tangible effects from the funds invested, particularly with
respect to funds made available in the form of advance payments, and ensure that the Youth Employment Initiative (YEI) is implemented
correctly.
Members also recalled that completion of the core TEN-T network is a European transport policy priority, and that the ESI Funds are a very
important tool in the implementation of this project.
The report went on to recommend, amongst other things:
an analysis of the current situation and the adoption of targeted action to counteract the fact that a significant proportion of ex ante
conditionalities have not yet been fulfilled;
an assessment of whether the performance reserve -consisting of 6 % of the resources allocated to the ESI Funds for each Member
State - actually creates added value or whether it has led to more red tape;
establishing a balanced link between cohesion policy on the one hand, and the European Semester and the Country Specific
Recommendations on the other;
better exploiting new possibilities for simplification in terms of common eligibility rules, simplified cost options and e-governance, and
establish standard procedures for drawing up operational programmes and for management;
establishing the necessary tools for permanent administrative capacity, by exploiting functional and flexible e-government solutions.
Synergies and financial instruments: whilst the use of grants is still indispensable, the report observed that there seems to be a focus on a
gradual shift from grants to loans and guarantees, and noted also that the use of the multi-fund approach still appears to be difficult.
Members noted that the Commission's Article 16 Report provides little information on coordination and synergies among different programmes
and with instruments of other policy areas, and in particular has not always presented reliable data on the expected results of the ESF and YEI
programmes.
They were convinced that synergies with other policies and instruments, including EFSI and other financial instruments, should be enhanced in
order to maximise the impact of investment. The Commission was asked to provide specific data on EFSIs impact in terms of growth and
employment and to come forward after the evaluation with learning points to enable the ESI Funds to be put to use more successfully in the
new programming period from 2021 onwards.

European Territorial Cooperation: the report highlighted the European added value of European Territorial Cooperation (ETC), especially from
the point of view of reducing disparities between border regions. This should be reflected in an increased level of appropriations for this
cohesion policy objective, to be introduced as soon as practicable. It underlines the need to preserve this instrument as one of the core
elements of cohesion policy after 2020.
Future cohesion policy: Members were convinced that the future performance-oriented cohesion policy must be founded on data and
indicators that are appropriate for measuring efforts, outcomes and impacts achieved, as well as experience at regional and local level in the
area (performance-based budgeting, ex ante conditionalities and thematic concentration).
The report underlined that faster take-up of the available funds and a more balanced progression of expenditure during the programming cycle
will be needed in future.
The legislative process to adopt the next multi-annual financial framework (MFF) should be concluded by the end of 2018, so that the
regulatory framework for future cohesion policy might be adopted swiftly after that and come into force without delay on 1 January 2021.

2016/2148(INI) - 16/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 493 votes to 53, with 40 abstentions, a resolution on investing in jobs and growth maximising the
contribution of European Structural and Investment Funds: an evaluation of the report under Article 16(3) of the Common Provisions
Regulation (CPR).
Members recalled that with a budget of EUR 454 billion for the period 2014-2020, the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESI Funds)
are the EUs main investment policy tool and are a vital source of public investment in many Member States. They made the following
recommendations:
Sharing results, communication and visibility: Parliament highlighted the need to improve communication on and the visibility of ESI Funds,
with greater focus on participation by stakeholders and recipients, and on involving citizens in the design and implementation of cohesion
policy. The key communication on cohesion policy projects should focus on European added value, solidarity and the visibility of success
stories.
Thematic concentration: Parliament insisted that cohesion policy should continue to have thematic focus, while allowing for the degree of
flexibility that is sufficient in order to take on board the specific needs of each region, especially the specific needs of the less developed
regions.
The resolution recommended the following:
allowing sufficient flexibility for Member States and regions to support new policy challenges, such as those relating to immigration, as
well as the broadly understood digital dimension of cohesion policy;
the ESI Funds have an important role to play in delivery of the EUs commitments under the Paris climate change;
the Funds should encourage a knowledge economy, innovation and social inclusion: they should be used to create and boost quality
jobs, as well as quality lifelong learning and vocational (training systems, including school infrastructure;
the Commission should pay more attention to the impact of cohesion policy on promoting employment and reducing unemployment.
For their part, Member States should intensify their efforts in order to achieve substantial and tangible effects from the funds invested,
particularly with respect to funds made available in the form of advance payments, and ensure that the Youth Employment Initiative
(YEI) is implemented correctly;
the ESI Funds are a very important tool in the completion of the core TEN-T network which is a European transport policy priority.
Parliament also recommended, inter alia:
an analysis of the current situation and the adoption of targeted action to counteract the fact that a significant proportion of ex ante
conditionalities have not yet been fulfilled;
an assessment of whether the performance reserve -consisting of 6 % of the resources allocated to the ESI Funds for each Member
State - actually creates added value or whether it has led to more red tape;
establishing a balanced link between cohesion policy on the one hand, and the European Semester and the Country Specific
Recommendations on the other;
better exploiting new possibilities for simplification in terms of common eligibility rules, simplified cost options and e-governance, and
establish standard procedures for drawing up operational programmes and for management;
establishing the necessary tools for permanent administrative capacity, by exploiting functional and flexible e-government solution;
strengthening administrative capacity particularly in Member States with low absorption of funds.
Synergies and financial instruments: whilst the use of grants is still indispensable, Members observed that there seems to be a focus on a
gradual shift from grants to loans and guarantees, and noted also that the use of the multi-fund approach still appears to be difficult.
Moreover, the Commission's Article 16 Report provides little information on coordination and synergies among different programmes and with
instruments of other policy areas, and in particular has not always presented reliable data on the expected results of the ESF and YEI
programmes.
Members were convinced that synergies with other policies and instruments, including EFSI and other financial instruments, should be
enhanced in order to maximise the impact of investment. The Commission was asked to provide specific data on EFSIs impact in terms of
growth and employment and to come forward after the evaluation with learning points to enable the ESI Funds to be put to use more
successfully in the new programming period from 2021 onwards.
European Territorial Cooperation: Parliament highlighted the European added value of European Territorial Cooperation (ETC), especially
from the point of view of reducing disparities between border regions. This should be reflected in an increased level of appropriations for this
cohesion policy objective, to be introduced as soon as practicable. It underlined the need to preserve this instrument as one of the core
elements of cohesion policy after 2020.
Future cohesion policy: Members were convinced that the future performance-oriented cohesion policy must be founded on data and

indicators that are appropriate for measuring efforts, outcomes and impacts achieved, as well as experience at regional and local level in the
area (performance-based budgeting, ex ante conditionalities and thematic concentration).
The resolution underlined that faster take-up of the available funds and a more balanced progression of expenditure during the programming
cycle will be needed in future.
The legislative process to adopt the next multi-annual financial framework (MFF) should be concluded by the end of 2018, so that the
regulatory framework for future cohesion policy might be adopted swiftly after that and come into force without delay on 1 January 2021.

