Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2307(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

European Semester for economic policy coordination: employment and
social Aspects in the annual growth survey 2017

Subject
4.10 Social policy, social charter and protocol
4.15 Employment policy, action to combat unemployment

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL Employment and Social Affairs
(Associated committee)

Rapporteur

Appointed
18/11/2016

TOOM Yana
Shadow rapporteur

RIBEIRO Sofia

ARENA Maria

TREBESIUS Ulrike

LÓPEZ BERMEJO
Paloma

LAMBERT Jean

AGEA Laura
BIZZOTTO Mara
Committee for opinion
BUDG Budgets
(Associated committee)
CULT

Rapporteur for opinion

30/11/2016
NÍ RIADA Liadh

Culture and Education

17/11/2016
WARD Julie

FEMM

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

Key events
24/11/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

24/11/2016

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

06/12/2016

Debate in Council

27/01/2017

Debate in Council

06/02/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

10/02/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

14/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

15/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

15/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0037/2017

Summary

T8-0039/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2307(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/8/08247

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE594.175

23/11/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE595.683

19/12/2016

EP

Committee opinion

BUDG

PE595.421

25/01/2017

EP

Committee opinion

CULT

PE594.070

26/01/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0037/2017

10/02/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0039/2017

15/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)358

31/08/2017

2016/2307(INI) - 10/02/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Yana TOOM (ADLE, EE) on the European Semester for
economic policy coordination: Employment and Social Aspects in the Annual Growth Survey 2017.
Members noted that unemployment in the EU has been slowly decreasing since the second half of 2013, 8 million new jobs have been created
since 2013, and unemployment stood at 8.6 % in September 2016, reaching its lowest level since 2009. However, the proportion of young
people not in employment, education or training (NEETs) remains high and represents 14.8 % of those aged between 15 and 29.
Members welcomed the fact that in the Annual Growth Survey 2017, emphasis is placed on the importance of ensuring social fairness as a
means of stimulating more inclusive growth, as well as on creating quality and inclusive employment and enhancing skills and on the need to
strengthen competitiveness, innovation and productivity. They regretted, however, the continuing low rates of public investment and stressed
that the European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) has not developed sufficient investment in social infrastructure.
In this context, the report made the following recommendations:
Reduction in unemployment and working conditions: Members welcomed the increase in the employment rate but noted that the rising
employment rate in Member States has been accompanied by the growing emergence of atypical and non-formal forms of employment, zero
hours contracts included. They were also concerned that high unemployment continues, especially in countries still suffering from the crisis.
They stressed that sustainability and quality of employment created should be a priority, along with the need to combat deteriorating wage and
working conditions, which must be addressed as part of any actions in favour of employment and social protection. The report encouraged
Member States to make further efforts, as well as to remain open towards new solutions and approaches in order to reach the Europe 2020
employment rate target of 75 %, including by focusing on groups that have the lowest labour market participation such as women, older
workers, low-skilled workers and persons with disabilities.

Migration could play an important role, with a view to making sustainable investments with the aim of integrating workers into the labour market
and reducing unemployment.
Youth employment: the report stressed that the implementation of the Youth Guarantee should be strengthened at national, regional and local
level and prolonged until at least 2020 with the active participation of the social partners and strengthened public services, and it highlighted
the importance of the Youth Guarantee for school-to-work transitions. Members called on the Commission and Member States to provide
adequate funding for the Youth Guarantee in order to ensure that it is implemented properly in all Member States and to help even more young
people.
Underlining that insufficient investment in the public education system may undermine Europe's competitive position and the employability of
its workforce, the report stressed the need to invest in people as early as possible in the life cycle in order to reduce inequality and foster
social inclusion at a young age.
Long-term unemployment: Members recognised that the integration of long-term unemployed individuals into quality employment through
individually tailored measures, in particular through active employment policies, is a key factor for fighting their poverty and social exclusion if
sufficient decent work is available. They highlighted the importance of skills and competences acquired in non-formal and informal learning
environments and their validation and certification, and of access to life-long learning.
The report called for the establishment and development of partnerships between employers, social partners, public and private employment
services, public authorities, social services and education and training institutions in order to provide the tools needed to better respond to the
needs of the labour market and prevent long-term unemployment. It recalled that personalised and individualised follow-up, capable of
delivering effective responses for the long-term unemployed, is indispensable.
Gender equality: Members called on the Commission and the Council to improve the strategy for an overarching gender equality objective.
They supported the use of the Commissions annual gender equality reports in the context of the European Semester to enhance gender
mainstreaming. Member States were asked to incorporate the gender dimension and the principle of equality between women and men in their
National Reform Programmes and stability and convergence programmes, by setting targets and defining measures that address persisting
gender gaps.
Investment in children: Members called for programmes offering support and opportunities as part of an integrated European plan to invest in
early childhood and combat child poverty, including the creation of a Child Guarantee, which will ensure that every child in Europe at risk of
poverty (including refugees) has access to free healthcare, free education, free childcare, decent housing and adequate nutrition.
Poverty and social exclusion: the report requested Member States to accelerate their actions towards the achievement of the Europe 2020
target to reduce the number of persons at risk of poverty by 20 million. It called for policies that respect and promote collective bargaining and
its coverage in order to reach as many workers as possible while at the same time also aiming at better wage floors in the form of minimum
wages set at decent levels and with the involvement of social partners.
Education: Members stressed that disparities in the availability and quality of education should be addressed in order to strengthen schooling
for all and reduce early school leaving. In order to overcome the gap in terms of skills shortages and mismatches on the European labour
market, the report called on Member States to prioritise comprehensive training in digital skills, programming and skills that are highly sought
after by employers for all, while at the same time maintaining high standards in traditional education. It stressed the importance of
implementing a true culture of entrepreneurship, which stimulates young people from an early age.
Population ageing: the report underlined the impact in terms of increasing informal and formal care needs, the need to invest in public health
promotion and disease prevention while ensuring and improving the sustainability, safety, adequacy and effectiveness of social protection
systems and the provision of quality long-term social services over the coming decades. It encouraged Member States, therefore, to develop
strategies to ensure adequate funding, staffing and development for those systems and services.

2016/2307(INI) - 15/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 317 votes to 233 with 117 abstentions, a resolution on the European Semester for economic policy
coordination: Employment and Social Aspects in the Annual Growth Survey 2017.
Members noted that unemployment in the EU has been slowly decreasing since the second half of 2013, 8 million new jobs have been created
since 2013, and unemployment stood at 8.6 % in September 2016, reaching its lowest level since 2009. However, the proportion of young
people not in employment, education or training (NEETs) remains high and represents 14.8 % of those aged between 15 and 29. The number
of long-term unemployed remains high, at around 10 million.
Parliament welcomed the progress towards achieving a balance between the economic and social dimensions of the European Semester
process.
Stressing that investment in social development contributes to economic growth and convergence, it called for stronger efforts to combat
poverty and rising inequality, and, where needed, for greater investment in social infrastructure and support for those hit hardest by the
economic crisis.
Parliament made the following recommendations:
Reduction in unemployment and working conditions: whilst welcoming the increase in the employment rate, Members noted that this has been
accompanied by the growing emergence of atypical and non-formal forms of employment, zero hours contracts included. They were also
concerned that high unemployment continues, especially in countries still suffering from the crisis.
They stressed that sustainability and quality of employment created should be a priority, along with the need to combat deteriorating wage and
working conditions, which must be addressed as part of any actions in favour of employment and social protection. Parliament encouraged
Member States to make further efforts, in order to reach the Europe 2020 employment rate target of 75 %, including by focusing on groups that
have the lowest labour market participation such as women, older workers, low-skilled workers and persons with disabilities.
Migration could play an important role, with a view to making sustainable investments with the aim of integrating workers into the labour market
and reducing unemployment.

Youth employment: Parliament wanted the Youth Guarantee to be strengthened and prolonged until at least 2020, emphasizing its importance
in the transition from school to work. It wanted to see adequate funding for the Youth Guarantee in order to ensure that it is implemented
properly in all Member States. Underlining that insufficient investment in the public education system may undermine Europe's competitive
position and the employability of its workforce, the report stressed the need to invest in people as early as possible in the life cycle in order to
reduce inequality and foster social inclusion at a young age.
Long-term unemployment: Members recognised that the integration of long-term unemployed individuals into quality employment through
individually tailored measures, in particular through active employment policies, is a key factor for fighting their poverty and social exclusion if
sufficient decent work is available. They stressed the importance of non-formal and informal learning environments and their validation and
certification and of access to life-long learning.
Parliament called for the establishment and development of partnerships between employers, social partners, public and private employment
services, public authorities, social services and education and training institutions in order to provide the tools needed to better respond to the
needs of the labour market and prevent long-term unemployment.
Gender equality: Members called on the Commission and the Council to improve the strategy for an overarching gender equality objective.
Member States were asked to incorporate the gender dimension and the principle of equality between women and men in their National
Reform Programmes and stability and convergence programmes, by setting targets and defining measures that address persisting gender
gaps.
Investment in children: stressing that the European Semester cycle still lacks a child centered approach, Members called for programmes
offering support and opportunities as part of an integrated European plan to invest in early childhood and combat child poverty, including the
creation of a Child Guarantee, which will ensure that every child in Europe at risk of poverty (including refugees) has access to free healthcare,
free education, free childcare, decent housing and adequate nutrition.
Poverty and social exclusion: Members asked the Commission and Member States to complement the Scoreboard of key employment and
social indicators with data on the quality of employment and on poverty. They requested Member States to accelerate their actions towards the
achievement of the Europe 2020 target to reduce the number of persons at risk of poverty by 20 million. Policies should promote collective
bargaining, while at the same time aim at better wage floors in the form of minimum wages set at decent levels and with the involvement of
social partners.
Education: Members stressed that education is a fundamental right and that disparities in the availability and quality of education should be
addressed in order to strengthen schooling for all and reduce early school leaving. In order to overcome the gap in terms of skills shortages
and mismatches on the European labour market, Parliament called on Member States to strengthen the link skills and training and the
requirements of the EU labour market, and prioritise comprehensive training in digital skills, programming and skills that are highly sought after
by employers for all, while at the same time maintaining high standards in traditional education. It stressed the importance of implementing a
true culture of entrepreneurship, which stimulates young people from an early age.
Population ageing: Parliament:
underlined that universal access to public, solidarity-based and adequate retirement and old-age pensions must be granted to all;
pension system reforms should focus among other aspects, on the effective retirement age and reflect labour market trends, birth
rates, the health and wealth situation, working conditions and the economic dependency ratio;
stressed the impact in terms of increasing informal and formal care needs, the need to invest in public health promotion and disease
prevention while ensuring and improving the sustainability, safety, adequacy and effectiveness of social protection systems;
urged the Commission, Member States and social partners to adapt labour markets for older workers through age-friendly working
conditions enabling them to work up to statutory retirement age.
Lastly, Parliament was concerned with the delay in implementing the operational programmes during the current programming period. It calls
on the Member States to make more active use of the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIFs) and the youth employment initiative
(YEI) to address employment and social priorities.

