Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2249(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Equality between women and men in the European Union in 2014-2015

Subject
4.10.04 Gender equality

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
FEMM

Rapporteur

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

Appointed
19/04/2016

URTASUN Ernest
Shadow rapporteur

ŠOJDROVÁ Michaela

PICIERNO Pina

GERICKE Arne

BECERRA
BASTERRECHEA Beatriz

ECK Stefan

VON STORCH Beatrix

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
06/10/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

06/02/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

23/02/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/03/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/03/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

14/03/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/03/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information

A8-0046/2017

Summary

T8-0073/2017

Summary

Procedure reference

2016/2249(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

FEMM/8/07789

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE589.343

21/09/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.261

19/10/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0046/2017

23/02/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0073/2017

14/03/2017

EP

Summary

2016/2249(INI) - 23/02/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Womens Rights and Gender Equality adopted the own-initiative report by Ernest URTASUN (Greens/EFA, ES) on the
equality between women and men in the European Union in 2014-2015.
Members stated that the feminisation of poverty persists in the EU as well as the increased risk of poverty and social exclusion among women.
This feminisation of poverty is closely linked to budget cuts to public services, such as healthcare, education, social services and welfare
benefits. In this regard, the Commission is called upon to mainstream gender equality into budgets and policy-making.
In particular, the Commission is asked for a greater assessment of and measures to address and take steps to stop the impact of those public
spending cuts which are having negative effects on womens rights and gender equality in the Member States.
New initiatives focusing on women: Members showed support for the Councils call for a new Commission initiative setting out a strategy for
gender equality 2016-2020 and for the status of its strategic engagement on gender equality to be enhanced. Further measures are called for
to strengthen policies and increase investment supporting female employment in quality jobs across all sectors and to take steps to combat
precarious forms of work. Initiatives should be promoted offering support in implementing professional education programmes for women,
encouraging them to attend higher education in the fields of science, technology and IT.
Moreover, the Commission should come forward with an ambitious, comprehensive package of legislative and non-legislative measures
regarding work-life balance as part of the Commission Work Programme 2017.
Member States are also called upon to:
tackle the gender equality issue, sexism and gender stereotypes in their education systems;
move towards the individualisation of rights in social equity policy;
take urgent action to close the gender pay-gap;
strive towards establishing a European Child Guarantee, which would ensure that every European child at risk of poverty has access
to free healthcare, free education, free childcare, decent housing and adequate nutrition;
take measures to encourage men to share equally in domestic responsibilities and in caring for children and other dependants;
take measures to prevent and respond to all types of violence against women and gender-based violence and to put in place further
prevention strategies;
include measures to protect women and LGBTI people against harassment in the workplace.
Women in management: Members reiterated their call on the Council for a swift adoption of the directive on gender balance among
non-executive directors of listed companies.
Violence towards women: Members considered that rape and sexual violence, female genital mutilation (FGM), forced marriage, domestic
violence, so-called honour crimes and state-sanctioned gender discrimination, constitute persecution and should be considered as valid
reasons for seeking asylum in the EU. They repeated their calls on the Member States to put an immediate end to the detention of children,
pregnant and nursing women and survivors of rape, sexual violence and trafficking.
Members called on the Commission and the Member States to introduce zero-tolerance policies in relation to all forms of violence, including
domestic violence.
They stressed the fact that women must have control over their sexual and reproductive health and rights. Therefore, measures should taken
to guarantee ready access for women to voluntary family planning and the full range of reproductive and sexual health services, including
contraception and abortion.
In this regard, Members considered that the denial of life-saving sexual and reproductive health services, including safe abortion, amounts to a
grave breach of fundamental human rights.

Infringement procedures in cases of failure to implement the relevant legislation: lastly, Members called on the Commission to monitor the
implementation of existing EU gender equality legislation in the Member States more effectively, while highlighting the necessity of initiating
infringement procedures in cases of failure to implement the relevant legislation.

2016/2249(INI) - 14/03/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 369 votes to 188, with 133 a resolution on the equality between women and men in the European Union
in 2014-2015.
Parliament stated that the feminisation of poverty persists in the EU as well as the increased risk of poverty and social exclusion among
women. This feminisation of poverty is closely linked to budget cuts to public services, such as healthcare, education, social services and
welfare benefits. In this regard, the Commission is called upon to mainstream gender equality into budgets and policy-making and into the
implementation of EU measures and programmes, and to carry out gender impact assessments when setting up any new policy.
In particular, the Commission is asked for a greater assessment of and measures to address and take steps to stop the impact of those public
spending cuts which are having negative effects on womens rights and gender equality in the Member States.
Parliament also called for the inclusion of overall and stronger gender mainstreaming therein, addressing the structural causes of female
poverty, in particular in the framework of formulating the country-specific recommendations in the context of the European semester.
It also called for poverty to be tackled among women, in particular among older women, single mothers, women victims of gender-based
violence, women with disabilities, migrant women and women refugees.
New initiatives focusing on women: Parliament showed support for the Councils call for a new Commission initiative setting out a strategy for
gender equality 2016-2020 and for the status of its strategic engagement on gender equality to be enhanced. Further measures are called for
to strengthen policies and increase investment supporting female employment in quality jobs across all sectors and to take steps to combat
precarious forms of work. Initiatives should be promoted offering support in implementing professional education programmes for women,
encouraging them to attend higher education in the fields of science, technology and IT.
Moreover, the Commission is called on to put forward, an ambitious, comprehensive package of legislative and non-legislative measures
regarding work-life balance as part of the Commission Work Programme 2017, taking into account the announced European pillar of social
rights, and including the revision of existing Maternity Leave Directive 92/85/EEC and Parental Leave Directive 2010/18/EU as well as the
proposals for directives on paternity leave and carers leave.
Member States are also called upon to:
tackle the gender equality issue, sexism and gender stereotypes in their education systems;
move towards the individualisation of rights in social equity policy;
take urgent action to close the gender pay-gap: in this context, Parliament called for the recast of the 2006 Equal Treatment Directive;
strive towards establishing a European Child Guarantee, which would ensure that every European child at risk of poverty has access
to free healthcare, free education, free childcare, decent housing and adequate nutrition;
take measures to encourage men to share equally in domestic responsibilities and in caring for children and other dependants;
take measures to prevent and respond to all types of violence against women and gender-based violence and to put in place further
prevention strategies;
include measures to protect women and LGBTI people against harassment in the workplace.
Parliament called on Poland, Croatia and Romania to step up their efforts in providing formal child care in order to contribute to striking a better
balance between the private and professional lives of workers. It reasserted its call on the Commission and the Member States to strive
towards establishing a Child Guarantee, which would ensure that every European child at risk of poverty has access to free healthcare, free
education, free childcare, decent housing and adequate nutrition.
Women in management: Parliament reiterated its call on the Council for a swift adoption of the directive on gender balance among
non-executive directors of listed companies.
Violence towards women: Parliament considered that rape and sexual violence, female genital mutilation (FGM), forced marriage, domestic
violence, so-called honour crimes and state-sanctioned gender discrimination, constitute persecution and should be considered as valid
reasons for seeking asylum in the EU. It repeated its call on the Member States to put an immediate end to the detention of children, pregnant
and nursing women and survivors of rape, sexual violence and trafficking.
Members called on the Commission and the Member States to introduce zero-tolerance policies in relation to all forms of violence, including
domestic violence.
Parliament repeated its calls on the Member States to put an immediate end to the detention of children, pregnant and nursing women and
survivors of rape, sexual violence and trafficking, and for appropriate psychological and health support to be made available, provided by
gender-appropriate professionals such as psychologists, social workers, nurses and doctors who have been suitably trained for such
emergencies.
It stated that women must have control over their sexual and reproductive health and rights. It called on all the Member States to guarantee
ready access for women to voluntary family planning and the full range of reproductive and sexual health services, including contraception and
safe and legal abortion. Public awareness actions should be undertaken with the objective of making men and women fully aware of their
rights and responsibilities when it comes to sexual and reproductive matters. It considered that the denial of life-saving sexual and
reproductive health services, including safe abortion, amounts to a grave breach of fundamental human rights.
Members also stressed the importance of active prevention, education and information policies for teenagers, young people and adults to
ensure that EU citizens benefit from good sexual and reproductive health and avoid sexually transmitted diseases and unwanted pregnancies.
They encouraged the competent authorities in the Member States to promote gender equality in their comprehensive sex and relationship

education programmes, including teaching girls and boys about relationships based on consent, respect and reciprocity, as well as in sport
and leisure activities, where stereotypes and expectations based on gender can affect the self-image, health, acquisition of skills, intellectual
development, social integration and identity formation of girls and boys.
Parliament called, once again, on the Commission to set up a European monitoring centre on gender violence (along the lines of the current
European Institute for Gender Equality), to be led by a European coordinator for the prevention of violence against women and girls.
It also called on the Commission and the Member States to include measures to protect women and LGBTI people against harassment in the
workplace.
Towards an overall anti-discrimination strategy: lastly, Parliament invited the Commission to develop a broader equality strategy, including a
horizontal directive to tackle discrimination, with a view to eliminating gender-based discrimination in all its forms. It urged the Council to reach
a common position as soon as possible on the proposal for a Council directive on implementing the principle of equal treatment between
persons irrespective of religion or belief, disability, age, gender or sexual orientation, which has been blocked since Parliament adopted its
position thereon on 2 April 2009.

