Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2096(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Promoting gender equality in mental health and clinical research

Subject
4.10.04 Gender equality
4.20.02 Medical research

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
FEMM

Rapporteur

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

Appointed
18/04/2016

BECERRA
BASTERRECHEA Beatriz
Shadow rapporteur

ESTARÀS FERRAGUT
Rosa

WARD Julie

GIRLING Julie

BJÖRK Malin

VON STORCH Beatrix
Committee for opinion
DEVE

Rapporteur for opinion

Development

Appointed
07/06/2016

MARCELLESI Florent
ITRE

European Commission

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
09/06/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

29/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

12/12/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

14/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0380/2016

Summary

T8-0028/2017

Summary

14/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2096(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

FEMM/8/06684

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE587.677

08/09/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.270

18/10/2016

EP

PE584.186

09/11/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0380/2016

12/12/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0028/2017

14/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)358

31/08/2017

Committee opinion

DEVE

2016/2096(INI) - 12/12/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Womens Rights and Gender Equality adopted the own-initiative report by Beatriz BECERRA BASTERRECHEA (ADLE,
ES) on promoting gender equality in mental health and clinical research.
Members recalled that the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health is a fundamental human right. In this respect,
they noted that in the EU, 27 % of the adult population, including both men and women, have experienced at least one episode of mental
illness. Accordingly, they called on Member States to take measures and allocate sufficient resources to ensure access to healthcare and
specifically to mental health services including womens shelters independently of their legal status, gender identity, sex characteristics, ethnic
origin, or religion.
Gender equality in mental health: Members called on the Commission and the Member States to promote information and prevention
campaigns and other initiatives to raise public awareness of mental health problems. They also asked for effective action in order to:
change how people with mental health problems are perceived: Members stressed the fact that there was a link between mental
health and poverty and social exclusion. Acknowledging the influence of media and particularly of the Internet and social networks on
mental health, Members called for more research on this topic. They pointed out that some women have a distorted perception of their
image due to media, stereotyped advertising and social pressure, and develop eating and behavioural disorders, for instance anorexia
and bulimia. Members called on the Commission, the Member States, and local authorities to ensure that their mental health
strategies address the mental health challenges that could be faced by LGBTI people;
develop tailored policies for marginalized and refugee women: the committee called on Member States to protect women asylum
seekers in detention who report abuse, and stresses that these women are to be provided with immediate protection. It called on the
Commission, the Member States and local authorities to develop specific tailored policies in order to provide mental health services to
groups of vulnerable women in marginalised communities.
Gender equality in clinical trials: Members underlined the fact that clinical trials of pharmaceutical products on both men and women are
necessary and that these should be inclusive, non-discriminatory and performed under conditions of equality. They wanted the labels on
pharmaceutical products clearly to indicate whether trials on women took place or not, and whether men and women may expect different side
effects. They also asked the Commission to incentivise projects at EU level focused on how women are treated in clinical research.
Members also underlined that urgent action was required to correct gender gaps in clinical trials in areas of health where such gaps are
particularly harmful, such as in medication for Alzheimers, cancer, treatment of strokes, anti-depressants, and cardiovascular diseases.
Lastly, the committee called on the Commission and Member States to:
promote healthcare by ensuring easy access to services and the provision of adequate information tailored to mens and womens
specific needs and the exchange of best practice in the field of mental health and clinical research;
take stock of the specific health needs of women and men in their health policies;
ensure that prevention strategies specifically target women who are at risk of intersectional discrimination;
recognise gender-based violence and violence against women as a public health issue;

incentivise programmes that address the specific needs of women concerning illnesses such as osteoporosis, musculoskeletal
problems and central nervous system illnesses such as Alzheimers and/or dementia.

2016/2096(INI) - 14/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 364 votes to 171 with 155 abstentions, a legislative resolution on promoting gender equality in mental
health and clinical research.
Parliament recalled that the right to the highest attainable standard of physical and mental health is a fundamental human right. In this respect,
they noted that in the EU, 27 % of the adult population, including both men and women, have experienced at least one episode of mental
illness. Accordingly, it called on Member States to take measures and allocate sufficient resources to ensure womens access to
healthcare and specifically to mental health services including womens shelters independently of their legal status, gender identity, sex
characteristics, ethnic origin, or religion.
Parliament recalled that in a global context marked by an ongoing economic crisis and a sharp rise in unemployment, in particular among
young people and women, the incidence of mental health problems such as depression, bipolar disorders, schizophrenia, anxiety and
dementia is steadily increasing. The World Health Organisation has estimated that depression affects 350 million people and by 2020 this
illness will be the second leading cause of inability to work.
Gender equality in mental health: Parliament called on the Commission and the Member States to promote information and prevention
campaigns and other initiatives to raise public awareness of mental health problems. It also asked for effective action in order to:
change how people with mental health problems are perceived: Members stressed the fact that there was a link between mental
health and poverty and social exclusion. Acknowledging the influence of media and particularly of the Internet and social networks on
mental health, Members called for more research on this topic. They pointed out that some women have a distorted perception of their
image due to media, stereotyped advertising and social pressure, and develop eating and behavioural disorders, for instance anorexia
and bulimia. Parliament called on the Commission, the Member States, and local authorities to ensure that their mental health
strategies address the mental health challenges that could be faced by LGBTI people;
targeted assistances for vulnerable women and women refugees: Parliament raises serious concerns over the provision of mental
health care and facilities to refugee women and girls in Europe, particularly those living in makeshift conditions across Member States.
It highlights that detention of refugees and asylum seekers without effectively and efficiently processing their asylum claims is in
violation of international law and has a negative impact on their mental health and wellbeing. It called on Member States to protect
women asylum seekers in detention, and stresses that these women are to be provided with immediate protection, including ending
detention, speeding up relocation and promoting support and counselling. Parliament also calls on Member States to delink health
policies from immigration control by allowing access to basic healthcare services and not imposing a duty to report undocumented
migrants on healthcare practitioners. It asked Member States, moreover, to implement the multi-agency guidelines on protecting and
supporting the mental health and psychosocial wellbeing of refugees, asylum-seekers and migrants in Europe, as prepared by
WHO/Europe, UN High Commission for Refugees and the International Organisation of Migrants.
Gender equality in clinical trials: Parliament underlined the fact that clinical trials of pharmaceutical products on both men and women are
necessary and that these should be inclusive, non-discriminatory and performed under conditions of equality. It wanted the labels on
pharmaceutical products clearly to indicate whether trials on women took place or not, and whether men and women may expect different side
effects. It also asked the Commission to incentivise projects at EU level focused on how women are treated in clinical research. Parliament
also underlined that urgent action was required to correct gender gaps in clinical trials in areas of health where such gaps are particularly
harmful, such as in medication for Alzheimers, cancer, treatment of strokes, anti-depressants, and cardiovascular diseases.
Sexual and reproductive education: Parliament called for comprehensive, age-appropriate, evidence-based, scientifically accurate and
non-judgmental sexuality education. It also called for quality family planning services and access to contraception help to prevent unintended
and unwanted pregnancies, reduce the need for abortion, and contribute to the prevention of HIV and STIs. In general, Parliament considered
that sexual and reproductive rights include access to legal and safe abortion, reliable, safe and affordable contraception, and comprehensive
sexuality and relationship education.
Parliament also called on the commission and Member States to:
promote healthcare by ensuring easy access to services and the provision of adequate information tailored to mens and womens
specific needs and the exchange of best practice in the field of mental health and clinical research;
take stock of the specific health needs of women and men in their health policies;
ensure that prevention strategies specifically target women who are at risk of intersectional discrimination;
recognise gender-based violence and violence against women as a public health issue;
incentivise programmes that address the specific needs of women concerning illnesses such as osteoporosis, musculoskeletal
problems and central nervous system illnesses such as Alzheimers and/or dementia.
Lastly, Parliament recalled that healthcare and health policy are a competence of the Member States and that the role of the Commission is
complementary to national policies.

