Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2143(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Integrated approach to sport policy: good governance, accessibility and
integrity

Subject
4.10.13 Sport

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
CULT

Rapporteur

Culture and Education

Appointed
26/04/2016

TAKKULA Hannu
Shadow rapporteur

FISAS AYXELÀ
Santiago

MIZZI Marlene

MCCLARKIN Emma

CHOUNTIS Nikolaos

D'AMATO Rosa
BILDE Dominique

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Education, Youth, Sport and Culture

NAVRACSICS Tibor

Key events
15/09/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

05/12/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

12/12/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

01/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

02/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

02/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

02/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2143(INI)

A8-0381/2016

Summary

T8-0012/2017

Summary

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CULT/8/07097

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE589.221

16/09/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.154

19/10/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0381/2016

12/12/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0012/2017

02/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)189

28/04/2017

2016/2143(INI) - 12/12/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Culture and Education adopted an own-initiative report by Hannu TAKKULA (ADLE, FI) on an integrated approach to Sport
Policy: good governance, accessibility and integrity.
Members recalled that with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty in 2009, the European Union acquired a specific competence for sport to
build up and implement an EU-coordinated sport policy supported by a specific budget line.
This report lays down guidelines and recommendations for the European Commissions work on evaluating its policy implementation which is
also aimed at Member States and the organised sport sector, in cooperation with national and European public authorities.
Integrity and good-governance of sports: recent corruption scandals in sport have tarnished the image of sport, raising questions about the
need for genuine and structural reforms of sport governing bodies and organisations. The report stressed the need for a zero-tolerance policy
to corruption and other types of crime in sports. The report also stated that fighting corruption in sport requires transnational efforts and
cooperation among all stakeholders, including public authorities, law enforcement agencies, the sports industry, athletes and supporters.
Members called on international, European and national sports organisations to commit to good governance practices, and to develop a
culture of transparency and sustainable financing. This process must be complemented by a better separation of powers within the sports
governing bodies, better division between commercial and charitable activities and better internal self-regulatory procedures to advance,
detect, investigate and sanction sport crimes and illegal activities within the sports organisations.
Bidding to host major events should comply with good governance standards, with human and labour rights, and with the principle of
democracy, in order to ensure a positive social, economic and environmental impact on local communities.
Members called on the Commission to develop a pledge board, and to explore the possibility of creating a code of conduct in the areas of
good governance and integrity in sport. They also called on sports organisations to put forward by 2018 concrete proposals to enhance good
governance standards for sports organisations.
Member States are encouraged to:
make public funding for sports conditional, subject to compliance with established and publicly available minimum governance,
monitoring and reporting standards;
establish match fixing as a specific criminal offence and ensure that any criminal activity, such as match fixing and corruption in sports,
is subject to judicial proceedings and appropriate sanction;
support doping controls, national testing programmes and legislations allowing coordination and information-sharing between state
authorities, sports organisations and anti-doping agencies.
Members reiterated their call for the establishment of transparency registers for the payment of sports agents, underpinned by an efficient
monitoring system, in order to tackle agent malpractice. They condemned all forms of discrimination and violence in sport and recalled the
need to boost the fight against human trafficking in sports, in particular the trafficking of children.
Social inclusion, social function and accessibility of sport: Members considered that investing in sports will help build united and inclusive
societies, re?move barriers and enable people to respect each other by building bridges across cultures and across ethnic and social divides,
and to promote a positive message of shared values, such as mutual respect, tolerance, compassion, leadership, equality of opportunity and
the rule of law. The Commission is urged to allocate more funds to sport under Erasmus+, with a focus on grassroots sports and education,
and to enhance its visibility and accessibility in order to improve the mainstreaming of sport into other funding programmes such as the ESIF
or the Health Programme.
The report underlined the importance of education through sport and the potential of sport to help get socially vulnerable youngsters back on
track and in preventing radicalisation.

Recalling that young European athletes are often faced with the challenge of combining their sports careers with education and work,
Members underlined the need to ensure sustainable financial support for dual-career exchange programmes at EU and national level through
the Erasmus+ Sport chapter. They called on the Member States to promote, in collaboration with educational institutions, cross-border
exchanges of athletes and to provide access to scholarships for athletes.
Stressing that the lack of physical activity is identified by WHO as the fourth leading risk factor for global mortality, the report encouraged the
Member States and the Commission to make physical activity a political priority in the next EU Work Plan on Sport, especially for young
people and vulnerable communities from socially deprived areas where physical participation is low.
Member States are urged to:
encourage citizens to pursue physical activities on a more regular basis by means of appropriate health policies and programmes for
their daily lives;
make licensed betting operators subject to mandatory and fair financial return to grassroots sports and projects aimed at improving
mass-access to sports.
The report stressed that disabled people should have equal access to all sports facilities and urged the Member States to implement inclusive
sport programmes for disabled people at schools and universities.
Members maintained that the selling of TV rights on a centralised, exclusive and territorial basis, with equitable sharing of revenues, is
essential to the sustainable funding of sport at all levels.

2016/2143(INI) - 02/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 522 votes to 76, with 37 abstentions, a resolution on an integrated approach to Sport Policy: good
governance, accessibility and integrity.
Members recalled that with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty in 2009, the European Union acquired a specific competence for sport to
build up and implement an EU-coordinated sport policy supported by a specific budget line. It has been estimated that sport-related
employment represents 3.51 % of total EU employment, and the share of sport-related gross value added at EUR 294 billion (2.98 % of total
EU gross value added).
Integrity and good-governance of sports: in the light of recent corruption scandals in sport, Parliament stressed the need for a zero-tolerance
policy to corruption and other types of crime in sports. It recalled that fighting corruption in sport requires transnational efforts and cooperation
among all stakeholders, including public authorities, law enforcement agencies, the sports industry, athletes and supporters.
Members called on international, European and national sports organisations to commit to good governance practices, and to develop a
culture of transparency and sustainable financing by making financial records and activity accounts publicly available.
In this regard, Members called on the Commission to develop a pledge board, and to explore the possibility of creating a code of conduct in
the areas of good governance and integrity in sport. They also called on sports organisations to put forward by 2018 concrete proposals to
enhance good governance standards for sports organisations.
Member States are encouraged to:
make public funding for sports conditional, subject to compliance with established and publicly available minimum governance,
monitoring and reporting standards;
establish dedicated prosecution services tasked specifically with investigating sports fraud cases and establish match fixing as a
specific criminal offence;
support doping controls, national testing programmes and legislations allowing coordination and information-sharing between state
authorities, sports organisations and anti-doping agencies.
Members reiterated their call for the establishment of transparency registers for the payment of sports agents, underpinned by an efficient
monitoring system, in order to tackle agent malpractice.
Bidding to host major events should comply with good governance standards, with human and labour rights, and with the principle of
democracy, in order to ensure a positive social, economic and environmental impact on local communities. Members condemned all forms of
discrimination and violence in sport and recalled the need to boost the fight against human trafficking in sports, in particular the trafficking of
children.
Members also urged the Council to find a solution that will allow the EU and its Member States to sign and ratify the new Council of Europe
Convention on an Integrated Safety, Security and Service Approach at Football Matches and Other Sports Events, and reiterated the call for
the introduction of the mutual recognition of stadium bans in Europe and the exchange of data in this regard.
Social inclusion, social function and accessibility of sport: Parliament considered that investing in sports will help build united and inclusive
societies, remove barriers and enable people to respect each other by building bridges across cultures and across ethnic and social divides,
and to promote a positive message of shared values, such as mutual respect, tolerance, compassion, leadership, equality of opportunity and
the rule of law.
The Commission is urged to allocate more funds to sport under Erasmus+, with a focus on grassroots sports and education, and to enhance
its visibility and accessibility in order to improve the mainstreaming of sport into other funding programmes such as the ESIF or the Health
Programme.
The resolution underlined the importance of education through sport and the potential of sport to help get socially vulnerable youngsters back
on track and in preventing radicalisation.
Recalling that young European athletes are often faced with the challenge of combining their sports careers with education and work,
Parliament underlined the need to ensure sustainable financial support for dual-career exchange programmes at EU and national level through
the Erasmus+ Sport chapter. It called on the Member States to promote, in collaboration with educational institutions, cross-border exchanges

of athletes and to provide access to scholarships for athletes.
Stressing that the lack of physical activity is identified by WHO as the fourth leading risk factor for global mortality, Parliament encouraged the
Member States and the Commission to make physical activity a political priority in the next EU Work Plan on Sport, especially for young
people and vulnerable communities from socially deprived areas where physical participation is low. It urged the Member State to encourage
citizens to pursue physical activities on a more regular basis by means of appropriate health policies and programmes for their daily lives.
The report stressed that disabled people should have equal access to all sports facilities and urged the Member States to implement inclusive
sport programmes for disabled people at schools and universities.
Lastly, Members maintained that the selling of TV rights on a centralised, exclusive and territorial basis, with equitable sharing of revenues, is
essential to the sustainable funding of sport at all levels.

