Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2011(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Application of the European order for payment procedure
See also 2004/0055(COD)
Subject
7.40.02 Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters
8.50.01 Implementation of EU law

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
26/11/2015

CHRYSOGONOS
Kostas
Shadow rapporteur

BUDA Daniel

REGNER Evelyn

CAVADA Jean-Marie

ANDERSSON Max
Committee for opinion
LIBE

European Commission

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
13/10/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

21/01/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

13/10/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

18/10/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

01/12/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

01/12/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

01/12/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information

COM(2015)0495

Summary

A8-0299/2016

Summary

T8-0481/2016

Summary

Procedure reference

2016/2011(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Implementation
See also 2004/0055(COD)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/05517

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0495

13/10/2015

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE584.146

06/06/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE587.422

14/07/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0299/2016

18/10/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0481/2016

01/12/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)128

27/03/2017

2016/2011(INI) - 13/10/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to assess the application of Regulation (EC) 1896/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council creating a European Order
for Payment Procedure.
CONTENT: the Commission presents a report on the application of Regulation (EC) 1896/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council
creating a European Order for Payment Procedure, which is the first true European civil payments procedure. It has been applied since
December 2008 in all Member States except Denmark. The procedure is an optional procedure that can be used in cross-border cases as an
alternative to domestic payment orders. The procedure allows creditors to recover uncontested civil and commercial claims according to a
uniform procedure available in 27 Member States.
General assessment of the Regulation: the Commission considers that, overall, the objectives of the Regulation to simplify, speed up and
reduce the costs of litigation in cases concerning uncontested claims and to permit the free circulation of European payment orders in the EU
without exequatur was broadly achieved, though in most Member States the procedure was only applied in a relatively small number of cases.
From the studies and consultation carried out, it appears that there have been no major legal or practical problems in the use of the procedure
or in the fact that exequatur is abolished for the recognition and enforcement of the judgments resulting from the procedure. The report reviews
the existing case-law.
Between 12,000 and 13,000 applications for European orders for payment are received by the courts of Member States per year. The highest
numbers of applications (more than 4,000 annually) are in Austria and Germany where also most European orders for payment are issued.
Between 300 and 700 applications are received annually in Belgium, the Czech Republic, France, Hungary, the Netherlands, Portugal and
Finland. In the other Member States, the procedure has been taken up to a more limited extent.
The Commission considers that the application of the Regulation has generally improved, simplified and accelerated the handling of
uncontested pecuniary claims in cross-border disputes. In the light of this, it is therefore considered not appropriate at this time to change the
fundamental parameters of the European procedure.
Awareness of the existence and operation of the procedure: a 2010 Eurobarometer showed that awareness and use of the European
procedures including the European order for payment procedure among citizens is relatively low: only 6 % of those asked had heard about the
European order for payment procedure. The Commission states that further awareness-raising is necessary, both at European and at Member
State level. Efficient and active promotion of the Regulation should take place, providing the general public and professionals with information
on the European order for payment procedure.
Electronic submission of the application: many Member States allow the electronic submission of the application (Czech Republic, Germany,
Estonia, France, Lithuania, Austria, Slovenia, Slovak Republic, Finland, Sweden, UK, Cyprus) or envisage developing electronic processing in
the future in all courts having jurisdiction to deal with the European order for payment procedure (Ireland, Italy, Malta, Portugal). Following a
Commission study on the feasibility of electronic application for European payment orders, a pilot project on this issue is being co-funded by
the Commission. Nine Member States are participating in the e-CODEX pilot for the European order for payment procedure.
In addition, the operation of the Regulation may be improved through non-legislative and implementation measures. The Commission will use
the cooperation mechanism of the European Judicial Network in Civil and Commercial Matters in a proactive manner to improve the
implementation and promote the take-up of this useful instrument.

On-line claims: the Commission considers that the operation of the procedure could further be improved by ensuring its electronic processing.
Many Member States allow the electronic submission of the application (Czech Republic, Germany, Estonia, France, Lithuania, Austria,
Slovenia, Slovak Republic, Finland, Sweden, UK, Cyprus) or envisage developing electronic processing in the future in all courts having
jurisdiction to deal with the European order for payment procedure (Ireland, Italy, Malta, Portugal).
Following a Commission study on the feasibility of electronic application for European payment orders, a pilot project on this issue is being
co-funded by the European Commission. Nine Member States are participating in the e-CODEX pilot for the European order for payment
procedure.
Merits of a centralised system: Member States are encouraged to give further consideration to the suitability of centralisation of the handling of
cases under the procedure. Five Member States have concentrated jurisdiction to handle European orders for payment in a single specific
court/authority. In the other Member States, district and regional courts (or notaries for instance in Hungary) are competent for issuing
European orders for payment. Overall, the data on the use of the procedure as to whether a centralised system leads to a more frequent use
of the procedure are inconclusive. Nevertheless, in the light of the written and non-adversarial nature of the procedure, where no debate on the
substance of the claim takes place, and which is thus particularly suited for electronic processing, the European order for payment procedure
does appear better suited for centralised court handling than other procedures which require a debate on the substance and consideration of
evidence.

2016/2011(INI) - 18/10/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Kostas CHRYSOGONOS (GUE/NGL, EL) on the application of the
European Order for Payment Procedure, following the Commission report on the application of Regulation (EC) No 1896/2006 of the European
Parliament and of the Council.
Whilst welcoming the successful operation in all the Member States of the European Order for Payment Procedure, Members deplored the
significant delay of almost two years in the submission of the Commissions report as well as th e lack of up-to-date data on the situation in the
Member States with regard to the functioning and implementation of the Payment Procedure. They called on the Commission, therefore to
produce an extended, updated and detailed impact assessment.
Better information for businesses, and legal professionals: Members regretted that use of the European Order for Payment Procedure varies
significantly between Member States. They called for:
practical steps to further inform citizens, businesses, legal professionals and all other relevant parties of the availability, functioning,
application and advantages of the European Order for Payment Procedure in cross-border cases;
assistance for members of the public and in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises to improve their use, understanding and
knowledge of existing legal instruments with a view to the enforcement of claims at cross-border level under the relevant EU
legislation;
Practical implementation: several elements are key for the effective use of the Procedure. The report:
encouraged Member States to strive to issue orders within 30 days, and to accept applications in foreign languages where possible.
More Member States should follow the example of France, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Cyprus and Sweden and allow claimants to
submit their applications in additional languages;
fully supported the work being done to allow, in the future, the electronic submission of applications for a European Order for Payment;
the Commission, in this connection, should encourage use of the ?-CODEX pilot project and to extend it to all Member States;
called on the Commission to adopt updated standard forms as required, and making better provision, inter alia, for an appropriate
description of the interest to be paid on claims.
A future review of the regulation should look at removing certain exceptions to the scope of the procedure and at revising the provisions on the
review of European Orders for Payment.

2016/2011(INI) - 01/12/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 568 votes to 43, with 8 abstentions, a resolution on the application of the European Order for Payment
Procedure, following the Commission report on the application of Regulation (EC) No 1896/2006 of the European Parliament and of the
Council.
Impact assessment: while welcoming the successful operation in all the Member States of the European Order for Payment Procedure,
Parliament deplored the significant delay of almost two years in the submission of the Commissions report as well as th e lack of up-to-date
data on the situation in the Member States with regard to the functioning and implementation of the Payment Procedure. It called on the
Commission, therefore to produce an extended, updated and detailed impact assessment for each Member State.
Better exploitation of the procedures potential: this procedure was created to enable the rapid, facilitated and inexpensive recovery of sums
arising from debts that are certain, of a fixed amount and due, and uncontested by the defendant. Although the operation of this procedure
seems largely satisfactory according to statistics, the procedure is working greatly below its full potential, as it is mainly used in Member States
whose legislation includes a similar national procedure. The resolution stressed that late payments are a key cause of insolvency, which
threatens the survival of businesses and in particular of small and medium-sized enterprises.
Better information for citizens and professionals: regretting that the use of the European Order for Payment Procedure varies significantly
between Member States, Parliament called for:
practical steps to further inform citizens, businesses, legal professionals and all other relevant parties of the availability, functioning,
application and advantages of the European Order for Payment Procedure in cross-border cases;
assistance for members of the public and in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises to improve their use, understanding and
knowledge of existing legal instruments with a view to the enforcement of claims at cross-border level under the relevant EU

legislation;
Practical implementation: several elements are key for the effective use of the Procedure. Parliament:
encouraged Member States to strive to issue orders within 30 days, and to accept applications in foreign languages where possible.
More Member States should follow the example of France, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Cyprus and Sweden and allow claimants to
submit their applications in additional languages;
fully supported the work being done to allow, in the future, the electronic submission of applications for a European Order for Payment;
the Commission, in this connection, should encourage use of the ?-CODEX pilot project and to extend it to all Member States;
called on the Commission to adopt updated standard forms as required, and making better provision, inter alia, for an appropriate
description of the interest to be paid on claims.
A future review of the regulation should look at removing certain exceptions to the scope of the procedure and at revising the provisions on the
review of European Orders for Payment.

