Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2145(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

European Cloud Initiative

Subject
3.50.20 Scientific and technological cooperation and agreements

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Rapporteur

Industry, Research and Energy

Appointed
12/01/2017

BUZEK Jerzy
Shadow rapporteur

BONI Michał

NICA Dan

FOX Ashley

VAN NIEUWENHUIZEN
Cora

REIMON Michel
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Appointed

24/05/2016
MAYDELL Eva

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

CULT

Culture and Education

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI

Legal Affairs

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
07/11/2016
BONI Michał

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Communications Networks, Content and Technology ANSIP Andrus

Key events
19/04/2016

Non-legislative basic document published

15/09/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

COM(2016)0178

Summary

12/01/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

26/01/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

15/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

16/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

16/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

16/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0006/2017

Summary

T8-0052/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2145(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Strategic initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ITRE/8/07102

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2016)0178

19/04/2016

EC

Committee draft report

PE587.505

15/09/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.264

25/10/2016

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

IMCO

PE589.220

29/11/2016

EP

Committee opinion

LIBE

PE593.831

14/12/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0006/2017

26/01/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0052/2017

16/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)358

31/08/2017

2016/2145(INI) - 19/04/2016 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to present a European Cloud Initiative with a view to securing Europe's place in the global data-driven economy.
BACKGROUND: the world is witnessing a dramatic increase in the amount and variety of data being produced. This " Big Data" phenomenon
creates new possibilities to share knowledge, to carry out research and to develop and implement public policies. It is also becoming easier to
exploit this data thanks to the Cloud. As Europe is the largest producer of scientific knowledge in the world, it is well placed to take the global
lead in the developing of a science cloud.
However, Europe is not yet fully tapping into the potential of data:
many European businesses, research communities and public bodies are yet to tap into the full potential of data and of its potentially
transformative effect on traditional sectors and on the way research is conducted. Data coming from publicly funded research is not
always open; likewise data generated or collected by businesses is often not shared, and not always for commercial reasons;
lack of interoperability prevents addressing grand societal challenges that require efficient data sharing and a multidisciplinary,
multi-actor approach, e.g. climate change);
fragmentation hampers data-driven science. Access policies for networking, data storage and computing differ;
there is surging demand in Europe for a world-class High Performance Computing (HPC) infrastructure to process data in science and
engineering. However, Europe is not participating in the HPC race in line with its economic and knowledge potential; it is lagging
behind in comparison to the USA, China, Japan, Russia and India.

The European Cloud Initiative will allow the EU to fully exploit the potential of data as a key driver of Open Science and the 4th industrial
revolution. It is designed to help science, industry and public authorities in Europe access world-class data infrastructures and cloud-based
services as they become the decisive factors for success in the digital economy.
CONTENT: the European Cloud Initiative builds on the Digital Single Market Strategy, which aims, inter alia, to maximise the growth potential
of the European digital economy. It aims to develop a trusted, open environment for the scientific community for storing, sharing and reusing
scientific data and results, the European Open Science Cloud. It aims to deploy the underpinning super-computing capacity, the fast
connectivity and the high-capacity cloud solutions needed via a European Data Infrastructure.
1) European Open Science Cloud: the European Open Science Cloud aims to give Europe a global lead in scientific data infrastructures.
Practically, it will offer 1.7 million European researchers and 70 million professionals in science and technology a virtual environment for
storage, management, analysis and re-use of research data, across borders and scientific disciplines.
As of 2016, the Commission will use the Horizon 2020 Work Programmes to: (i) provide funding to integrate and consolidate
e-infrastructure platforms, (ii) federate existing research infrastructures and scientific clouds and (iii) support the development of
cloud-based services for Open Science.
As of 2017, the Commission will make open research data the default option, while ensuring opt-outs, for all new projects of the
Horizon 2020 programme. It will encourage scientific data sharing and the creation of incentive schemes for researchers and
businesses to share data
2) European Data Infrastructure: the European Data Infrastructure, once fully implemented, will underpin the European Open Science Cloud. It
will also support the EU to rank among the world's top supercomputing powers by realising exascale supercomputers around 2022, based on
EU technology.
From now until 2020, the Commission and participating Member States should develop and deploy a large scale European HPC, data
and network infrastructure, including the following: (i) the acquisition of two co-designed, prototype exascale supercomputers and two
operational systems which will rank in the top three of the world; (ii) the establishment of a European Big Data centre; (iii) the upgrade
of the backbone network for research and innovation (GEANT) and the integration of European public services networks.
3) Exploiting the potential of quantum technologies: the European Data Infrastructure should be complemented by an ambitious, long-term and
large-scale flagship initiative to unlock the full potential of quantum technologies, accelerate their development and bring commercial products
to public and private users.
The Commission will start the preparatory steps for the flagship, with the aim of launching the ramp up phase in 2018.
4) Financial implications: various sources of EU financing can be identified for the European Cloud Initiative: (i) Horizon 2020 Framework
Programme for Research and Innovation; (ii) Connecting Europe Facility (CEF); (iii) European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIF); (iv)
European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI).
In cooperation with Member States and stakeholders, the Commission will explore appropriate governance and financing mechanisms for the
Open Science Cloud and the European Data Infrastructure and define an implementation roadmap.

2016/2145(INI) - 26/01/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted the own-initiative report by Jerzy BUZEK (EPP, PL) on the European Cloud
Initiative.
The report noted that the full potential of cloud computing for Europe can only be realised when data can flow freely across the Union with
clear rules, and when international data flows play an increasingly important role in the European and global economy.
The EU is lagging behind on the development of high-performance computing (HPC) as a result of its under-investment in establishing a
complete HPC system.
Firstly, Members welcomed the Commissions European Cloud Initiative as part of the implementation of the Digital Single Market (DSM)
Strategy and the Digitising European Industry Package, thus fostering the growth of the European digital economy, contributing to the
competitiveness of European businesses and services and enhancing global market positioning. They stressed that work on standardisation in
cloud computing should be accelerated and that creating more awareness of the benefits of cloud computing is crucial.
European Open Science Cloud (EOSC): Members gave their support to the EOSC as part of the European Cloud Initiative that will create a
virtual environment where scientists and professionals from all regions can store, share, manage, analyse and reuse their research data. It
must be developed and used with due regard for the fundamental rights enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights. The committee
welcomed the Commission's plan to extend the user base to the industry and to governments as fast as possible. The EOSC should be
accompanied by a comprehensive cyber-security strategy, because the scientific community has a need for a reliable data infrastructure that
can be used without exposing research work to data loss, corruption or intrusion.
European programmes: Members urged the Commission to:
lead by example, and to make all research data funded by European programmes such as Horizon 2020, the European Fund for
Strategic Investments (EFSI), the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESI) and others and its results to be open by default,
based on the findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable (FAIR) principles;
identify appropriate financing mechanisms for the EOSC and the European Data Infrastructure (EDI);
ensure that the EOSC benefits all regions of the Union, exploring the use of regional development funds for widening the initiative.
Removing barriers: Members supported the Commissions intention to remove barriers, especially technical and legal ones, to the free
movement of data and data services, to remove as well disproportionate data localisation requirements, and to promote the interoperability of
data by linking the European Cloud Initiative to the Free Flow of Data Initiative. In order to achieve a digital society, the free flow of data must
be regarded as the fifth freedom within the single market. They noted that a clear legal framework, sufficient skills and resources related to the

management of big data, as well as the recognition of relevant professional qualifications are prerequisites for unleashing the full potential of
cloud computing.
The Commission is urged to engage with stakeholders, especially the industry, in identifying big data, and to create incentives for
stakeholders, in particular SMEs and start-ups, to use, open and share data in the Single Market.
Text and data mining: the report stressed that full availability of public data within the EOSC will not be sufficient to remove all barriers to
data-based research. The initiative needs to be complemented by a modern copyright framework that should allow for the removal of
fragmentation and lack of interoperability from the European data research process.
Data protection, fundamental rights and data security: the report urged the Commission to take action to promote the further harmonisation of
laws in the Member States in order to avoid jurisdictional confusion and fragmentation, and to ensure transparency in the digital single market.
Stressing that the EU is a global importer and exporter of digital services, and that it requires a strong cloud computing and data economy to
be competitive, Members called on the Commission to take a lead in striving towards the creation of uniform, globally accepted standards of
personal data protection.
Members recognised that a harmonised approach to the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation, including guidelines,
compliance toolkits and awareness-raising campaigns for citizens, researchers and businesses, is crucial, especially for the development of
the EOSC and the facilitation of research cooperation, including by high-performance computing.
Lastly, the Commission is urged to:
cooperate in establishing a safe and trustworthy digital infrastructure and to build up high levels of cybersecurity in compliance with the
Network and Information Security Directive;
work with industry-led standard setting initiatives to ensure that the single market remains accessible to third countries and responsive
to technological evolution, avoiding barriers which will hinder innovation and competitiveness in Europe.

2016/2145(INI) - 16/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 444 votes to 93, with 50 abstentions, a resolution on the European Cloud Initiative.
Members noted that the full potential of cloud computing for Europe can only be realised when data can flow freely across the Union with clear
rules, and when international data flows play an increasingly important role in the European and global economy. They recalled that the EU is
lagging behind on the development of high-performance computing (HPC) as a result of its under-investment in establishing a complete HPC
system.
Parliament welcomed the Commissions European Cloud Initiative as part of the implementation of the Digital Single Market (DSM) Strategy. It
stressed that work on standardisation in cloud computing should be accelerated and that creating more awareness of the benefits of cloud
computing is crucial.
European Open Science Cloud (EOSC): Members gave their support to the EOSC as part of the European Cloud Initiative that will create a
virtual environment where scientists and professionals from all regions can store, share, manage, analyse and reuse their research data. It
must be developed and used with due regard for the fundamental rights enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights. Parliament welcomed
the Commission's plan to extend the user base to the industry and to governments as fast as possible.
Solutions under the European Cloud Initiative should be developed with due regard for the fundamental rights enshrined in the Charter of
Fundamental Rights.
The scientific community needs a secured, safe and open-source high-capacity infrastructure in order to advance research and to prevent
potential security breaches. The EOSC should be accompanied by a comprehensive cyber-security strategy.
The Commission and the Member States, in cooperation with other stakeholders, are called upon to establish a roadmap to give as fast as
possible a clear timescale for the implementation of the actions envisaged by the EOSC.
Access to data and financing: Parliament urged the Commission to lead by example, and to make all research data funded by European
programmes such as Horizon 2020, the European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI), the European Structural and Investment Funds
(ESI) and others and its results to be open by default, based on the findable, accessible, interoperable and reusable ( FAIR) principles.
Moreover, concerned by the EUR 4.7 billion financing gap of the European Cloud Initiative, Members called on the Commission to: (i) identify
appropriate financing mechanisms for the EOSC and the European Data Infrastructure (EDI); (ii) provide sufficient resources for this policy
area in Horizon 2020 and in its proposal for the Ninth Framework Programme.
Removing barriers: Parliament supported the Commissions intention to remove barriers, especially technical and legal ones, to the free
movement of data and data services, to remove as well disproportionate data localisation requirements, and to promote the interoperability of
data by linking the European Cloud Initiative to the Free Flow of Data Initiative. In order to achieve a digital society, the free flow of data must
be regarded as the fifth freedom within the single market. Members noted that a clear legal framework, sufficient skills and resources related to
the management of big data, as well as the recognition of relevant professional qualifications are prerequisites for unleashing the full potential
of cloud computing.
The Commission is urged to: (i) engage with stakeholders, especially the industry, in identifying big data; (ii) create incentives for stakeholders,
in particular SMEs and start-ups, to use, open and share data in the Single Market.
Text and data mining: the resolution stressed that full availability of public data within the EOSC will not be sufficient to remove all barriers to
data-based research. The initiative needs to be complemented by a modern copyright framework that should allow for the removal of
fragmentation and lack of interoperability from the European data research process.
Data protection, fundamental rights and data security: Parliament urged the Commission to take action to promote the further harmonisation of
laws in the Member States in order to avoid jurisdictional confusion and fragmentation, and to ensure transparency in the digital single market.

Stressing that the EU is a global importer and exporter of digital services, and that it requires a strong cloud computing and data economy to
be competitive, Members called on the Commission to take a lead in striving towards the creation of uniform, globally accepted standards of
personal data protection.
Parliament recognised that a harmonised approach to the implementation of the General Data Protection Regulation, including guidelines,
compliance toolkits and awareness-raising campaigns for citizens, researchers and businesses, is crucial, especially for the development of
the EOSC and the facilitation of research cooperation, including by high-performance computing.
Lastly, the Commission is urged to:
cooperate in establishing a safe and trustworthy digital infrastructure and to build up high levels of cybersecurity in compliance with the
Network and Information Security Directive;
ensure that this initiative is fit for purpose, outward looking, future proof and technologically neutral in order for the EU to be a leader in
this area;
work with industry-led standard setting initiatives to ensure that the single market remains accessible to third countries and responsive
to technological evolution, avoiding barriers which will hinder innovation and competitiveness in Europe.

