Procedure file
Basic information
RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

2016/2731(RSP)

Procedure completed

Resolution on space market uptake

Subject
3.40.05 Aeronautical industry, aerospace industry

Key players
European Parliament
European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs BIEŃKOWSKA Elżbieta

Key events
07/06/2016

Debate in Parliament

08/06/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

08/06/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

08/06/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0268/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2731(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Documentation gateway
Motion for a resolution

B8-0739/2016

06/06/2016

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0268/2016

08/06/2016

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)612

18/11/2016

Summary

2016/2731(RSP) - 08/06/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution tabled by the EPP, S&D, ECR, ALDE, Greens/EFA and EFDD groups on space market uptake.
Space strategy and market uptake: Parliament encouraged the Commission to present a comprehensive, ambitious and forward-looking
strategy, ensuring in the short, medium and long term Europes leading position in space technologies and services on global markets,
ensuring independent access to space for Europe and ensuring a level playing field for the European space industry.
One of the main elements of the strategy should be market uptake of space data, services and applications to maximise the socio-economic
benefits of EU space programmes.
Members called on the Commission to present a proposal for a clear European space industrial policy as part of the upcoming strategy. They

also acknowledged the broad range of stakeholders involved in implementing EU space policy, particularly the Commission, the European
GNSS Agency (GSA), the European Space Agency (ESA), Copernicus service providers and encouraged them to further foster their
cooperation.
Technical barriers: Parliament considered that Galileo and Copernicus should be considered as complementary programmes and that further
synergies should be encouraged. Considering that Copernicus data dissemination is too fragmented, Parliament emphasised the need for
faster access to large sets of earth observation (EO) data, such as time series. It urged the Commission ensure that Copernicus data are
made available to independent ICT platforms, which would allow the storage, management, processing of and easy access to big data, and
would make it easier to integrate data sets from as many sources as possible and bring them to the user.
Members also recommended that the Commission work closely with the Member States and the ESA on the creation of a properly integrated
infrastructure system, with appropriate levels of data security.
The resolution highlighted the fact that, without Galileo-enabled chipsets and receivers, Galileo market uptake will be severely hampered. In
this regard, Parliament called on the GSA to continue to work with chipset and receiver manufacturers in order to understand their needs and
to provide them with the necessary technical information and specifications to ensure that as much user equipment as possible is compatible
with Galileo.
Market barriers: public sector activities, including those of entrusted European agencies, should be predictable in order to stimulate private
sector investments. Therefore, future space services should be mainly provided by, and procured from, commercial enterprises unless there is
a good reason not to do so, for example, because of tangible security risks. Members suggested that the mid-term evaluation of the
Copernicus and Galileo regulations should be used to ensure a greater involvement of the private sector in the procurement of services.
The Commission is urged to:
in relation to Copernicus data, to clearly define as soon as possible the role of the core public services and what should be left to the
downstream sector;
assess needs for very high resolution EO data for EU internal operational purposes;
take measures to facilitate the procurement of space-based services by public authorities, including by encouraging pre-commercial
procurement, in particular to support innovative SMEs.
Parliament also called for efforts to be stepped up to raise awareness of the potential of European space programmes amongst the public and
private sector and end users and to encourage the use of space data in the public sector and in the business community. More efforts are
needed to promote and market the Copernicus programme.
Space in EU policies: according to Members, the Commission should strengthen the links between EU space assets and activities in policy
areas such as the internal market, industrial base, jobs, growth, investment, energy, climate, environment, health, agriculture, forestry,
fisheries, transport, tourism, the digital single market, regional policy and local planning.
Moreover, there is a huge potential in tackling challenges such as migration, border management and sustainable development.
In this regard, the Commission should carry out a space check on all existing and new policy initiatives, to make sure that the best use is made
of EU space assets.
Access to finance and expertise: Parliament stressed the need to strengthen funding for development of downstream applications and services
and the downstream market in general. It invited the Commission, at the time of the next MFF, to examine the desirability of setting aside for
this purpose a greater proportion of the EU space budget. It considered in particular that the innovation potential of Horizon 2020 should be
better exploited for the space sector.
Members also stressed that the Commission should support initiatives such as space industry clusters, incubators and similar initiatives to
develop a coherent EU strategy to support space entrepreneurship. The Commission is also called upon to help to correct the geographical
imbalance of such activities in which the Central and Eastern European countries are lagging behind.
Lastly, the EU and the Member States should, in cooperation with the private sector, step up their efforts to stimulate skills and
entrepreneurship and to attract students towards the space sector.

