Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2139(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Increasing the effectiveness of development cooperation

Subject
6.30 Development cooperation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
DEVE

Rapporteur

Development

Appointed
12/07/2016

PREDA Cristian Dan
Shadow rapporteur

TOIA Patrizia

ZAHRADIL Jan

VÄYRYNEN Paavo

SÁNCHEZ
CALDENTEY Lola

HAUTALA Heidi

CORRAO Ignazio
Committee for opinion
CONT

European Commission

Budgetary Control

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

International Cooperation and Development

MIMICA Neven

Key events
15/09/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

08/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

11/11/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

21/11/2016

Debate in Parliament

22/11/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

22/11/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

22/11/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0322/2016

Summary

T8-0437/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2139(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

DEVE/8/07090

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE589.254

03/10/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.237

18/10/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE593.894

04/11/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0322/2016

11/11/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0437/2016

22/11/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)148

22/03/2017

2016/2139(INI) - 11/11/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Development adopted the own-initiative report by Cristian Dan PREDA (EPP, RO) on increasing the effectiveness of
development cooperation.
Members recalled that the aid effectiveness principles have clearly contributed to progress towards the Millennium Development Goals in
many countries, but progress remains uneven. They insisted on the fact that Official Development Assistance (ODA) can play a crucial role in
delivering on the 2030 Agenda, in particular in low-income countries, if it is better targeted and if it respects the principles of effective
development cooperation, namely democratic country ownership.
Members also called on all development actors to build on the commitments made from Paris to Busan, and to renew and reinforce their
efforts to make development cooperation as effective as possible with a view to achieving the ambitious goals and targets set out in the 2030
Agenda.
In brief, the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, adopted at the Second High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in 2005, followed by
another Forum lunched in turn the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (GPEDC).
Sufficient funding of development policy: overall, Members recommended the use of all development policy tools for poverty eradication and
the promotion of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). However, sufficient funding is a prerequisite for effective development
cooperation. Most Official Development Assistance (ODA) providers have not met their commitment to allocate 0.7 % of GNI to development
assistance by 2015, resulting in more than USD 2 trillion not being made available to developing countries for attaining the Millennium
Development Goals. Members urged the EU and its Member States to meet their long-standing commitment to devote 0.7 % of GNI to aid, to
step up their development assistance, including through the EU budget and the European Development Fund (EDF).
Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (GPEDC): Members noted with concern that as of mid-2015, only five EU Member
States had published Busan implementation plans. They urged Member States to publish implementation plans and report on their efforts prior
to the Second High Level Meeting of the GPEDC, which will take place in Nairobi from 28 November to 1 December 2016.
They called for the outcome document of this meeting to clearly address and assign differentiated roles and responsibilities of development
actors and institutions for implementing the agenda and applying the principles, in order to enhance progress and facilitate future cooperation.
The GPEDC ought to play a leading role in ensuring progress on SDG 17, namely on monitoring and accountability, increased effectiveness of
aid, quality and capacity aspects of finance for development, tax and debt sustainability.
This partnership should support the full implementation of the SDG by all actors at national level.
Improve transparency and development aid: whilst welcoming the efforts made to ensure that all actors concerned have access to information
on transparency of development cooperation programming, funding mechanisms, projects and aid flows, in particular in the context of the
International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) and the setting-up of the EU Aid Explorer website. Members stated that major steps still need to
be taken in this regard, and called for further significant efforts be urgently made by all donors to make information and data more accessible,
timely and comparable.
Given that monitoring, review, and knowledge-sharing about progress in development are of paramount importance, Members called on the
Commission to submit reports, at least every 24 months, on the efforts and action plans of both the EU and the Member States with a view to
comprehensively implementing the Busan principles. Moreover, they demanded to be informed regularly and in a timely manner on the

positions taken by the Commission in the GPEDC Steering Committee.
Responsibility of donors: Member stressed that assistance can only be sustained when recipients are strongly committed and in charge. They
insisted on the importance of shared responsibility for development results. They recalled that democratic ownership requires strong
institutions that can ensure the full participation of local actors in the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development programmes.
More generally, Members encouraged recipient countries parliaments to adopt national policies on development aid in order to improve the
accountability of donors and of recipient governments, including that of local authorities, enhance public financial management and absorption
capacity, and improve conditions for receiving budget support, as well as, in the long run, reducing dependence on aid.
They invited the Commission and the Member States to engage with national parliaments of partner countries with a view to constructively
supporting the development of such policies, complementing them with mutual accountability arrangements.
The report welcomed the OECD's initiatives potentially contributing to reducing illicit financial flows, and called on the international community
to enhance cooperation in order to increase the transparency of tax regimes and financial flows more generally. It insisted on the crucial role
and responsibilities of multinational companies and financial institutions in this regard.
Combat against corruption: Members recalled that corruption in recipient countries, whether directly linked to development assistance or not,
constitutes a serious violation of democratic legitimacy and harms public support for development assistance in donor countries. They
welcomed, therefore, all measures taken to promote sound financial management and eradicate corruption once and for all, while noting that
the situation in many partner countries by definition implies a certain degree of risk.
Civil society: Members underlined the role in development of citizens, local communities, elected representatives, faith-based organisations,
civil society organisations (CSOs), academia, trade unions and the private sector, and stresses that all these actors need to be involved in
furthering and implementing the effectiveness agenda at various levels. They stated that their effective contribution requires their participatory
involvement in planning and implementing, mutual accountability and transparency, and that donors should improve predictability and
speediness when working with these actors as implementing partners.
Complementarity of aid: Members recalled their request for the codification and strengthening of the mechanisms and practices for ensuring
better complementarity and effective coordination of development aid among EU Member States and institutions, providing clear and
enforceable rules for ensuring democratic domestic ownership.
Private sector: lastly, Members firmly believe that the private sector is an important partner in achieving the SDGs and mobilising further
resources for development.

2016/2139(INI) - 22/11/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 545 votes to 39, with 92 abstentions, a resolution on increasing the effectiveness of development
cooperation.
Parliament recalled that the aid effectiveness principles have clearly contributed to progress towards the Millennium Development Goals in
many countries, but progress remains uneven. It insisted on the fact that Official Development Assistance (ODA) can play a crucial role in
delivering on the 2030 Agenda, in particular in low-income countries, if it is better targeted and if it respects the principles of effective
development cooperation, namely democratic country ownership.
Parliament also called on all development actors to build on the commitments made from Paris to Busan, and to renew and reinforce efforts to
make development cooperation as effective as possible with a view to achieving the ambitious goals and targets set out in the 2030 Agenda.
In brief, the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness, adopted at the Second High Level Forum on Aid Effectiveness in 2005, followed by
another Forum lunched in turn the Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (GPEDC).
Sufficient funding of development policy: overall, Parliament recommended the use of all development policy tools for poverty eradication and
the promotion of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). However, sufficient funding is a prerequisite for effective development
cooperation. Most Official Development Assistance (ODA) providers have not met their commitment to allocate 0.7 % of GNI to development
assistance by 2015, resulting in more than USD 2 trillion not being made available to developing countries for attaining the Millennium
Development Goals. Parliament urged the EU and its Member States to meet their long-standing commitment to devote 0.7 % of GNI to aid, to
step up their development assistance, including through the EU budget and the European Development Fund (EDF).
Parliament called on the Member States to adopt an effective roadmap in order to achieve the commitment target in a transparent, predictable
and accountable way. It warned against the dilution of ODA criteria with the aim of covering expenses other than those directly linked to
promoting sustainable development in developing countries.
Global Partnership for Effective Development Cooperation (GPEDC): Parliament noted with concern that as of mid-2015, only five EU Member
States had published Busan implementation plans. It urged Member States to publish implementation plans and report on their efforts prior to
the Second High Level Meeting of the GPEDC, which will take place in Nairobi from 28 November to 1 December 2016. It called for the
outcome document of this meeting to clearly address and assign differentiated roles and responsibilities of development actors and institutions
for implementing the agenda and applying the principles, in order to enhance progress and facilitate future cooperation.
The GPEDC ought to play a leading role in ensuring progress on SDG 17, namely on monitoring and accountability, increased effectiveness of
aid, quality and capacity aspects of finance for development, tax and debt sustainability, mobilising the private sector and its responsibility for
sustainable development, transparency, policy coherence, multi-stakeholder partnerships, and South-South and triangular cooperation. This
partnership should support the full implementation of the SDG by all actors at national level.
Improve transparency and development aid: whilst welcoming the efforts made to ensure that all actors concerned have access to information
on transparency of development cooperation programming, funding mechanisms, projects and aid flows, in particular in the context of the
International Aid Transparency Initiative (IATI) and the setting-up of the EU Aid Explorer website, Members stated that major steps still need to
be taken in this regard, and called for further significant efforts be urgently made by all donors to make information and data more accessible,
timely and comparable.

Given that monitoring, review, and knowledge-sharing about progress in development are of paramount importance, Parliament called on the
Commission to submit reports, at least every 24 months, on the efforts and action plans of both the EU and the Member States with a view to
comprehensively implementing the Busan principles. Moreover, it demanded to be informed regularly and in a timely manner on the positions
taken by the Commission in the GPEDC Steering Committee.
Responsibility of donors: Parliament stressed that assistance can only be sustained when recipients are strongly committed and in charge. It
insisted on the importance of shared responsibility for development results. It recalled that democratic ownership requires strong institutions
that can ensure the full participation of local actors in the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of development programmes.
More generally, Parliament encouraged recipient countries parliaments to adopt national policies on development aid in order to improve the
accountability of donors and of recipient governments, including that of local authorities, enhance public financial management and absorption
capacity, and improve conditions for receiving budget support, as well as, in the long run, reducing dependence on aid.
Members invited the Commission and the Member States to engage with national parliaments of partner countries with a view to constructively
supporting the development of such policies, complementing them with mutual accountability arrangements.
The resolution welcomed the OECD's initiatives potentially contributing to reducing illicit financial flows, and called on the international
community to enhance cooperation in order to increase the transparency of tax regimes and financial flows more generally. It insisted on the
crucial role and responsibilities of multinational companies and financial institutions in this regard.
Combat against corruption: Members recalled that corruption in recipient countries, whether directly linked to development assistance or not,
constitutes a serious violation of democratic legitimacy and harms public support for development assistance in donor countries. They
welcomed, therefore, all measures taken to promote sound financial management and eradicate corruption once and for all, while noting that
the situation in many partner countries by definition implies a certain degree of risk.
Civil society: Parliament underlined the role in development of citizens, local communities, elected representatives, faith-based organisations,
civil society organisations (CSOs), academia, trade unions and the private sector, and stresses that all these actors need to be involved in
furthering and implementing the effectiveness agenda at various levels. It stated that their effective contribution requires their participatory
involvement in planning and implementing, mutual accountability and transparency, and that donors should improve predictability and
speediness when working with these actors as implementing partners and basic service supply partners, in order genuinely to reach the most
vulnerable sections of the population.
Complementarity of aid: Parliament recalled its request for the codification and strengthening of the mechanisms and practices for ensuring
better complementarity and effective coordination of development aid among EU Member States and institutions, providing clear and
enforceable rules for ensuring democratic domestic ownership. Parliament called for further efforts to accelerate untying of aid at global level.
It called on aid providers to use partner countries procurement systems as a first option.
Private sector: lastly, Parliament firmly believed that the private sector is an important partner in achieving the SDGs and mobilising further
resources for development.

