Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2325(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Space strategy for Europe

Subject
3.40.05 Aeronautical industry, aerospace industry

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Rapporteur

Industry, Research and Energy

Appointed
28/11/2016

KREHL Constanze
Shadow rapporteur

GROSSETÊTE
Françoise

TOŠENOVSKÝ Evžen

VAN NIEUWENHUIZEN
Cora

KOHLÍČEK Jaromír

REIMON Michel

PAKSAS Rolandas
SCHAFFHAUSER
Jean-Luc
Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
06/02/2017

VAN ORDEN Geoffrey
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

05/12/2016
GEBHARDT Evelyne

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

01/02/2017
MEISSNER Gesine

PECH

Fisheries

10/01/2017
SERRÃO SANTOS
Ricardo

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs BIEŃKOWSKA Elżbieta

Key events
26/10/2016

Non-legislative basic document published

19/01/2017

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

COM(2016)0705

Summary

30/05/2017

Debate in Council

21/06/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

05/07/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

11/09/2017

Debate in Parliament

12/09/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/09/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0250/2017

Summary

T8-0323/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2325(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ITRE/8/08785

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document
Committee draft report
Committee opinion

PECH

Amendments tabled in committee

COM(2016)0705

26/10/2016

EC

PE602.728

04/04/2017

EP

PE599.804

27/04/2017

EP

PE602.729

27/04/2017

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

AFET

PE601.237

31/05/2017

EP

Committee opinion

TRAN

PE601.249

02/06/2017

EP

Committee opinion

IMCO

PE602.751

09/06/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0250/2017

05/07/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0323/2017

12/09/2017

EP

Summary

2016/2325(INI) - 26/10/2016 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to present a new space strategy for Europe.
BACKGROUND: Europe owns world class space systems with Copernicus for Earth observation, EGNOS and Galileo for satellite navigation
and geo-positioning.
With 18 satellites currently in orbit and over 30 planned in the next 10-15 years, the EU is the largest institutional customer for launch services
in Europe.
The European space economy, including manufacturing and services, employs over 230 000 professionals and its value was estimated at
EUR 46-54 billion in 2014, representing around 21% of the value of the global space sector. Between 2014 and 2020, the EU alone will invest
over EUR 12 billion in space activities.
Space technologies, data and services have become indispensable in the daily lives of European citizens: when using mobile phones and car
navigation systems, watching satellite TV or withdrawing cash. Satellites provide immediate information when disasters, such as earthquakes,
forest fires or floods strike, allowing emergency and rescue teams to better coordinate their efforts. Agriculture benefits from improved land

use. Transportation and energy infrastructure is safer and can be more efficiently managed thanks to satellite technologies. Global challenges
due to growing populations, increased demand for resources and climate change require information about our planet which space based
solution can provide more easily.
In a fast-changing international space context, Europe must work together to promote its position as a leader in space, increase its share on
the world space markets, and seize the benefits and opportunities offered by space.
CONTENT: building on Article 189 of the Treaty (TFEU), the Commission is proposing a new space strategy for Europe focused on four
strategic goals:
1) Maximising the benefits of space for society and the EU economy: it is necessary to boost demand among public and private users,
facilitating access to and use of space data, and stimulating the development and use of innovative downstream applications but also ensuring
the continuity and user-driven development of EU space programmes.
The Commission will:
encourage the use of space services, data and applications in EU policies whenever they provide effective solutions (from
environmental protection to transport safety, precision farming, control of fishery stocks, monitoring of shipping routes and detection of
oil spills, to urban and regional planning);
take concrete measures, including regulatory ones where justified and beneficial, to introduce Galileo in specific markets or areas,
such as mobile phones, European critical infrastructure and aviation;
facilitate the use of Copernicus data and information by strengthening data dissemination and setting up platform services, promoting
interfaces with non-space data and services;
stimulate the development of space applications with a greater involvement of new actors from different domains;
address emerging needs related, in particular, to climate change/sustainable development and security and defence;
explore alternative business models (public-public, public-private partnerships or buying services) with a view to mobilising funds.
2) Fostering a globally competitive and innovative European space sector: the European space industry is facing tougher global competition.
Space is now part of a global value chain that increasingly attracts new companies and entrepreneurs. This opens up new opportunities to
develop innovative products, services and processes which can benefit industry in all Member States, creating new capacities and adding
value in and outside the space sector.
The Commission intends to:
step up its efforts to support space R&D activities, in cooperation with Member States and ESA, and review its strategic approach to
boosting the competitiveness of the European space sector;
support space entrepreneurs through EU funding programmes to facilitate further financing of investments in the space sector;
support space start-ups, including by exploring synergies with the upcoming Fund of Funds, and facilitate the emergence of space
hubs and clusters across Europe.
3) Reinforcing Europes strategic autonomy: space is becoming a more contested and challenged environment. Europe needs to ensure its
freedom of action and autonomy. It needs to have access to space and be able to use it safely.
The Commission wishes to:
aggregate the launch service needs of EU programmes and act as a smart customer of European reliable and cost-effective launch
solutions;
encourage the development of commercial markets for new space activities;
ensure that European satellite systems and operators have access to spectrum that is protected from interference from other system;
enhance the current EU space surveillance tracking (SST) support framework to protect against cyber threats or the impact of space
weather on satellites;
propose a Govsatcom initiative (new initiative providing resilient satellite communication services for governmental and institutional
security users) to ensure reliable, secured and cost-effective satellite communication services for EU and national public authorities
and infrastructure.
4) Strengthening Europes role as a global actor: the Commission will therefore work alongside the High Representative and Member States in
promoting international principles of responsible behaviour in outer space in the framework of the United Nations and other appropriate
multilateral fora.
The Commission will pursue space dialogues with strategic international partners, ensure that space policy is duly taken into account in EU
export control dialogues with third countries.

2016/2325(INI) - 05/07/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted an own-initiative report drafted by Constanze KREHL (S&D, DE) following the
Commission's Communication 'Space Strategy for Europe'.
Members endorsed the Commission's commitment to maximise the economic and societal benefits of space, increase the use of space
technologies by fostering a competitive and innovative European space sector and strengthening the EUs autonomy, Europe in the space
sector and its role as a global player.
Maximising the benefits of space for society and the economy of the Union: the report stresses that space programmes and their services are
essential assets in economic sectors and sectors such as energy, climate, safety, health, agriculture, transport, the digital market and local
planning. There is also a huge potential in addressing challenges such as migration, border management and sustainable development.
The Commission is invited to accelerate the economic exploitation of the Galileo, EGNOS and Copernicus programmes by setting adequate
targets for market development and by emphasising the benefits for citizens and businesses of satellite navigation and earth observation data
and services.

Members called on the Commission to carry out a systematic space check on compatibility with space programmes before tabling any new
legislative or non-legislative proposals.
The report acknowledged the role of space technologies, and of the two EU flagship space programmes, in making land, maritime, air and
space transport smarter, safer, more secure and sustainable, and integrated in strategic future sectors such as self-driving and connected
cars, and unmanned aerial vehicles.
Members also underlined the important role of the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIF) in stimulating downstream space
markets, most importantly through public procurement.
Fostering a globally competitive and innovative European space sector: Members called for the enhancement and extension of the dedicated
space budget line under Framework Programme 9. They called on the Commission to extend the use of the SME instrument for scaling-up
business opportunities in space-based products and services, both within Horizon 2020 and in future Framework Programmes.
The report called on the Commission, in the context of public procurement, to ensure fair treatment of EU enterprises vis-à-vis enterprises from
third countries. It highlighted the importance of reinforcing the European industrial base, and of guaranteeing the EUs strategic autonomy, by
diversifying sources of supply and making the best use of multiple EU providers.
Reinforcing Europes autonomy in accessing space: while recalling that EU space programmes are of a civil nature, Members are of the
opinion that the Commission should analyse synergies between European space programmes and the European Defence Action Plan
proposed in November 2016 to ensure overall coherence in this strategic field.
The Commission is called upon to:
aggregate the demand of institutional customers from the European Union and the Member States to ensure an independent, cost
effective and reliable access to space through the use of the European launchers Ariane, Vega and their future evolutions;
encourage the development of alternative launching technologies and the inclusion of eco-design principles in all launchers and space
assets;
mitigate the risks presented by space debris by enhancing current space surveillance and tracking (SST) services;
mitigate the risks for EU space assets by taking adequate measures, including, where appropriate, the use of encryption, for the
protection of space-related infrastructure against cyber-threats.
The report stressed the importance of securing critical infrastructure and communications as well as space capabilities in the fight against
terrorism.
Strengthening Europes role as a global actor and promoting international cooperation: the Commission is called upon to promote EU space
assets and space industrial capacity in all relevant aspects of its external relations.
In order to ensure a peaceful and safe space environment, Members advocated engaging with international partners to promote norms of
responsible behaviour and sustainability, notably in relation to space exploration. They called on the Commission to monitor the existing
private sector objectives in the field space mining.

2016/2325(INI) - 12/09/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 606 votes to 66, with 16 abstentions, a resolution following the Commission's Communication 'Space
Strategy for Europe'.
Parliament endorsed the Commissions commitment to maximise the economic and societal benefits of space, increase the use of space
technologies by fostering a competitive and innovative European space sector and strengthening the EUs autonomy, Europe in the space
sector and its role as a global player.
Maximising the benefits of space for society and the economy of the Union: Parliament stressed that space programmes and their services are
essential assets in economic sectors and sectors such as energy, climate, safety, health, agriculture, transport, the digital market and local
planning. There is also a huge potential in addressing challenges such as migration, border management and sustainable development.
The Commission is invited to:
accelerate the economic exploitation of the Galileo, EGNOS and Copernicus programmes by setting adequate targets for market
development and by emphasising the benefits for citizens and businesses of satellite navigation and earth observation data and
services;
stimulate the adoption of space technologies by European, national, regional and local authorities;
carry out a systematic space check on compatibility with space programmes before tabling any new legislative or non-legislative
proposals.
Parliament acknowledged the role of space technologies, and of the two EU flagship space programmes, in making land, maritime, air and
space transport smarter, safer, more secure and sustainable, and integrated in strategic future sectors such as self-driving and connected
cars, and unmanned aerial vehicles.
Members also underlined the important role of the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESIF) in stimulating downstream space
markets, most importantly through public procurement.
Fostering a globally competitive and innovative European space sector: stressing that the success and competitiveness of the space sector,
and the development of breakthrough technologies, are highly dependent on research and innovation, Members called for the enhancement
and extension of the dedicated space budget line under Framework Programme 9. They called on the Commission to extend the use of the
SME instrument for scaling-up business opportunities in space-based products and services, both within Horizon 2020 and in future
Framework Programmes.
Parliament called on the Commission, in the context of public procurement, to ensure fair treatment of EU enterprises vis-à-vis enterprises
from third countries. It highlighted the importance of reinforcing the European industrial base, and of guaranteeing the EUs strategic autonomy,

by diversifying sources of supply and making the best use of multiple EU providers.
Space clusters are thought to play a useful role in a space-industrial strategy.
Reinforcing Europes autonomy in accessing space: while recalling that EU space programmes are of a civil nature, Parliament called on the
Commission to analyse synergies between European space programmes and the European Defence Action Plan proposed in November 2016
to ensure overall coherence in this strategic field.
The Commission is called upon to:
aggregate the demand of institutional customers from the European Union and the Member States to ensure an independent, cost
effective and reliable access to space through the use of the European launchers Ariane, Vega and their future evolutions; the
Commission is urged to come forward with a work programme for launch vehicles in Europe for the next 20 years;
further develop the security of the Galileo infrastructure;
encourage the development of alternative launching technologies and the inclusion of eco-design principles in all launchers and space
assets;
mitigate the risks presented by space debris by enhancing current space surveillance and tracking (SST) services;
mitigate the risks for EU space assets by taking adequate measures, including, where appropriate, the use of encryption, for the
protection of space-related infrastructure against cyber-threats.
The resolution stressed the importance of securing critical infrastructure and communications as well as space capabilities in the fight against
terrorism.
Strengthening Europes role as a global actor and promoting international cooperation: the Commission is called upon to promote EU space
assets and space industrial capacity in all relevant aspects of its external relations.
In order to ensure a peaceful and safe space environment, Members advocated engaging with international partners to promote norms of
responsible behaviour and sustainability, notably in relation to space exploration. They called on the Commission to monitor the existing
private sector objectives in the field space mining.

