Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2140(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU flagship initiative on the garment sector

Subject
3.40.10 Textile and clothing industry, leathers
6.20.05 Multilateral and plurilateral economic and trade agreements and
relations
6.30 Development cooperation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
DEVE

Rapporteur

Development

Appointed
08/09/2016

SÁNCHEZ
CALDENTEY Lola
Shadow rapporteur

SZEJNFELD Adam

LIETZ Arne

ZAHRADIL Jan

BECERRA
BASTERRECHEA Beatriz

SARGENTINI Judith

CORRAO Ignazio
Committee for opinion
INTA

Rapporteur for opinion

International Trade

Appointed
31/08/2016

KARIM Sajjad
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

28/09/2016
LAMBERT Jean

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

International Cooperation and Development

MIMICA Neven

Key events
15/09/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

15/09/2016

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

21/03/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

28/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

A8-0080/2017

Summary

26/04/2017

Debate in Parliament

27/04/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

27/04/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/04/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0196/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2140(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

DEVE/8/07092

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE595.670

12/01/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE599.614

06/02/2017

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE593.891

10/02/2017

EP

Committee opinion

INTA

PE592.396

28/02/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0080/2017

28/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0196/2017

27/04/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)472

07/09/2017

2016/2140(INI) - 28/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Development adopted an own-initiative report by Lola SÁNCHEZ CALDENTEY (GUE/NGL, ES) on the EU flagship
initiative on the garment sector.
Members recalled that 60 million people worldwide work in the textile and clothing sector, which creates many jobs, particularly in developing
countries. However, textile manufacturers in developing countries are constantly exposed to aggressive purchasing practices by the
international wholesale and retail trade, which is also due to fierce global competition. This state of affairs has led to widespread labour rights
violations, including: poverty wages, forced labour and child labour, arbitrary dismissals, unsafe workplaces, violence against women, etc.
Most human rights violations in the garment sector concern various aspects of labour rights, such as the denial of workers fundamental right to
join or form a union of their choosing and bargain collectively in good faith.
Members noted that voluntary initiatives led by the private sector over the last 20 years have not proven to be effective enough in bringing
about a real improvement in workers rights. Multi-stakeholder initiatives like the German partnership for sustainable textiles or the Dutch
agreement on sustainable garment and textile have still to produce concrete results. The efforts of corporations to promote workplace
compliance can support, but not replace, the effectiveness and efficiency of public governance systems.
Members welcomed the increasing attention given to the promotion of decent working conditions through global supply chains following the
Rana Plaza factory collapse and acknowledged the Commissions commitment towards responsible management of supply chains, including in
the garment sector, as outlined in the Communication entitled Trade for All.
Members noted, however, that existing voluntary initiatives not only recurrently overlap and fail to cover the whole supply chains loopholes , but
also fall short of effectively addressing human rights issues.
Consequently, a legally binding institutional framework is urgently needed.
The Commission, aligned with the principle of Policy Coherence for Development reflected in Art. 208 TFEU, must develop a legislative

proposal for binding supply chain due diligence obligations in the garment sector, aligned with OECD Guidelines and the highest internationally
agreed standards on human rights and social and environmental standards.
This proposal must be human rights centred and must focus the spotlight on the core problems garment workers face (occupational health and
safety, a living wage, freedom of association, sexual harassment and violence in the workplace and the elimination of forced and child labour).
The following matters must also be addressed: (i) key criteria for sustainable production, (ii) transparency and traceability, including the
transparent collection of data and tools for consumer information, (iii) due diligence checks and auditing, (iv) access to remedy, (v) gender
equality, (vi) supply-chain due diligence reporting, (viii) the responsibility of companies in the event of man-made disasters and awareness
raising in the European Union.
Members called for consumers to be provided with clear, trustworthy information about sustainability in the garment sector, where products
originate from and the extent to which workers rights have been respected. They proposed, to this end, the development of EU-wide labelling
standards for fair clothing, accessible to both multinational companies and SMEs, to assist customers in their purchasing decisions.
Members called for an effective and compulsory reporting system and due diligence for garment products entering the EU market to ensure
increased access to information on the conduct of enterprise. It encouraged the EU to work with all relevant stakeholders to promote a
successful social partnership and to support stakeholders in the development and implementation of wage-setting mechanisms in accordance
with relevant International Labour Organisation (ILO) conventions, especially in countries where there is a lack of adequate legislation.
They recommended further research on ways of improving audits and inspections in the clothing and footwear supply chain. They emphasised
the importance of independent labour inspections in early warning and prevention, as well as in enforcement of national rules and regulations
on health and safety at the workplace.
The Commission is called upon to: (i) continue to include the ratification of core ILO standards, health and safety inspection, and freedom of
association in discussions on continued preferential trade with countries linked to the global supply chain for the garment sector, and; (ii)
strengthen human rights, labour and environmental conventions under the Generalised System of Preferences.

2016/2140(INI) - 27/04/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 505 votes to 49, with 57 abstentions, a resolution on the EU flagship initiative on the garment sector.
Members recalled that 60 million people worldwide work in the textile and clothing sector, which creates many jobs, particularly in developing
countries. However, textile manufacturers in developing countries are constantly exposed to aggressive purchasing practices by the
international wholesale and retail trade, which is also due to fierce global competition. This state of affairs has led to widespread labour rights
violations, including: poverty wages, forced labour and child labour, arbitrary dismissals, unsafe workplaces, violence against women, etc.
These practices are also detrimental to the European industry as they lead to social dumping.
In order to follow up on the flagship initiative which seeks to avoid disasters such as the Rana Plaza building collapse in 2013 in Bangladesh,
Parliament presented a series of recommendations.
Due diligence obligations: Members noted with concern how the existing voluntary initiatives for the sustainability of the garment sectors global
supply chain have fallen short of effectively addressing human rights and labour rights-related issues in the sector.
Therefore, the Commission is called upon to propose binding legislation on due diligence obligations for supply chains in the garment sector.
This legislative proposal must be aligned with the new OECD due diligence guidance for responsible supply chains in the garment and
footwear sector in line with the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises which are importing into the European Union, the ILO resolution
on decent work in supply chains and internationally agreed human rights, social and environmental standards.
This legislative proposal should include core standards, such as: (i) occupational health and safety, (ii) health standards, (iii) a living wage, (iv)
freedom of association and collective bargaining, (v) the prevention of sexual harassment and violence in the workplace, (vi) the elimination of
forced and child labour.
Members called for an effective and compulsory reporting system and due diligence for garment products entering the EU market with a view
to ensure increased access to information on the conduct of enterprises.
The also recommended that further action be taken to improve inspections and social audits in the clothing and footwear supply chain.
Consumer information: Parliament called for consumers to be provided with clear, trustworthy information about sustainability in the garment
sector, where products originate from and the extent to which workers rights have been respected. It proposed, to this end, the development of
EU-wide labelling standards for fair clothing, accessible to both multinational companies and SMEs, to assist customers in their purchasing
decisions.
Trade preferences and sustainability: Members considered that sustainable development chapters of EU trade agreements should be
mandatory and enforceable. They called on the Commission to introduce tariff preferences for demonstrably proven sustainably produced
textiles in the forthcoming reform of the GSP / GSP + rules and to promote the production of Fair Trade products through this instrument of
tariff preferences.
The Commission is called upon to: (i) continue to include the ratification of core ILO standards, health and safety inspection, and freedom of
association in discussions on continued preferential trade with countries linked to the global supply chain for the garment sector, and; (ii)
strengthen human rights, labour and environmental conventions under the Generalised System of Preferences.

