Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2060(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Rights of women in the Eastern Partnership States

Subject
4.10.09 Women condition and rights
8.20.04 Pre-accession and partnership

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
FEMM

Rapporteur

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

Appointed
09/03/2016

GABRIEL Mariya
Shadow rapporteur

BORZAN Biljana

ŽITŇANSKÁ Jana

MLINAR Angelika

ECK Stefan

SEBASTIA TALAVERA
Jordi Vicent

VON STORCH Beatrix
Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
24/05/2016

PANZERI Pier Antonio

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
28/04/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

29/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/12/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

12/12/2016

Debate in Parliament

13/12/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

13/12/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading
End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0365/2016

Summary

T8-0487/2016

Summary

13/12/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2060(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

FEMM/8/06305

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE589.329

30/09/2016

EP

PE585.433

11/10/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.241

18/10/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE594.198

24/11/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0365/2016

02/12/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0487/2016

13/12/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)243

04/07/2017

Committee opinion

AFET

2016/2060(INI) - 02/12/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Womens Rights and Gender Equality adopted the own-initiative report by Mariya GABRIEL (EPP, BG) on the rights of
women in the Eastern Partnership (EaP) States.
Members recalled that in the EaP States, only 17 of 136 senior ministerial positions were held by women in 2015, on average women
constituted 16 % of the elected Members of Parliament, and on average women accounted for only 17 % of the highest-ranking civil service
positions. Moreover, only three political parties in the whole region were led by women. Members noted that vertical and horizontal segregation
of womens employment in the labour markets of the EaP States remains deeply entrenched in their cultural and social norms.
In general, Members considered the situation in the area of womens rights in the EaP countries to be in need of improvement. They pointed
out that profound economic changes and economic uncertainty have had a negative effect on the economic situation of women, leading to
shortcomings in their de facto equality. It is for this reason that Members called on the EaP countries to overcome gaps in their
anti-discrimination frameworks, and for greater use of legislation against discrimination on the grounds of sex, including greater use of
international standards in judicial decisions, in order to increase the enforceability of laws. They noted that the situation of LGBTI individuals is
still precarious and alarming.
Participation of women in decision-making processes: Members stressed the noticeable absence of women from the structures of power in the
EaP States and called for equal access to power and representation of women at all levels of government and decision-making.
Moreover, Members supported womens participation and role in governmental and non-governmental anti-corruption organisations, actions
and programmes and in the fight against corruption but also in electoral observation missions.
Economic participation of women: Members deplored the fact that women are employed to a much greater extent in services and state sectors
with significantly lower wages than in the sectors employing a majority of males, that the gender pay gap remains high and can be as much as
50 %, and that women encounter cultural and sociological barriers in their access to managerial positions, as is also often the case in the EU.
They also regretted the fact that women are predominantly active in low-paying sectors despite their higher levels of education in all EaP
countries.
They highlighted that the protective legal provisions existing in some EaP countries, prohibiting the employment of women in potentially
dangerous occupations, restrict the access of women to certain professions and work and further limit their possibilities in the labour market.
They encouraged these countries to review such provisions.
Members encouraged the development of a social economy for women and facilitation of the use of microcredits as a tool for economic
independence of women. Furthermore, they called for equal access to education for women and girls and for the elimination of all forms of
child labour (e.g. Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan).

Violence against women: Members expressed the need to combat domestic violence and gender-based violence, including sexual
harassment. They condemned the use of sexual violence against women and girls as weapons of war, including mass rape and recalled that
they are classified in the Rome Statute as war crimes.
The EaP countries are urged to sign and ratify the Istanbul Convention on preventing and combating violence against women. They are also
urged to dedicate more resources to combating all forms of violence against women, including amending legal instruments and providing
assistance to victims of violence.
Members urged the governments to increase efforts to investigate and prosecute suspected traffickers and convict labour and sex traffickers
and to support NGO partners that provide rehabilitation and reintegration services to victims.
Womens role in peaceful resolution of conflicts: Members encouraged further efforts towards the peaceful resolution of conflicts and called for
greater involvement of women in such processes, in line with UN Security Council Resolutions 1325 and 2242 on Women, Peace and
Security. They called for specific protection for women and girls seeking asylum.
Examples of best practice: Members pointed out positive examples of greater inclusion of women in conflict resolution and reconciliation, such
as the Trans-Caucasus Womens Peace and Security Dialogue, established in 1994 and developed by the National Peace Foundation (US),
which was created in order for women in Caucasus to work on projects such as the rehabilitation of child victims of war, training for peace and
democracy building. They supported empowerment projects that raise womens self-confidence.
EU support in the context of the European Neighbourhood Policy: Members underlined that in the last five years EUR 103 million have been
spent on 121 projects and programmes to promote gender equality in the European neighbourhoods, including the EUR 5 million Women in
Business Programme in the Eastern Partnership countries. They recognised that significant support has already been provided by the EU
towards achieving goals in the area of womens rights and gender equality, including through TAIEX peer-to-peer assistance that helps with
public administration reform and promotes cooperation on fundamental principles and policies.
They urged the need to include womens rights and gender equality issues on the agendas of regular political and human rights dialogues with
the Eastern Partnership countries.
They stressed the need to provide support from the ENI to grassroots womens organisations and civil society, which are best positioned to
reach out to local populations and help to raise awareness and tackle problems encountered by women and girls in the regions.

2016/2060(INI) - 13/12/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 505 votes to 68, with 103 abstentions, a resolution on the rights of women in the Eastern Partnership
(EaP) States.
Parliament recalled that in the EaP States, only 17 of 136 senior ministerial positions were held by women in 2015, on average women
constituted 16 % of the elected Members of Parliament, and on average women accounted for only 17 % of the highest-ranking civil service
positions. Moreover, only three political parties in the whole region were led by women.
Parliament noted that vertical and horizontal segregation of womens employment in the labour markets of the EaP States remains deeply
entrenched in their cultural and social norms.
In general, Parliament considered the situation in the area of womens rights in the EaP countries to be in need of improvement. It pointed out
that profound economic changes and economic uncertainty have had a negative effect on the economic situation of women, leading to
shortcomings in their de facto equality. It is for this reason that Members called on the EaP countries to overcome gaps in their
anti-discrimination frameworks, and for greater use of legislation against discrimination on the grounds of sex, including greater use of
international standards in judicial decisions, in order to increase the enforceability of laws.
Parliament expressed the need for the EaP countries to take immediate action to increase equality between women and men in society,
including adoption of national action plans and cooperation with international organisations and civil society stakeholders.
Moreover, it noted that in some EaP countries, the situation of LGBTI individuals is still precarious. It called on the national authorities to be
vigilant and firm and to impose penalties on people who insult or stigmatise LGBTI people.
Participation of women in decision-making processes: Parliament stressed the noticeable absence of women from the structures of power in
the EaP States and called for equal access to power and representation of women at all levels of government and decision-making.
Moreover, it supported womens participation and role in governmental and non-governmental anti-corruption organisations, actions and
programmes and in the fight against corruption but also in electoral observation missions.
Economic participation of women: Parliament deplored the fact that women are employed to a much greater extent in services and state
sectors with significantly lower wages than in the sectors employing a majority of males, that the gender pay gap remains high and can be as
much as 50 %, and that women encounter cultural and sociological barriers in their access to managerial positions, as is also often the case in
the EU. It also regretted the fact that women are predominantly active in low-paying sectors despite their higher levels of education in all EaP
countries.
Members highlighted that the protective legal provisions existing in some EaP countries, prohibiting the employment of women in potentially
dangerous occupations, restrict the access of women to certain professions and work and further limit their possibilities in the labour market.
They encouraged these countries to review such provisions.
Parliament encouraged the development of a social economy for women and facilitation of the use of microcredits as a tool for economic
independence of women. Furthermore, it called for equal access to education for women and girls and for the elimination of all forms of child
labour (e.g. Moldova, Georgia and Azerbaijan).
Violence against women: Parliament expressed the need to combat domestic violence and gender-based violence, including sexual
harassment. It condemned the use of sexual violence against women and girls as weapons of war, including mass rape and recalled that they
are classified in the Rome Statute as war crimes.

It also called for the application of the Beijing Platform for Action to education and health as basic human rights, including access to voluntary
family planning.
Parliament urged the governments to increase efforts to investigate and prosecute suspected traffickers and convict labour and sex traffickers,
to protect the integrity of the women concerned according to the Nordic model and to support NGO partners that provide rehabilitation and
reintegration services to victims.
Womens role in peaceful resolution of conflicts: Parliament encouraged further efforts towards the peaceful resolution of conflicts and called
for greater involvement of women in such processes, in line with UN Security Council Resolutions 1325 and 2242 on Women, Peace and
Security. It called for specific protection for women and girls seeking asylum.
Examples of best practice: Parliament pointed out positive examples of greater inclusion of women in conflict resolution and reconciliation,
such as the Trans-Caucasus Womens Peace and Security Dialogue, established in 1994 and developed by the National Peace Foundation
(US), which was created in order for women in Caucasus to work on projects such as the rehabilitation of child victims of war, training for
peace and democracy building. It supported empowerment projects that raise womens self-confidence.
EU support in the context of the European Neighbourhood Policy: Parliament underlined that in the last five years EUR 103 million have been
spent on 121 projects and programmes to promote gender equality in the European neighbourhoods, including the EUR 5 million Women in
Business Programme in the Eastern Partnership countries. It recognised that significant support has already been provided by the EU towards
achieving goals in the area of womens rights and gender equality, including through TAIEX peer-to-peer assistance that helps with public
administration reform.
The Commission is called upon to use gender mainstreaming in all areas of the ENP and ENI, thus ensuring that specific gender equality
targets are developed and monitored.
It urged the need to include womens rights and gender equality issues on the agendas of regular political and human rights dialogues with the
Eastern Partnership countries.
Lastly, it stressed the need to provide support from the European Neighbourhood Instrument (ENI) to grassroots womens organisations and
civil society, which are best positioned to reach out to local populations and help to raise awareness and tackle problems encountered by
women and girls in the regions.

