Procedure file
Basic information
2016/0060(CNS)

CNS - Consultation procedure
Regulation

Procedure completed

Jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of
decisions in matters of property consequences of registered partnerships

Subject
4.10.02 Family policy, family law, parental leave
7.40.02 Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
15/03/2016

CAVADA Jean-Marie
Shadow rapporteur

VOSS Axel

GEBHARDT Evelyne

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

MAŠTÁLKA Jiří

HAUTALA Heidi
Committee for opinion
LIBE

FEMM

Rapporteur for opinion

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Justice and Consumers

Appointed

Commissioner
JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
02/03/2016

Legislative proposal published

11/04/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

10/06/2016

Debate in Council

14/06/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

16/06/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

22/06/2016

Debate in Parliament

COM(2016)0107

Summary

A8-0208/2016

Summary

23/06/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

23/06/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

24/06/2016

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

24/06/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

08/07/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0289/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0060(CNS)

Procedure type

CNS - Consultation procedure

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 081-p3-a1

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/05947

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0107

02/03/2016

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE580.493

30/03/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE582.312

09/05/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0208/2016

16/06/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0289/2016

23/06/2016

EP

Summary

Final act
Regulation 2016/1104
OJ L 183 08.07.2016, p. 0030 Summary
Corrigendum to final act 32016R1104R(01)
OJ L 113 29.04.2017, p. 0062

2016/0060(CNS) - 02/03/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish a clear legal framework in the European Union for determining jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and
enforcement of decisions in matters of the property consequences of registered partnerships.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Regulation.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the Council adopts the act after consulting the European Parliament but without being obliged to
follow its opinion.
BACKGROUND: the increasing mobility of persons within an area without internal frontiers leads to a significant increase in the number of
couples formed by nationals of different Member States who live in a Member State other than their own or acquire property in more than one
Member State.
These transnational couples face practical and legal difficulties, both in the daily management of their property and in its division if the couple
separate or one of its members dies.
While marriage is the most common form of couple, new forms of union have emerged, including the registered partnership, by which two
people in a stable relationship formally register their union with a public authority. The difficulties encountered by couples in a registered

partnership often result from the great disparities between the applicable rules governing the property effects of such unions, both in
substantive law and in private international law.
The European Union has set itself the objective of maintaining and developing an area of freedom, security and justice in which the free
movement of persons is ensured.
In the 'EU Citizenship Report 2010: Dismantling the obstacles to EU citizens rights', adopted on 27 October 2010, the Commission announced
that it would adopt in 2011 a proposal for legislation to make it easier for international couples (either married or registered partners) to know
which courts had jurisdiction to deal with their property rights and which law applied to their property rights
On 16 March 2011, the Commission adopted a proposal for a Council Regulation on jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and
enforcement of decisions in matters of matrimonial property regimes and a proposal for a Council Regulation on jurisdiction, applicable law
and the recognition and enforcement of decisions regarding the property consequences of registered partnerships. At its meeting of 3
December 2015, the Council concluded that no unanimity could be reached for the adoption of the proposals for regulations on matrimonial
property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships and that therefore the objectives of cooperation in this area could
not be attained within a reasonable period by the Union as a whole.
17 Member States addressed a request to the Commission indicating that they wished to establish enhanced cooperation.
The proposal for a Council Decision authorising enhanced cooperation in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and
enforcement of decisions on the property regimes of international couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property regimes and the
property consequences of registered partnerships.
This proposal for a Council Regulation on the property consequences of registered partnerships, and the parallel proposal for a Council
Regulation on matrimonial property regimes both of which implement the enhanced cooperation and were adopted by the Commission at the
same time, are the Commission's response to the request by 17 Member States.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: before the 2011 Commission proposal was drawn up, a broad consultation exercise took place with the Member
States, other Union institutions and the public. The Commission conducted a joint impact study on the proposals for regulations on matrimonial
property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships.
The two new proposals regarding matrimonial property regimes and the property consequences of registered partnerships contain solutions
similar to those presented in the 2011 proposals taking into account the discussions in the Council and the European Parliament up to the end
of 2015.
CONTENT: the aim of the proposal is to establish a clear, legal framework in the European Union for determining jurisdiction and the law
applicable to the property consequences of registered partnerships. It therefore deals with matters of jurisdiction, applicable law and the
recognition and enforcement of decisions regarding the property consequences of a registered partnership. The rules proposed are concerned
only with cross-border cases.
Scope and definitions: according to the proposal, the notion of 'the property consequences of registered partnerships' must be given an
autonomous interpretation and embrace considerations relating to both the partners' daily management of their property and the liquidation of
the property as a result of the couple's separation or the death of one of the partners.
Matters already covered by existing EU regulations, such as maintenance obligations, especially between partners, and matters arising from
the law of succession, are excluded from the scope of the Regulation.
The Regulation does not affect the existence or validity of a registered partnership under national law or the recognition in one Member State
of a partnership registered in another Member State. It also does not affect matters of social security or the entitlement to rights to pension in
case of dissolution or annulment of the registered partnership.
The property consequences of registered partnerships, which are the sole subject matter of this Regulation, are given a specific definition
limiting them to existing property relationships between the partners and between the partners and third parties arising from the
institutionalised relationship created by the registration of the partnership.
Jurisdiction: the aim of this Regulation is to enable citizens to have the various related procedures handled by the courts of the same Member
State. To this end, the proposal is designed to ensure that the rules to determine the jurisdiction of the courts called on to deal with the
property aspects of registered partnerships are in line with existing rules in other Union instruments and, in particular, to concentrate
jurisdiction over the property regime in the Member State whose courts are handling the succession of a partner or the dissolution or
annulment of the registered partnership.
To ensure that, in the event of the death of one of the spouses, the competent court can handle both the succession of the deceased spouse
and the liquidation of the matrimonial property regime, this article provides that the court having jurisdiction for the succession according to the
rules laid down in Regulation (EU) No 650/2012 should also have jurisdiction to rule on the liquidation of the property regime of the registered
partnership linked to the succession.
Applicable law: the option proposed in the Regulation is that of a single scheme: all the property of the partners, regardless of its nature
(moveable or immoveable) and location, would be subject to the same law, namely the law applicable to the property regime of the registered
partnership.
The partners or future partners may agree to designate or to change the law applicable to the property consequences of their registered
partnership, provided that that law attaches property consequences to the institution of the registered partnership and that it is one of the
following:
the law of the State where the partners or future partners, or one of them, is habitually resident at the time the agreement is
concluded,
the law of a State of nationality of either partner or future partner at the time the agreement is concluded, or
the law of the State under whose law the registered partnership was created.
In the absence of any agreement, the law applicable to the property consequences of registered partnerships shall be the law of the State
under whose law the registered partnership was created. However, exceptionally, one of the partners can ask a court that the law applicable
should be the law of the State where the partners had their last common habitual residence

The Regulation lists some of the matters that would be governed by the law applicable to the matrimonial property regime. Such matters
include the liquidation of the property and also the effects of the matrimonial property regime on the relationships between a spouse and a
third party.
To protect the family home, a Member State where the family home is located may apply its own rules for the protection of the family home.
Exceptionally, this Member State may apply its own law to all persons living on its territory in 'preference' to the law normally applicable or that
of a marriage agreement concluded in another Member State.
Recognition, enforceability and enforcement: the proposal provides for the free circulation of decisions, authentic instruments and court
settlements concerning matrimonial property regimes. It would thus introduce mutual recognition based on the mutual trust arising out of the
integration of the Member States within the Union.
This free circulation would take the form of a uniform procedure for the recognition and enforcement of decisions, authentic acts and legal
transactions originating in another Member State. The grounds for non-recognition or refusal to enforce are also harmonised at Union level or
reduced to the absolute minimum.

2016/0060(CNS) - 16/06/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted, in the framework of a special legislative procedure (Parliaments consultation), the report by
Jean-Marie CAVADA (ADLE, FR) on the proposal for a Council regulation on jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement
of decisions in matters of the property consequences of registered partnerships.
The committee approved the Commission proposal subject to the introduction of a new definition of Member State so as to cover only Member
States participating in the Registered Partnerships Regulation, in line with the definition included in Article 3(1) of Council Regulation (EU) No
1259/2010 implementing enhanced cooperation in the area of the law applicable to divorce and legal separation (Rome III).

2016/0060(CNS) - 23/06/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 490 votes to 68, with 34 abstentions, in the framework of a special legislative procedure (Parliaments
consultations), a legislative resolution on the proposal for a Council regulation on jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and
enforcement of decisions in matters of the property consequences of registered partnerships.
Parliament approved the Commission proposal without amendment.
To recall, the aim of the proposal is to establish a clear, legal framework in the European Union for determining jurisdiction and the law
applicable to the property consequences of registered partnerships. It therefore deals with matters of jurisdiction, applicable law and the
recognition and enforcement of decisions regarding the property consequences of a registered partnership. The rules proposed are concerned
only with cross-border cases.

2016/0060(CNS) - 24/06/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to provide for a set of rules applicable to the property consequences of registered partnerships in order to provide unmarried
couples with legal certainty as to their property and offer them a degree of predictability.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2016/1104 implementing enhanced cooperation in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the
recognition and enforcement of decisions in matters of the property consequences of registered partnerships.
CONTENT : the Regulation applies to those Member States participating in the area of jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and
enforcement of decisions on the property regimes of international couples, covering both matters of matrimonial property regimes and the
property consequences of registered partnerships, by virtue of Council Decision (EU) 2016/954.
This Regulation is closely linked to another Regulation concerning jurisdiction, applicable law and the recognition and enforcement of
decisions in matters of matrimonial regimes.
Scope: the Regulation brings together provisions on jurisdiction, applicable law, recognition or, as the case may be, acceptance, enforceability
and enforcement of decisions, authentic instruments and court settlements.
Registered partnership may be understood as the regime governing the shared life of two people which is provided for in law, the registration
of which is mandatory under that law and which fulfils the legal formalities required by that law for its creation. The specific meaning of the term
remains defined by the national law of Member States.
The scope of the Regulation includes all civil-law aspects of the property consequences of registered partnerships, both the daily management
of the partner's property and its liquidation, in particular as a result of the couple's separation or the death of one of the partners.
However, excluded from the scope of the Regulation are questions concerning the legal capacity of spouses, the existence, validity or
recognition of a marriage, maintenance obligations and the succession to the estate of a deceased spouse.
The Regulation does not affect the competence of the authorities of the Member States to deal with matters of the property consequences of
registered partnerships
Jurisdiction: to reflect the increasing mobility of couples, the rules on jurisdiction set out in in the Regulation enable citizens to have their
various related procedures handled by the courts of the same Member State. The Regulation provides the following:
·

where a court of a Member State is seised in matters of the succession of a registered partner under Regulation (EU) No 650/2012,

the courts of that State shall have jurisdiction to rule on matters of the property consequences of the registered partnership arising in
connection with that succession case;
·

where a court of a Member State is seised to rule on the dissolution or annulment of a registered partnership, the courts of that State
shall have jurisdiction to rule on the property consequences of the registered partnership arising in connection with that case of
dissolution or annulment, where the partners so agree.

In order to increase legal certainty, predictability and the autonomy of the parties, the Regulation enables the parties, under certain
circumstances, to conclude a choice of court agreement in favour of the courts of the Member State of the applicable law or of the courts of the
Member State under whose law the registered partnership was created. Where a Member State holds that the registered partnership in
question cannot be recognised, the courts must act swiftly and the party concerned may submit the case in any other Member State that has a
connecting factor. The Regulation does not prevent the parties from settling the case amicably out of court, for instance before a notary, in a
Member State of their choice.
Applicable law: following the principle of unity of the applicable law, the Regulation stipulates that the law applicable to the property
consequences of registered partnerships applies to all assets falling under those consequences, regardless of where the assets are located.
The law designated as applicable by the Regulation shall be applied whether or not it is the law of a Member State.
The spouses may agree to designate, or to change, the law applicable to the property consequences of their registered partnership, provided
that that law is one of the following:
·

the law of the State where the spouses or future spouses, or one of them, is habitually resident at the time the agreement is
concluded; or

·

the law of a State of nationality of either spouse or future spouse at the time the agreement is concluded;

·

the law of the State under whose law the registered partnership was created.

In the absence of a choice-of-law agreement, the law applicable to the property consequences of registered partnerships shall be the law of
the State under whose law the registered partnership was created.
By way of exception, one partner may ask for a decision that the law of a State other than the State whose law is applicable if that applicant
can demonstrate that the partners had their last common habitual residence in that other State for a significantly long period of time.
The Regulation sets out the issues governed by the law applicable to the property consequences of registered partnerships, particularly the
liquidation of assets and the effects of the property consequences of the registered partnership on a legal relationship between a partner and
third parties.
Recognition, enforceability and enforcement of decisions: the Regulation lays down rules relating to the recognition, enforceability and
enforcement of decisions similar to those of other Union instruments in the area of judicial cooperation in civil matters. Grounds for
non-recognition of a decision include circumstances where such recognition is manifestly contrary to public policy in the Member State in
which recognition is sought.
The Regulation also allows for the acceptance and enforceability in all Member States of authentic instruments in matters related to the
property consequences of registered partnerships, in certain circumstances.
Information made available to the public: Member States shall provide the Commission with a short summary of their national legislation and
procedures relating to the property consequences of registered partnerships, including information on the type of authority that has
competence in the matter.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 28.7.2016. The Regulation is applicable in the Member States that participate in enhanced, as authorised by Decision
(EU) 2016/954.
APPLICATION: from 29.1.2019, except with respect to certain provisions that apply from 29.4.2018, and others that apply from 29.7.2016.

