Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2308(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

2016 Commission report on Turkey

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Turkey

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/10/2016

PIRI Kati
Shadow rapporteur

SOMMER Renate

BELDER Bas

LAMBSDORFF
Alexander Graf

HADJIGEORGIOU
Takis

VALERO Bodil

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo
BORGHEZIO Mario

Key events
19/01/2017

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

20/06/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

26/06/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

05/07/2017

Debate in Parliament

06/07/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

06/07/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

06/07/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0234/2017

Summary

T8-0306/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2308(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/08539

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE601.216

18/04/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE604.664

12/05/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE604.701

12/05/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0234/2017

26/06/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0306/2017

06/07/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)619

01/12/2017

2016/2308(INI) - 26/06/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Kati PIRI (S&D, NL) on the Commission's 2016 report on Turkey.
Members stressed that 2016 was a difficult year for the Turkish population as a result of the continuing war in Syria, the large number of
refugees, the conflict in the south-east of the country, the series of heinous attacks and the attempted coup in which 248 people were killed.
They reiterated their firm condemnation of the coup attempt of 15 July even though they recognised the right and responsibility of the Turkish
government to take steps to bring the perpetrators to justice.
Coup d'etat and state of emergency in Turkey: Members stressed that the measures taken under the current state of emergency have had a
disproportionately negative impact on a large number of citizens. They condemned a number of measures taken against public freedoms and
called for the immediate release of all prisoners detained without proof.
Political situation in Turkey: Members regretted that the accession instruments have not been used to the fullest extent and that there has
been a regression in the areas of rule of law and human rights in Turkey . They are determined to cooperate and to maintain an open and
constructive dialogue with the Turkish Government in order to work on common challenges such as regional stability, the situation in Syria,
migration and security.
Taking note of the outcome of the referendum held on 16 April 2017, Members expressed concern about the allegations of irregularities and
general electoral fraud highlighted in the conclusions of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe/Office for Democratic
Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR). They therefore called on Turkey to respect its commitments as a member of the Council of
Europe.
Members firmly condemned the fact that the Turkish President and several other political figures have repeatedly spoken in favour of restoring
the death penalty. Once again, Members underlined their unequivocal rejection of the death penalty and stated that this is an essential
requirement for accession to the European Union.
Turkey's accession process to the EU: Members recalled that in November 2016 they called for the freezing of Turkey's accession process.
They therefore called on the Commission and the Member States to formally suspend the accession negotiations with Turkey without further
delay if the constitutional reform package currently provided by the Turkish Government is implemented as it stands.
They also invited the Commission, Member States and Turkey to hold an open and frank discussion on areas of common interest for which
enhanced cooperation would be possible.
According to Members, any new political commitment between the EU and Turkey should be based on conditionality provisions concerning
respect for democracy, the rule of law and fundamental rights.
Human rights and fundamental freedoms: Members regretted all the measures taken following the introduction of a state of emergency, as well
as the detention of many opposition Members. They called on the Turkish government to immediately lift the state of emergency and
thoroughly investigate allegations of the serious ill-treatment of prisoners.
They pointed out that, since July 2016, more than 100 000 complaints have been lodged with the Turkish Constitutional Court , which has
declared itself incompetent on matters relating to the emergency decree. Measures are therefore needed to ensure that judicial review can be
applied.

In general, Members stressed the continuing violations of freedom of expression and serious violations of media freedom in Turkey, including
in the Kurdish language. They also deplored the repression of several foreign journalists arrested illegally. In particular, they called on the
government to allow the former Member of the European Parliament and chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee, Joost Lagendijk, to
return to his family in Turkey.
Kurdish-majority region: Members deplored the continuing deterioration of the situation in south-east Turkey, especially in areas where
curfews have been introduced. They recalled the responsibility of the Turkish Government to protect of all its citizens, irrespective of their
cultural or religious origins, and their beliefs.
They are convinced that only an equitable political settlement of the Kurdish issue can bring lasting stability and prosperity to both the area
concerned and the country as a whole.
Minorities: Members condemned discrimination against many religious minorities, including the Christian and Alevi minorities. They called on
Turkey to respect the importance of the Ecumenical Patriarchate and to recognise its legal personality.
They also urged Turkey to protect the rights of the most vulnerable groups and persons belonging to minorities and deplored the fact that the
LGBTI marches in Ankara and Istanbul were banned for the second consecutive year. They also encouraged the authorities to remedy the
main obstacles to the social inclusion of Roma.
EU-Turkey relations: Members called for the deepening of EU-Turkey relations in important areas of common interest such as the fight against
terrorism, migration, energy, economy and trade, and encourage dialogue and cooperation with that country, provided that commitments to
fundamental freedoms and rights are respected.
Convergence efforts are therefore required between the country's foreign policy and that of the Union, as well as the improvement of the
customs union with Turkey. Members stated that the full potential of the customs union shall not be achieved until Turkey fully implements the
Additional Protocol vis-à-vis all Member States.
Improvements are also required as regards:
the liberalisation of the visa regime;
the fight against corruption.
At the same time, Members called for the suspension of pre-accession funds if the accession negotiations are suspended and to use these
funds to support Turkish civil society and refugees in Turkey.
In general, Members condemned all the attacks in Turkey and stressed that close cooperation between Europol and the Turkish law
enforcement authorities is essential to effectively combat terrorism.
Refugees: Members welcomed the mobilisation of the Turkish government and local NGOs and the hospitality shown by the population in
hosting around three million refugees. They called on the Commission to ensure long-term investments for refugees and their host
communities in Turkey.
President Erdo?an: Members strongly condemned President Erdo?an's statements accusing some EU leaders of 'Nazi practices' and their
citizens being 'Nazis'. According to Members, such statements are unwarranted and undermine Turkey's credibility as a political partner. They
also called on the Turkish Government to refrain from systematically seeking to mobilise the Turkish Diaspora in the Member States for its own
needs. They also condemned the Turkish authorities' oversight of citizens holding dual citizenship residing abroad.
Turkish-Greek and Turkish-Cypriot bilateral relations: Members called on the Turkish government to put an end to the repeated violations of
Greek airspace and Greek territorial waters and to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all its neighbours.
They also pointed out that a settlement of the Cyprus issue would have a positive impact for the whole region, which would benefit first and
foremost the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots. They therefore pleaded for the continuation of the process of reaching an agreement
acceptable to both parties regarding the reunification of the island.
Syria: Members are convinced that only a credible political solution will ensure the stability of Syria and allow the decisive defeat of Daech and
other UN-designated terrorist groups in Syria. They urged all guarantors, including Turkey, to honour their commitments to ensure the full
implementation of the ceasefire agreement and to advance unhindered humanitarian access to the entire country.
It should be noted that the parliamentary committee has expressly requested the translation of the present report into Turkish.

2016/2308(INI) - 06/07/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 477 votes to 64, with 97 abstentions, a resolution on the Commission's 2016 report on Turkey.
Parliament stressed that 2016 was a difficult year for the Turkish population as a result of the continuing war in Syria, the large number of
refugees, the conflict in the south-east of the country, the series of heinous attacks and the attempted coup in which 248 people were killed. It
reiterated its firm condemnation of the coup attempt of 15 July even though it recognised the right and responsibility of the Turkish government
to take steps to bring the perpetrators to justice.
Coup d'etat and state of emergency in Turkey: Parliament stressed that the measures taken under the current state of emergency have had a
disproportionately negative impact on a large number of citizens. It condemned a number of measures taken against public freedoms and
called for the immediate release of all prisoners detained without proof.
Political situation in Turkey: Parliament regretted that the accession instruments have not been used to the fullest extent and that there has
been a regression in the areas of rule of law and human rights in Turkey . It is determined to cooperate and to maintain an open and
constructive dialogue with the Turkish Government in order to work on common challenges such as regional stability, the situation in Syria,
migration and security.
Taking note of the outcome of the referendum held on 16 April 2017, Parliament expressed concern about the allegations of irregularities and
general electoral fraud highlighted in the conclusions of the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe/Office for Democratic

Institutions and Human Rights (OSCE/ODIHR). It therefore called on Turkey to respect its commitments as a member of the Council of
Europe.
Parliament firmly condemned the fact that the Turkish President and several other political figures have repeatedly spoken in favour of
restoring the death penalty. Once again, Members underlined their unequivocal rejection of the death penalty and stated that this is an
essential requirement for accession to the European Union.
Turkey's accession process to the EU: Parliament recalled that in November 2016 it called for the freezing of Turkey's accession process. It
asked the Commission and the Member States to formally suspend the accession negotiations with Turkey without further delay if the package
of constitutional reforms currently provided by the Turkish Government is implemented as it stands. Parliament also pointed out that the
proposed constitutional reform in Turkey does not respect the fundamental principles of the separation of powers, does not offer sufficient
checks and balances and does not comply with the Copenhagen criteria. For the Parliament, any new political commitment between the EU
and Turkey should be based on conditionality provisions on respect for democracy, the rule of law and fundamental rights.
It called on the Commission, the Member States and Turkey to hold a fair and open debate on areas of common interest for which enhanced
cooperation would be possible.
Human rights and fundamental freedoms: Parliament regretted all the measures taken following the introduction of a state of emergency, as
well as the detention of many opposition Members and measures taken against the alleged members/supporters of the Gülen movement.
Parliament called on the Turkish government to immediately lift the state of emergency and thoroughly investigate allegations of the serious
ill-treatment of prisoners.
It pointed out that, since July 2016, more than 100 000 complaints have been lodged with the Turkish Constitutional Court, which has declared
itself incompetent on matters relating to the emergency decree. Measures are therefore needed to ensure that judicial review can be applied.
In general, Parliament stressed the continuing violations of freedom of expression and serious violations of media freedom in Turkey, including
in the Kurdish language. It also deplored the repression of several foreign journalists arrested illegally. In particular, Members called on the
government to allow the former Member of the European Parliament and chairman of the Joint Parliamentary Committee, Joost Lagendijk, to
return to his family in Turkey.
Kurdish-majority region: Parliament deplored the continuing deterioration of the situation in south-east Turkey, especially in areas where
curfews have been introduced. It recalled the responsibility of the Turkish Government to protect of all its citizens, irrespective of their cultural
or religious origins, and their beliefs.
It is convinced that only an equitable political settlement of the Kurdish issue can bring lasting stability and prosperity to both the area
concerned and the country as a whole.
Minorities: Parliament condemned discrimination against many religious minorities, including the Christian and Alevi minorities, as well as
violence on religious grounds, including verbal and physical attacks. It called on Turkey to respect the importance of the Ecumenical Patriarch
and to recognise its legal personality.
It also called on Turkey to protect the rights of the most vulnerable groups and persons belonging to minorities and regretted that the LGBTI
marches in Ankara and Istanbul were banned for the second consecutive year. It expressed serious concern about gender-based violence,
discrimination, hate speech against minorities, hate crimes and human rights abuses of LGBTI persons.
It also encouraged the authorities to address the key obstacles to the social inclusion of the Roma.
Parliament also welcomed the steps taken by some Member States to accelerate asylum procedures for Turkish nationals persecuted under
emergency decrees.
EU-Turkey relations: Parliament called for the deepening of EU-Turkey relations in important areas of common interest such as the fight
against terrorism, migration, energy, economy and trade, and encourage dialogue and cooperation with that country, provided that
commitments to fundamental freedoms and rights are respected.
Convergence efforts are therefore required between the country's foreign policy and that of the Union, as well as the improvement of the
customs union with Turkey. Members stated that the full potential of the customs union shall not be achieved until Turkey fully implements the
Additional Protocol vis-à-vis all Member States.
Improvements are also required as regards:
the liberalisation of the visa regime;
the fight against corruption.
At the same time, Parliament called for the suspension of pre-accession funds if the accession negotiations are suspended and to use these
funds to support Turkish civil society and refugees in Turkey.
In general, Parliament condemned all the attacks in Turkey and stressed that close cooperation between Europol and the Turkish law
enforcement authorities is essential to effectively combat terrorism.
Members deplored the decision of the Turkish Government to prevent German MPs from visiting the German Federal Armed Forces in Incirlik,
which means that they will now be relocated to a non-NATO country, representing a major setback for effective cooperation between NATO
allies in the fight against terrorism.
Refugees: Parliament welcomed the mobilisation of the Turkish government and local NGOs and the hospitality shown by the population in
hosting around three million refugees. It called on the Commission to ensure long-term investments for refugees and their host communities in
Turkey.
President Erdo?an: Members strongly condemned President Erdo?an's statements accusing some EU leaders of 'Nazi practices' and their
citizens being 'Nazis'. According to Members, such statements are unwarranted and undermine Turkey's credibility as a political partner. They
also called on the Turkish Government to refrain from systematically seeking to mobilise the Turkish Diaspora in the Member States for its own
needs. They also condemned the Turkish authorities' oversight of citizens holding dual citizenship residing abroad.

Turkish-Greek and Turkish-Cypriot bilateral relations: Parliament called on the Turkish government to put an end to the repeated violations of
Greek airspace and Greek territorial waters and to respect the territorial integrity and sovereignty of all its neighbours.
It also pointed out that a settlement of the Cyprus issue would have a positive impact for the whole region, which would benefit first and
foremost the Greek Cypriots and the Turkish Cypriots. It therefore pleaded for the continuation of the process of reaching an agreement
acceptable to both parties regarding the reunification of the island.
Syria: Parliament is convinced that only a credible political solution will ensure the stability of Syria and allow the decisive defeat of Daech and
other UN-designated terrorist groups in Syria. It urged all guarantors, including Turkey, to honour their commitments to ensure the full
implementation of the ceasefire agreement and to advance unhindered humanitarian access to the entire country.
Parliament called for the translation of this resolution into Turkish.

