Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2036(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Implementation of the common foreign and security policy

Subject
6.10 Common foreign and security policy (CFSP)

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
13/10/2015

BROK Elmar
Shadow rapporteur

FLECKENSTEIN Knut

TANNOCK Charles

VAN BAALEN
Johannes Cornelis

LÖSING Sabine

MESZERICS Tamás

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo
Committee for opinion
BUDG

Rapporteur for opinion

Budgets

Appointed
03/02/2016

ARTHUIS Jean
CULT

Culture and Education

26/02/2016
DZHAMBAZKI Angel

Key events
10/03/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

24/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/11/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/12/2016

Debate in Parliament

14/12/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

14/12/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/12/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0360/2016

Summary

T8-0503/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2036(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/05935

Documentation gateway
Committee opinion

CULT

PE578.556

27/04/2016

EP

Committee opinion

BUDG

PE580.697

24/05/2016

EP

Committee draft report

PE587.509

06/10/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.239

18/10/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.245

18/10/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0360/2016

30/11/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0503/2016

14/12/2016

EP

Summary

2016/2036(INI) - 30/11/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Elmar BROK (EPP, DE) on the Annual Report on the implementation of
the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
Members noted that the European Union faces unprecedented internal and external challenges, and is now surrounded by an arc of instability,
as large parts of the Middle East and North Africa are engulfed in ethno-religious conflicts and proxy wars. These conflicts have direct and
serious consequences for the security and well-being of EU citizens as they increasingly spill over into the EU, be it in the form of terrorism,
massive refugee flows, or disinformation campaigns aimed at dividing our societies.
Continuing the EUs success story: noting that the EU is one of the greatest achievements in European history, Members welcomed the
roadmap and the commitments of the Bratislava summit of 16 September 2016, but felt that the current challenges demand reform. Member
States must change their mentality since nowadays thinking about foreign policy and security in a narrow minded national perspective is
obsolete. The committee was convinced that no single Member State alone could tackle any of the challenges alone. It urged Member States
to finally show sufficient levels of unity, political will and trust in one another to make it possible to use the tools at hand in a concerted manner.
In this respect, it called for an effective implementation of the EU Global Strategy presented by the VP/HR in June 2016, including the
appropriate human and financial resources to be allocated by Member States. In addition, Members called on the VP/HR to devise an
implementation plan on security and defence, complemented by a White Book process, in order to deliver first results in 2017.
The resolution suggested that EU external action should be based on three pillars: diplomacy, development and defence.
Taking responsibility for security: noting that since power politics is again dominating international relations, and defence and deterrence
capabilities are critical for leverage in diplomatic talks, Members emphasised that the EU must strengthen its security and defence capabilities.
In view of an already underfinanced EU budget, they felt that additional efforts for operations, administrative costs, preparatory actions and
pilot projects under the Common Security and Defence Policy, additional funding from Member States, as well as efforts to enhance synergies,
are also needed. They called on the Commission and the Member States to seize the opportunity of the current revision of the multiannual
financial framework (MFF) to address the budgetary needs for the growing security challenges.
Furthermore, the instruments provided by the Treaty of Lisbon must finally be implemented, notably Permanent Structured Cooperation
(PESCO). Members called on the VP/HR to take the lead on this initiative, as well as on other recent proposals, including the following:
the creation of a permanent civilian and military headquarter, with an equally important Military Planning and Conduct Capability and
Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability;
enhancing the EUs rapid reaction tools, notably by further improving the usability of battlegroups ;
extending the common financing of CSDP operations, including through an urgent review of the Athena mechanism ;
setting up a Defence configuration of the Council.
Russia: taking the view that it is time to define a new, more realistic strategy for the EUs relations with Russia, Members underlined at the
same time the importance of investing more into Russian civil society. They felt that sanctions have proven to be an effective means of
deterring further Russian aggression in Ukraine, and insisted that the EU should keep open the option of further gradual sanctions, in

particular against high-technology products in the oil and gas, IT and armaments sectors, if Russia continues to violate international law.
ENI: noting that the revised European Neighbourhood Instrument has not lived up to its goals, especially when it comes to the 'more for more'
principle, Members encouraged consideration of the policy of less for less with regard to those countries which go into reverse in terms of
governance, democracy, and human rights.
Building resilience: Members took the view that it is necessary to tackle the root causes of instability and forced and irregular migration,
namely poverty, the lack of economic opportunities, armed conflict, bad governance, climate change, human rights abuses, inequality and
trade policies which do not address these challenges.
On Syria, they highlighted the importance of finding a sustainable solution to the conflict in line with the transition process set out in the
Geneva Communiqué and UNSC resolution 2254 (2015), noting that the bilateral negotiations between Russia and the United States will not
be sufficient to bring about a sustainable response to the Syrian crisis. In addition, the committee made recommendations on West Africa and
the Sahel, Turkey and the Middle East.
European diplomacy: Members urged the EU to show political leadership in preventive diplomacy and conflict mediation, and welcomed in this
regard the role of the EU Conflict Early Warning System, the EEAS Mediation Support Team and the European Institute of Peace.
Lastly, they regretted the limited budget of around EUR 320 million (0.2 % of the EU budget) for the EUs Common Foreign and Security Policy
(CFSP), stressing that the budget allocations decided for 2016 remain at the same level as 2015 and that the margin available at the end of
March was EUR 170 million. They expressed concern at the shortage of resources available in view of the commitments that will have to be
met throughout 2016.
In a minority report, 4 GUE/NGL Members tabled objections to the report, stating it fostered further EU-militarization, stronger EU-NATO
cooperation, and the merger of internal and external security.

2016/2036(INI) - 14/12/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 433 votes to 174 with 93 votes a resolution on the Annual Report on the implementation of the Common
Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP).
It noted that the European Union faces unprecedented internal and external challenges, and is now surrounded by an arc of instability, as
large parts of the Middle East and North Africa are engulfed in ethno-religious conflicts and proxy wars. These conflicts have direct and serious
consequences for the security and well-being of EU citizens as they increasingly spill over into the EU, be it in the form of terrorism, massive
refugee flows, or disinformation campaigns aimed at dividing our societies.
Continuing the EUs success story: noting that the EU is one of the greatest achievements in European history, Parliament welcomed the
roadmap and the commitments of the Bratislava summit of 16 September 2016, but felt that the current challenges demand reform. Member
States must change their mentality since nowadays thinking about foreign policy and security in a narrow minded national perspective is
obsolete. Parliament was convinced that no single Member State alone could tackle any of the challenges alone. It urged Member States to
finally show sufficient levels of unity, political will and trust in one another to make it possible to use the tools at hand in a concerted manner. In
this respect, it called for an effective implementation of the EU Global Strategy presented by the VP/HR in June 2016, including the
appropriate human and financial resources to be allocated by Member States. In addition, Members called on the VP/HR to devise an
implementation plan on security and defence, complemented by a White Book process, in order to deliver first results in 2017.
The resolution suggested that EU external action should be based on three pillars: diplomacy, development and defence. It also pointed out
how recent crises have shown the limits of the United Nations, and called on the EU and its Member States to bring all their weight to bear in
an attempt to reform the Security Council, in particular with a view to removing the veto with regard to mass atrocities.
Taking responsibility for security: noting that since power politics is again dominating international relations, and defence and deterrence
capabilities are critical for leverage in diplomatic talks, Parliament emphasised that the EU must strengthen its security and defence
capabilities. In view of an already underfinanced EU budget, it felt that additional efforts for operations, administrative costs, preparatory
actions and pilot projects under the Common Security and Defence Policy, additional funding from Member States, as well as efforts to
enhance synergies, are also needed. It called on the Commission and the Member States to seize the opportunity of the current revision of the
multiannual financial framework (MFF) to address the budgetary needs for the growing security challenges.
Furthermore, the instruments provided by the Treaty of Lisbon must finally be implemented, notably Permanent Structured Cooperation
(PESCO). Members called on the VP/HR to take the lead on this initiative, as well as on other recent proposals, including the following:
the creation of a permanent civilian and military headquarter, with an equally important Military Planning and Conduct Capability and
Civilian Planning and Conduct Capability ;
enhancing the EUs rapid reaction tools, notably by further improving the usability of battlegroups ;
extending the common financing of CSDP operations, including through an urgent review of the Athena mechanism ;
setting up a Defence configuration of the Council.
Parliament encouraged the speeding up of the ongoing work on the European Defence Action Plan and the Commissions efforts to maximise
defence cooperation, including through incentives in areas such as the internal market, public procurement, research, transport, space, cyber,
energy and industrial policies. It noted the proposal by the French President for a European Security and Defence Fund, and supported the
development of new and innovative financing and investment concepts, including through the European Investment Bank and public-private
partnerships.
Russia: Parliament felt that it is time to define a new, more realistic strategy for the EUs relations with Russia, based on credible deterrence
but also on dialogue in areas of common interest, such as counter-terrorism, non-proliferation and trade. It underlined at the same time the
importance of investing more into cooperation with and support to Russian civil society, so as to strengthen the long-term basis of EU-Russia
relations. It felt that sanctions have proven to be an effective means of deterring further Russian aggression in Ukraine, and insisted that the
EU should keep open the option of further gradual sanctions, in particular against high-technology products in the oil and gas, IT and
armaments sectors, if Russia continues to violate international law.

ENI: noting that the revised European Neighbourhood Instrument has not lived up to its goals, especially when it comes to the 'more for more'
principle, Parliament encouraged consideration of the policy of less for less with regard to those countries which go into reverse in terms of
governance, democracy, and human rights.
Building resilience: Parliament took the view that it is necessary to tackle the root causes of instability and forced and irregular migration,
namely poverty, the lack of economic opportunities, armed conflict, bad governance, climate change, human rights abuses, inequality and
trade policies which do not address these challenges.
On Syria, it highlighted the importance of finding a sustainable solution to the conflict in line with the transition process set out in the Geneva
Communiqué and UNSC resolution 2254 (2015), noting that the bilateral negotiations between Russia and the United States will not be
sufficient to bring about a sustainable response to the Syrian crisis. In addition, the committee made recommendations on West Africa and the
Sahel, Turkey and the Middle East.
European diplomacy: Parliament urged the EU to show political leadership in preventive diplomacy and conflict mediation, and welcomed in
this regard the role of the EU Conflict Early Warning System, the EEAS Mediation Support Team and the European Institute of Peace.
Lastly, it regretted the limited budget of around EUR 320 million (0.2 % of the EU budget) for the EUs Common Foreign and Security Policy
(CFSP), stressing that the budget allocations decided for 2016 remain at the same level as 2015 and that the margin available at the end of
March was EUR 170 million. It expressed concern at the shortage of resources available in view of the commitments that will have to be met
throughout 2016.

