Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2310(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

2016 Commission report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/10/2016

VAJGL Ivo
Shadow rapporteur

KELAM Tunne

PICULA Tonino

MESZERICS Tamás

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

Key events
06/12/2016

Debate in Council

19/01/2017

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/02/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

06/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

05/04/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/06/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

14/06/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/06/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2310(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A8-0055/2017

Summary

T8-0263/2017

Summary

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/08484

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE595.412

10/01/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE595.413

09/02/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0055/2017

06/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0263/2017

14/06/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)574

20/11/2017

2016/2310(INI) - 06/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Ivo VAJGL (ADLE, SI) on the 2016 Commission Report on the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Early elections 2016: Members welcomed the early elections on 11 December 2016, which were held in a transparent and inclusive manner.
They called for a swift formation of a new, stable and accountable government and for the promotion of cross-party and inter-ethnic
cooperation in order to maintain the positive recommendation to open EU accession negotiations.
Members called however for more controls on the financing of political parties in the country.
Accession reforms: Members reiterated their support for the opening of accession negotiations, conditional on the progress of the
implementation of the Prino Agreement to ensure its full, tangible and sustainable implementation and substantial progress in the
implementation of the Urgent Reform Priorities on systemic reforms. They called on the Council to address the issue of the accession
negotiations at its earliest convenience.
Members underlined that implementation of the Prino agreement is vital also beyond the elections to ensure political stability and sustainability
in the future.
They drew attention to the potential negative political, security and socio-economic consequences of further delays in the countrys
Euro-Atlantic integration process and in this regard called on the Commission and the EEAS to increase the visibility of EU-funded projects in
the country in order to bring the EU closer to the citizens of the country.
The current challenges facing the European Union (Brexit, migration, radicalism, etc.) should not hinder the enlargement process, but rather
that these challenges have demonstrated the need to fully integrate the Western Balkans into EU structures in order to enhance and deepen
partnership and overcome international crises.
Members expressed concern about the politicised public administration. It urged new government to demonstrate a strong political
commitment to enhancing professionalism, merit, neutrality and independence.
Further measures are awaited such as:
a comprehensive e-governance strategy accompanied by the further development of e-services for citizens and businesses in order to
reduce the bureaucratic burden for the state, citizens and business;
strengthening the judiciary, by improving transparency in the appointment and promotion procedures and by reducing the length of
court proceedings and putting an end to judicial obstructions faced by the Special Prosecutors Office.
Anti-corruption measures are also for.
Fight against criminality, radicalisation and discrimination: although Members welcomed the dismantling of criminal networks and routes
related to trafficking in human beings and drugs, they called for the rapid implementation of prevention measures against radicalisation. They
called for continued monitoring of returning foreign fighters by security services, their proper reintegration into society and a constant exchange
of information with the authorities of the EU and neighbouring countries.
The importance of a regular and constructive dialogue and cooperation with civil society organisations was stressed.
Members reiterated their condemnation of hate speech against discriminated groups, in particular LGBTI people and the Roma people.
Moreover, they called for further efforts to promote gender equality and increase the participation of women in political life and employment.
Measures are also called for to review the law on prevention and protection against domestic Violence.
Inter-ethnic reconciliation: Members urged all political parties and civil society organisations to actively promote an inclusive and tolerant
multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and multi-religious society. They condemned any form of irredentism and any attempt to disintegrate different social
groups. According to Members, the authorities and civil society should take appropriate measures to achieve historical reconciliation in order to
overcome the divide between and within different ethnic and national groups, including citizens of Bulgarian identity. Measure should also be
put in place to combat stereotypes and to improve the freedom of the media.

Economic reforms and reduction of unemployment: Members remained concerned that the political situation represents a serious risk to the
Macedonian economy. They called for measures to enhance job creation, especially among young people, women and the disabled.
On an environmental level, Members expressed concern about industrial pollution and air and water pollution and called for a comprehensive
policy and strategy on climate action in this country.
Migration policy and refugee policy: Members commended the country for its constructive role and cooperation and its tremendous efforts in
addressing the challenges of the migration crisis, thus substantially contributing to the security and stability of the EU.
They noted that the country lies on the so-called Western Balkans route and that approximately 600 000 refugees and migrants, including
vulnerable groups such as children and the elderly, have so far travelled through it on their way to Europe. The urged the Commission to
continue the work on migration-related issues with all the countries of the Western Balkans, in order to make sure that European and
international norms and standards are followed.
Regional cooperation and relations with Greece: Members considered that regional cooperation is an essential element in the EU accession
process and should be a priority for the government. They called on the Macedonian authorities to also align with the EUs restrictive measures
against Russia following the illegal annexation of Crimea.
Moreover, they stressed the importance of finalising the negotiations on a treaty on friendship and good neighbourliness with Bulgaria.
Members welcomed the tangible results from the initiative for confidence-building measures between this country and Greece, which could
contribute to a better understanding and stronger bilateral relations, paving the way for a mutually acceptable solution to the name issue. They
reiterated their invitation to the Vice-President/High Representative (VP/HR) and the Commission to develop new initiatives to overcome the
remaining differences and to work, in cooperation with the two countries and the UN Special Representative, on a mutually acceptable solution
on the name issue and to report back to Parliament thereon.

2016/2310(INI) - 14/06/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 503 votes to 113 with 45 abstentions, a resolution on the 2016 Commission Report on the former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia.
Parliament recalled that (potential) candidate countries are judged on their own merits and the speed and quality of the necessary reforms
determine the timetable for accession. In this regard, it noted that the country has been considered for many years as one of the most
advanced EU candidate countries in terms of alignment with the acquis.
2016 anticipated elections and formation of a new government: Parliament welcomed the formation of a new government on 31 May 2017 and
urged all political parties to act in a spirit of reconciliation, in the common interest of all citizens and to work with the government on restoring
confidence in the country and its institutions. It welcomed the respect for fundamental freedoms shown at the early elections on 11 December
2016, which were well administered, were held in a transparent and inclusive manner and proceeded without major incidents.
Members called on all parties to refrain from any obstruction of the effective functioning of the parliament and urged the new government to
swiftly proceed with the necessary reforms, to ensure the countrys Euro-Atlantic integration and to advance its European perspective for the
benefit of citizens.
It considered cross-party and inter-ethnic cooperation essential for addressing pressing domestic and EU-related challenges, and for
maintaining the positive recommendation to.
Accession reforms: Parliament reiterated its support for the opening of accession negotiations, conditional on the progress of the
implementation of the Prino Agreement to ensure its full, tangible and sustainable implementation and substantial progress in the
implementation of the Urgent Reform Priorities on systemic reforms. It called on the Council to address the issue of the accession negotiations
at its earliest convenience.
It underlined that implementation of the Prino agreement is vital also beyond the elections to ensure political stability and sustainability in the
future.
Parliament underlined the significant progress the country has made in the process of EU integration and emphasised the negative
consequences of further delaying the process of integration, including the threat to the credibility of the EUs enlargement policy and the risk of
instability in the region. It drew attention to the potential negative political, security and socio-economic consequences of further delays in the
countrys Euro-Atlantic integration process and in this regard called on the Commission and the EEAS to increase the visibility of EU-funded
projects in the country in order to bring the EU closer to the citizens of the country.
The current challenges facing the European Union (Brexit, migration, radicalism, etc.) should not hinder the enlargement process, but rather
that these challenges have demonstrated the need to fully integrate the Western Balkans into EU structures in order to enhance and deepen
partnership and overcome international crises.
Members expressed concern about the politicised public administration. It urged new government to demonstrate a strong political
commitment to enhancing professionalism, merit, neutrality and independence.
Further measures are awaited such as:
a comprehensive e-governance strategy accompanied by the further development of e-services for citizens and businesses in order to
reduce the bureaucratic burden for the state, citizens and business;
strengthening the judiciary, by improving transparency in the appointment and promotion procedures and by reducing the length of
court proceedings and putting an end to judicial obstructions faced by the Special Prosecutors Office.
Anti-corruption measures are also called for.
Fight against criminality, radicalisation and discrimination: although Parliament welcomed the dismantling of criminal networks and routes
related to trafficking in human beings and drugs, it called for the rapid implementation of prevention measures against radicalisation. It called
for continued monitoring of returning foreign fighters by security services, their proper reintegration into society and a constant exchange of

information with the authorities of the EU and neighbouring countries.
The importance of a regular and constructive dialogue and cooperation with civil society organisations was stressed.
Parliament reiterated its condemnation of hate speech against discriminated groups, in particular LGBTI people and the Roma people.
Moreover, it called for further efforts to promote gender equality and increase the participation of women in political life and employment.
Measures are also called for to review the law on prevention and protection against domestic violence.
Inter-ethnic reconciliation: Parliament urged all political parties and civil society organisations to actively promote an inclusive and tolerant
multi-ethnic, multi-cultural and multi-religious society. It condemned any form of irredentism and any attempt to disintegrate different social
groups. According to Members, the authorities and civil society should take appropriate measures to achieve historical reconciliation in order to
overcome the divide between and within different ethnic and national groups, including citizens of Bulgarian identity. Measures should also be
put in place to combat stereotypes and to improve the freedom of the media.
Parliament called on the Commission to make further efforts to support a true reconciliation process in the region, notably through support for
cultural projects dealing with the recent past and promoting a common and shared understanding of history and a public and political culture of
tolerance, inclusion and reconciliation.
Economic reforms and reduction of unemployment: Parliament remained concerned that the political situation represents a serious risk to the
Macedonian economy. It called for measures to enhance job creation, especially among young people, women and the disabled.
It is concerned about the sustainability of public debt and the fact that unemployment still remains high.
On an environmental level, Parliament expressed concern about industrial pollution and air and water pollution and called for a comprehensive
policy and strategy on climate action in this country.
Migration policy and refugee policy: Parliament commended the country for its constructive role and cooperation and its tremendous efforts in
addressing the challenges of the migration crisis, thus substantially contributing to the security and stability of the EU. It noted that the country
lies on the so-called Western Balkans route and that approximately 600 000 refugees and migrants, including vulnerable groups such as
children and the elderly, have so far travelled through it on their way to Europe. It urged the Commission to continue the work on
migration-related issues with all the countries of the Western Balkans, in order to make sure that European and international norms and
standards are followed.
Regional cooperation and relations with Greece: Parliament considered that regional cooperation is an essential element in the EU accession
process and should be a priority for the government. It called on the Macedonian authorities to also align with the EUs restrictive measures
against Russia following the illegal annexation of Crimea.
Moreover, it stressed the importance of finalising the negotiations on a treaty on friendship and good neighbourliness with Bulgaria.
Parliament welcomed the tangible results from the initiative for confidence-building measures between this country and Greece, which could
contribute to a better understanding and stronger bilateral relations, paving the way for a mutually acceptable solution to the name issue. It
reiterated their invitation to the Vice-President/High Representative (VP/HR) and the Commission to develop new initiatives to overcome the
remaining differences and to work, in cooperation with the two countries and the UN Special Representative, on a mutually acceptable solution
on the name issue and to report back to Parliament thereon.

