Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2016/0142(COD)

Procedure completed

Third countries whose nationals are subject to or exempt from a visa
requirement: suspension mechanism
Amending Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 2000/0030(CNS)
Subject
7.10.04 External borders crossing and controls, visas

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
23/05/2016

DÍAZ DE MERA
GARCÍA CONSUEGRA
Agustín
Shadow rapporteur

SIPPEL Birgit

MACOVEI Monica

JEŽEK Petr

VERGIAT
Marie-Christine

VALERO Bodil

VON STORCH Beatrix
Committee for opinion
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Migration and Home Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
AVRAMOPOULOS Dimitris

Key events
04/05/2016

Legislative proposal published

12/05/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

20/05/2016

Debate in Council

07/07/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

07/07/2016

Committee decision to open

COM(2016)0290

Summary

interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee
18/07/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

14/12/2016

Debate in Parliament

15/12/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

15/12/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/02/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

01/03/2017

Final act signed

01/03/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

08/03/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0235/2016

Summary

T8-0508/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0142(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 2000/0030(CNS)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 077-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/06526

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0290

04/05/2016

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE584.091

01/06/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE585.487

04/07/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0235/2016

18/07/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0508/2016

15/12/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)131

08/03/2017

Final act
Regulation 2017/371
OJ L 061 08.03.2017, p. 0001 Summary

2016/0142(COD) - 04/05/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to revise the suspension mechanism of Council Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 listing the third countries whose nationals must be
in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement.

PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: Council Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 lists the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of a visa when crossing
the external borders of the Member States and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement.
The Regulation is part of the EU's common visa policy for short stays of up to 90 days in any 180-day period.
Suspension mechanism: the suspension mechanism in Article 1a of Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 allows the temporary suspension of the visa
exemption for nationals of a third country in certain emergency situations, as a last resort . It can be triggered by any Member State by notifying
the Commission that it is confronted, over a six-month period, in comparison with the same period in the previous year or with the last six
months prior to the visa liberalisation of that country, with circumstances leading to an emergency situation which the Member State in
question cannot remedy on its own. These circumstances are namely a substantial and sudden increase in the number of:
nationals of that third country found to be illegally overstaying in the Member State in question;
unfounded asylum applications from the nationals of that third country, where such increase is leading to specific pressures on the
Member States asylum system;
rejected readmission applications submitted by the Member State to that third country for its own nationals.
The Commission may decide that action is needed, taking into account the consequences of the suspension of the visa exemption for the
external relations of the Union and its Member States with the third country concerned, while working in close cooperation with that third
country to find alternative long-term solutions.
In that case, the Commission has three months from the receipt of the notification to adopt an implementing act temporarily suspending the
exemption from the visa requirement for the nationals of the third country concerned, for a period of six months.
Before the expiry of this six-month period, the Commission must submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council. This report may
be accompanied by a legislative proposal to amend Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 to transfer the third country in question to the list of
visa-required countries (Annex I), and thus to put its citizens permanently under the visa requirement. In such case, the temporary suspension
of the visa waiver may be extended by a maximum period of 12 months.
Migration crisis: in the context of the current migratory situation in the European Union and of the successful conclusion of several visa
liberalisation dialogues with neighbouring countries (Georgia, Ukraine, Kosovo, Turkey), several Member States have questioned whether the
existing visa suspension mechanism provides for the necessary flexibility to act in certain situations of urgency.
In particular they have argued that:
the possible grounds for suspension are too limited, and for instance do not include the failure of a third country to cooperate on
readmission of third-country nationals having transited through that third country, where a readmission agreement concluded between
the Union or a Member State and the third country concerned provides for such a readmission obligation;
the initiative to trigger the suspension mechanism by means of a notification, which in the Regulation lies solely with Member States,
should be extended to Commission;
the reference periods and the deadlines are too long, which does not allow for a fast reaction in emergency situations. Taking into
account the Commission's recent proposals for visa liberalisation of Georgia, Ukraine, Turkey and Kosovo and the recent discussions
with Member States, the Commission has decided to present a proposal to amend Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 to revise the current
suspension mechanism.
This is the aim of this proposal.
CONTENT: the main objective is to strengthen the suspension mechanism by making it easier for Member States to notify circumstances
leading to a possible suspension and by enabling the Commission to trigger the mechanism on its own initiative.
This proposal for the revision of the suspension mechanism includes the following elements:
The definition of the circumstances which Member States can notify to the Commission has been amended to clarify that the suspension
mechanism cannot only be used in "emergency situations, as a last resort", but more generally in case the visa liberalisation leads to a serious
increase of irregular migration, unfounded asylum applications or rejected readmission applications.
The reference period for comparing this situation with the situation of the previous year or before visa liberalisation, is shortened from six to
two months. It is sufficient for the increase of irregular migration, unfounded asylum applications or rejected readmission applications to be
"substantial", whereas the increase must currently be "sudden and substantial".
The grounds for possible suspension which can be notified should include rejected readmission applications for nationals of another third
country having transited through that third country, where a readmission agreement concluded between the Union or a Member State and the
third country concerned provides for such a readmission obligation.
Other salient issues:
- the limitation in time (to seven years) of the possibility to compare the current situation with the situation before visa liberalisation is
abolished;
- the Commission is given the possibility to trigger the suspension mechanism on its own initiative if it has concrete and reliable information of
any of the circumstances which Member States can notify or that the third country is in a more general manner not cooperating on
readmission, in particular where an EU-level readmission agreement has been concluded with that third country. This failure to cooperate can,
for instance, consist in: (i) rejecting or not replying to readmission applications, (ii) failing to issue travel documents for the purposes of return
within deadlines specified in the agreement or not accepting European travel documents issued following the lapse of deadlines specified in
the agreement, (iii) terminating or suspending the agreement. Where the Commission, after having examined the circumstances notified (or of
which it has received concrete and reliable information), decides that action is needed, the deadline for the adoption of the implementing act
temporarily suspending the visa exemption for the third country concerned is reduced from three to one month.

Territorial provisions: the proposed Regulation constitutes a development of provisions of the Schengen acquis. Therefore, the United
Kingdom and Ireland shall not participate in the adoption of the Regulation, nor shall it be bound or subject to its application.
The amended Regulation shall be binding in its entirety and directly applicable in the Member States in accordance with the Treaties.

2016/0142(COD) - 18/07/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the report by Agustín DÍAZ DE MERA GARCÍA CONSUEGRA (EPP, ES)
on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 listing the third
countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that
requirement (revision of the suspension mechanism).
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Suspend the exemption from the visa requirement: it is proposed that, by way of derogation from Article 1(2) of Regulation (EC) No 539/2001,
the exemption from the visa requirement for nationals of a third country listed in Annex II of the Regulation shall be temporarily suspended as
a last resort, based on strict and objective data, for instance in cases where there is an increased risk or imminent threat to the public policy or
internal security of Member States.
Examine the situation of human rights in the country concerned: the Commission should, before taking any decision to temporarily suspend a
visa exemption for nationals of a third country, examine the situation of human rights in that third country. A robust set of guarantees and
measures are needed to protect human rights, along with reports and statistics supplied by the European agencies and the competent law
enforcement authorities.
Delegation of power: in order to ensure the adequate involvement of the European Parliament and of the Council in the application of the
suspension mechanism, given the particularly sensitive political nature of the suspension of the exemption from the visa requirement for all the
nationals of a third country listed in Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 and its horizontal implications for the Member States, it is
proposed that power should be delegated to the Commission to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty of the Functioning of
the European Union in respect of the decision temporarily suspending the application of Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 in relation to
the third country concerned.
Conferring such power on the Commission takes into account the need for political discussion on the Union policy on visas in the Schengen
area. It should also reflect also the need to ensure adequate transparency and legal certainty in the application of the suspension mechanism
to all the nationals of the third country concerned.
Against this background, the Commission should carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level and
keep the European Parliament and the Council duly informed.
The delegated act shall determine a date on which the suspension of the application is to take effect. That amendment shall be made through
inserting next to the name of the third country in question a footnote indicating that the exemption from the visa requirement is suspended.
Monitoring of the evaluation criteria used to assess visa liberalisation by third countries: the Commission shall monitor the continuous fulfilment
of the specific criteria which were used to assess the appropriateness of a visa liberalisation by the third countries whose nationals are exempt
from the visa requirement when travelling to the territory of Member States as a result of a successful conclusion of a visa liberalisation
dialogue conducted between the Union and that third country. The report shall focus on third countries for which the Commission considers,
based on concrete and reliable information, that certain criteria are no longer fulfilled.

2016/0142(COD) - 15/12/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 485 votes to 132 with 21 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 listing the third countries whose nationals must be in
possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement (revision of the
suspension mechanism).
The European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as
follows:
Suspension of the exemption from the visa requirement: it is proposed that, by way of derogation from Article 1(2) of Regulation (EC) No
539/2001, the exemption from the visa requirement for nationals of a third country listed in Annex II of the Regulation shall be temporarily
suspended as a last resort, based on strict and objective data, such as the following:
a substantial increase in the number of nationals of that third country refused entry or found to be staying in the Member State's
territory without a right thereto;
a substantial increase in the number of asylum applications from the nationals of that third country for which the recognition rate is low
(around 3 or 4% maximum or less if the Commission considers this applicable);
a decrease of cooperation on readmission with that third country, substantiated by adequate data, in particular a substantial increase
in the refusal rate of readmission applications submitted by the Member State to that third country for its own nationals;
an increase of risks or imminent threat to public policy or internal security of Member States , in particular a substantial increase of
serious criminal offences, related to nationals of that third country, substantiated by objective, concrete and relevant information and
data provided by competent authorities.
A substantial increase indicates an increase exceeding a threshold of 50 %, or a lower increase if the Commission deems it applicable.
Before taking any decision on suspension, the Commission should take into account the situation of human rights in that third country and the
possible consequences of a suspension of the visa exemption for that situation.

Notification: the notification of suspension shall state the reasons on which it is based and shall include relevant data and statistics as well as a
detailed explanation of the preliminary measures that the Member State concerned has taken with a view to remedying the situation. The
Member State concerned may in its notification specify which categories of nationals of the third country should be covered, indicating the
detailed reasons therefor. The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council.
Justifying decisions: there are provisions allowing the Commission to take the necessary measures once it has concrete and reliable
information taking into account relevant data, reports and statistics, of circumstances justifying the decision on exemption.
The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council promptly, of its analysis.
Monitoring the criteria used in the visa liberalisation with third countries scheme: it is provided that the Commission shall monitor the
continuous fulfilment of the specific requirements that were used to assess the appropriateness of a visa liberalisation by the third countries
whose nationals are exempt from the visa requirement when travelling to the territory of Member States.
The Commission shall report regularly to the European Parliament and the Council at least once a year, for a period of seven years after the
entry into force of visa liberalisation for that third country, or thereafter when the Commission considers it necessary or upon request by the
European Parliament or the Council. The report shall focus on third countries for which the Commission considers, based on concrete and
reliable information, that certain requirements are no longer fulfilled. Where a report of the Commission shows that one or more of the specific
requirements is no longer fulfilled in relation to a particular third country, certain measures shall apply.
Mechanism for the application of the suspension of visa exemption: the Commission, on the basis of examination and analysis, and taking into
account the consequences of a suspension of the exemption from the visa requirement for the external relations of the Union and its Member
States with the third country concerned, may take the prescribed measures while working in close cooperation with that third country to find
alternative long-term solutions.
These measures may also be taken where a simple majority of Member States have notified the Commission of circumstances referred to
above.
Implementing act: the Commission shall adopt an implementing act temporarily suspending the exemption from the visa requirement for the
nationals of the third country concerned for a period of nine months. The suspension shall apply to certain categories of nationals of the third
country concerned, by reference to the information available, and the Commission will try to efficiently contribute to addressing the
circumstances justifying the suspension, while respecting the principle of proportionality. It shall adopt the implementing act within one month
of being made aware of the relevant information and in accordance with the criteria set out in the Regulation.
That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure and shall determine the date on which the suspension
of the exemption from the visa requirement is to take effect.
During the period of suspension, the Commission shall establish an enhanced dialogue with the third country concerned with a view to
remedying the circumstances in question.
Delegated act: in order to ensure the adequate involvement of the European Parliament and of the Council in the application of the suspension
mechanism, given the particularly sensitive political nature of the suspension of the exemption from the visa requirement for all the nationals of
a third country listed in Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 and its horizontal implications for the Member States, the Schengen
associated countries and the Union itself, in particular for their external relations and for the overall functioning of the Schengen area, the
power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union is delegated to the Commission in
respect of the temporary suspension of the exemption of the visa requirement for the nationals of the third countries concerned. The
Commission should carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level, and the European Parliament and
the Council should receive all documents at the same time and be informed before the decision is taken.
Accordingly, if the circumstances justifying the first suspension of nine months persist, the Commission may adopt a delegated act at the latest
two months prior to the expiry of the nine-month period, temporarily suspending the application of Annex II for a period of 18 months for all the
nationals of the third country concerned.
This may be extended by 6 months in the particular circumstances set out in the Regulation.
During the periods of the suspension the nationals of the third country concerned shall be required to be in possession of a visa when crossing
the external borders of the Member States.
The power to adopt delegated acts shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from entry into force of the Regulation. The
Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the five-year period. The
delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such
extension not later than three months before the end of each period.
The Council or the European Parliament may revoke the delegation of power at any time. A delegated act shall enter into force only if no
objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or the Council within a period of two months of notification of that act to the
European Parliament and the Council or if, before the expiry of that period, the European Parliament and the Council have both informed the
Commission that they will not object.
Information for Parliament: before the end of the period of validity of the delegated act, the Commission, shall submit a report to the European
Parliament and to the Council, accompanied by a legislative proposal for amending the Regulation in order to transfer the reference to the third
country concerned from Annex II to Annex I (third country under a visa obligation).
Implementation report: 4 years after the entry into force of the Regulation, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament
and to the Council assessing the effectiveness of the suspension mechanism and shall, if necessary, submit a legislative proposal for
amending this Regulation. The European Parliament and the Council shall act on such a proposal by the ordinary legislative procedure.

2016/0142(COD) - 01/03/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to revise the suspension mechanism of Council Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 listing the third countries whose nationals must be

in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those whose nationals are exempt from that requirement.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2017/371 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 1 March 2017 amending Council Regulation
(EC) No 539/2001 listing the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders and those
whose nationals are exempt from that requirement (revision of the suspension mechanism).
CONTENT: Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 lists the third countries whose citizens are required to be in possession of visas when crossing the
external borders of the Member States and the list of countries whose nationals are exempt from this requirement.
With this regulation, it is planned to strengthen the mechanism allowing the temporary suspension of the exemption from the visa requirement
in regard to citizens of third countries on the list in Annex II of Regulation (EC) No 539/2001, by making it easier for the Member States to
notify circumstances leading to a possible suspension and empowering the Commission to initiate the suspension mechanism on its own
initiative.
Suspension of the exemption from the visa requirement: by way of derogation from Article 1(2) of Regulation (EC) No 539/2001, the exemption
from the visa requirement for nationals of a third country listed in Annex II of the regulation shall be temporarily suspended as a last resort,
based on strict and objective data, such as the following:
a substantial increase, i.e. exceeding a threshold of 50% (or even less, if the Commission considers it necessary) in the number of
nationals of that third country refused entry or found to be staying in the Member State's territory without a right thereto;
a substantial increase in the number of asylum applications from the nationals of that third country for which the recognition rate is low
(around 3 or 4% maximum or less if the Commission considers this applicable);
a decrease of cooperation on readmission with that third country, substantiated by adequate data, in particular a substantial increase
in the refusal rate of readmission applications submitted by the Member State to that third country for its own nationals;
an increase of risks or imminent threat to public policy or internal security of Member States , in particular a substantial increase of
serious criminal offences, related to nationals of that third country, substantiated by objective, concrete and relevant information and
data provided by competent authorities.
Before taking any decision on suspension, the Commission should take into account the human rights situation in that third country and the
possible consequences of a suspension of the visa exemption for that situation.
Notification: the notification of suspension shall state the reasons on which it is based and shall include relevant data and statistics as well as a
detailed explanation of the preliminary measures that the Member State concerned has taken with a view to remedying the situation. The
Member State concerned may in its notification specify which categories of nationals of the third country should be covered, indicating the
detailed reasons therefor. The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council.
Justifying decisions: there are provisions allowing the Commission to take the necessary measures once it has concrete and reliable
information taking into account relevant data, reports and statistics, of circumstances justifying the decision on exemption (e.g. (i) refusal or
lack of timely processing of readmission requests, (ii) failure to issue travel documents for return, etc.).
The Commission shall inform the European Parliament and the Council promptly, of its analysis.
Monitoring the criteria used in the visa liberalisation with third countries scheme: the Commission shall monitor the continuous fulfilment of the
specific requirements that were used to assess the appropriateness of a visa liberalisation by the third countries whose nationals are exempt
from the visa requirement when travelling to the territory of Member States.
The Commission shall report regularly to the European Parliament and the Council at least once a year, for a period of seven years after the
entry into force of visa liberalisation for that third country, or thereafter when the Commission considers it necessary or upon request by the
European Parliament or the Council. The report shall focus on third countries for which the Commission considers, based on concrete and
reliable information, that certain requirements are no longer fulfilled. Where a report of the Commission shows that one or more of the specific
requirements is no longer fulfilled in relation to a particular third country, certain measures shall apply.
Mechanism for the application of the suspension of visa exemption: the Commission, on the basis of examination and analysis, and taking into
account the consequences of a suspension of the exemption from the visa requirement for the external relations of the Union and its Member
States with the third country concerned, may take the prescribed measures while working in close cooperation with that third country to find
alternative long-term solutions.
These measures may also be taken where a simple majority of Member States have notified the Commission of circumstances referred to
above.
Implementing act: the Commission shall adopt an implementing act temporarily suspending the exemption from the visa requirement for the
nationals of the third country concerned for a period of nine months. The suspension shall apply to certain categories of nationals of the third
country concerned, by reference to the information available, and the Commission will try to efficiently contribute to addressing the
circumstances justifying the suspension, while respecting the principle of proportionality. It shall adopt the implementing act within one month
of being made aware of the relevant information and in accordance with the criteria set out in the Regulation.
That implementing act shall be adopted in accordance with the examination procedure and shall determine the date on which the suspension
of the exemption from the visa requirement is to take effect.
During the period of suspension, the Commission shall establish an enhanced dialogue with the third country concerned with a view to
remedying the circumstances in question.
Delegated act: to ensure the adequate involvement of the European Parliament and of the Council in the application of the suspension
mechanism, given the particularly sensitive political nature of the suspension of the exemption from the visa requirement for all the nationals of
a third country listed in Annex II to Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 and its horizontal implications for the Member States, the Schengen
associated countries and the Union itself, in particular for their external relations and for the overall functioning of the Schengen area, the
power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty of the Functioning of the European Union is delegated to the Commission in
respect of the temporary suspension of the exemption of the visa requirement for the nationals of the third countries concerned. The
Commission should carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level, and the European Parliament and
the Council should receive all documents at the same time and be informed before the decision is taken.

Accordingly, if the circumstances justifying the first suspension of nine months persist, the Commission may adopt a delegated act at the latest
two months prior to the expiry of the nine-month period, temporarily suspending the application of Annex II for a period of 18 months for all the
nationals of the third country concerned.
This may be extended by 6 months in the particular circumstances set out in the Regulation.
During the periods of the suspension the nationals of the third country concerned shall be required to be in possession of a visa when crossing
the external borders of the Member States.
The Commissions power to adopt a delegated act will depend on:
- either the reciprocity mechanism provided for in Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 and will be conferred on the Commission until 9.1.2019. The
Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of this period. The
delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such
extension not later than three months before the end of each period;
- or the suspension mechanism: the power to adopt delegated acts shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from
28.3.2017. The Commission shall draw up a report in respect of the delegation of power not later than nine months before the end of the
five-year period. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the
Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period.
The Council or the European Parliament may revoke the delegation of power at any time.
Specific provisions are envisaged for the entry into force of the various delegated acts.
Implementation reports:
-

by 10 January 2018, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council assessing the
effectiveness of the reciprocity mechanism provided for in the regulation and shall, if necessary, submit a legislative proposal for
amending this Regulation which will be adopted according to the ordinary legislative procedure.

-

by 29 March 2021, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council assessing the effectiveness
of the suspension mechanism provided for and shall, if necessary, submit a legislative proposal for amending this Regulation. The
European Parliament and the Council shall act on such a proposal by the ordinary legislative procedure.

ENTRY INTO FORCE: 28.3.2017. The regulation is directly applicable in all Member States concerned by the measure.

