Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2313(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

2016 Commission report on Bosnia and Herzegovina

Subject
8.20 Enlargement of the Union
Geographical area
Bosnia and Herzegovina

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/10/2016

PREDA Cristian Dan
Shadow rapporteur

PAPADAKIS Demetris

RADOŠ Jozo

ŠOLTES Igor

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

Key events
13/12/2016

Debate in Council

19/01/2017

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

31/01/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

06/02/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

14/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

15/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

15/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2313(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A8-0026/2017

Summary

T8-0037/2017

Summary

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/08487

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE594.188

01/12/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE595.410

12/01/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0026/2017

06/02/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0037/2017

15/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)358

31/08/2017

2016/2313(INI) - 06/02/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Cristian Dan PREDA (EPP, RO) on the 2016 Commission Report on
Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Members recalled that progress has been achieved on the EU integration path. They stated that the Council asked the Commission to prepare
its opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovinas (BiH) application for membership.
Towards BiHs accession: Members welcomed the consideration of BiH's EU membership application by the Council and the handing in of the
questionnaire and looks forward to the Commission's opinion on the merits of the application for membership. The called on competent BiH
authorities to commit actively to this process and to cooperate and coordinate in participating in the Commission's Opinion process by
providing a single and coherent set of replies to the Commission's inquiries.
They reiterated that the EU accession process is inclusive and involves all stakeholders.
Democratic reforms: Members welcomed the progress made on the implementation of the 2015-2018 Reform Agenda, as well as the countrys
determination to pursue further institutional and socio-economic reforms. They noted that the situation has somewhat improved, but stressed
that harmonised and effective implementation of the Reform Agenda in line with the action plan is needed to achieve real change across the
country.
They called for the momentum of the reform to be maintained in order to transform BiH into a fully effective, inclusive and functional state
based on the rule of law, guaranteeing equality and democratic representation of all its constituent peoples and citizens. They regretted,
however, that common reform efforts often continue to be hampered by ethnic and political divisions, caused by deeply-rooted disintegrative
tendencies hindering normal democratic development.
Protocol to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with BiH: Members expressed satisfaction about the signature of the Protocol
on SAA adaptation that has been provisionally applied as of 1 February 2017, automatically reinstating the autonomous trade measures that
had been suspended as of 1 January 2016. However, they regretted that the Rules of Procedure of the EU-BiH Stabilisation and Association
Parliamentary Committee (SAPC) have still not been adopted, due to the attempts to introduce ethnic blocking. As a consequence, BiH has
remained the only enlargement country where such a body could not be properly constituted. Members urged the presiding bodies of the BiH
Parliament to find, without delay, a solution to this problem.
Fighting corruption: Members regretted that the declared political commitment to combat corruption did not translate into tangible results. They
underlined that there is no track record of high-profile cases and that the legal and institutional framework for combating systemic corruption
such as in relation to political party finance, public procurement, conflicts of interest, and assets declaration is weak and inadequate. They
stressed the need to address swiftly any outstanding shortcomings of the judiciary and urged the rapid adoption of the action plan for the
implementation of the 2014-2018 justice sector reform.
Unity of the country: Members strongly condemned the Law on Order in the Serb Republic which is still in force and undermines the
fundamental democratic rights. They urged the full implementation of the Freedom of Access to Information Act and urged leaders on all sides
to refrain from divisive, nationalist and secessionist rhetoric that polarises society as well as from actions that represent a challenge to the
cohesion, sovereignty and integrity of the country.
Members emphasised the importance of the recent decision of the Constitutional Court on the principle of constituent status and the equality of
its three constitutive peoples to elect their own legitimate political representatives based on legitimate and proportional representation in the
House of People of the Parliament of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
They strongly condemned the decision of the RS National Assembly in October 2016 to express appreciation to former leaders of the Serb
Republic convicted of war crimes.
Respect for minorities and refugees: Members noted that some progress with regard to refugees and internally displaced persons, who were
displaced as a result of the Bosnian war. They called on the competent authorities to facilitate their sustainable return, access to healthcare,
employment, social protection and education and to devote further attention to compensation for damage to property which cannot be
returned.

They also called on the Commission to continue work on migration-related issues with all countries of the Western Balkans in order to make
sure that European and international norms and standards are observed.
Radicalisation: Members pointed out that the polarisation of the country, in combination with the deterioration of the socio-economic situation,
especially for young people, increases the danger of spreading radicalism. They called, as a matter of urgency, to boost efforts to combat
radicalisation and further measures to identify, prevent and disrupt the flow of foreign fighters as well as channels of untraceable money
intended for further radicalisation.
Protection of minorities and women: Members are concerned about continued discrimination against persons with disabilities and the Roma
community. They welcomed the fact that some governments and parliaments have begun discussing LGBTI rights and drawing up specific
measures for their protection.
Moreover, they highlighted the importance of the effective implementation of the legislation on the prevention of and protection from
gender-based violence. They welcomed the commitment of the competent authorities to implement the Istanbul Convention of the Council of
Europe on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence.
Youth unemployment: Members welcomed the slight reduction in unemployment but remain concerned that youth unemployment continues to
be high. They encouraged BiH to participate actively in various programmes designed for young people in the region, such as those in the
framework of the Positive Agenda for the Youth in the Western Balkans or Regional Youth Cooperation Office (RYCO).
Neighbourhood relations: Members welcomed BiHs continued constructive and pro-active role in promoting bilateral and regional cooperation.
They called for further efforts to resolve outstanding bilateral issues, including border demarcation with Serbia and Croatia.
Lastly, Parliament regretted the decision by BiH authorities not to back EU restrictive measures against Russia, following the latter's illegal
annexation of Crimea. They reminded BiH of the need for a unified foreign policy and that foreign policy alignment is an essential part of EU
membership.

2016/2313(INI) - 15/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 496 votes to 132, with 67 abstentions, a resolution on the 2016 Commission Report on Bosnia and
Herzegovina.
Parliament recalled that progress has been achieved on the EU integration path. It stated that the Council asked the Commission to prepare its
opinion on Bosnia and Herzegovinas (BiH) application for membership.
Towards BiHs accession: Parliament welcomed the consideration of BiH's EU membership application by the Council and the handing in of the
questionnaire and looks forward to the Commission's opinion on the merits of the application for membership. It called on competent BiH
authorities to commit actively to this process and to cooperate and coordinate in participating in the Commission's Opinion process by
providing a single and coherent set of replies to the Commission's inquiries.
It reiterated that the EU accession process is inclusive and involves all stakeholders.
Democratic reforms: Members welcomed the progress made on the implementation of the 2015-2018 Reform Agenda, as well as the countrys
determination to pursue further institutional and socio-economic reforms. They noted that the situation has somewhat improved, but stressed
that harmonised and effective implementation of the Reform Agenda in line with the action plan is needed to achieve real change across the
country.
Parliament called for the momentum of the reform to be maintained in order to transform BiH into a fully effective, inclusive and functional state
based on the rule of law, guaranteeing equality and democratic representation of all its constituent peoples and citizens. It regretted, however,
that common reform efforts often continue to be hampered by ethnic and political divisions, caused by deeply-rooted disintegrative tendencies
hindering normal democratic development.
Protocol to the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with BiH: Parliament expressed satisfaction about the signature of the Protocol
on SAA adaptation that has been provisionally applied as of 1 February 2017, automatically reinstating the autonomous trade measures that
had been suspended as of 1 January 2016. However, it regretted that the Rules of Procedure of the EU-BiH Stabilisation and Association
Parliamentary Committee (SAPC) have still not been adopted, due to the attempts to introduce ethnic blocking. As a consequence, BiH has
remained the only enlargement country where such a body could not be properly constituted. Members urged the presiding bodies of the BiH
Parliament to find, without delay, a solution to this problem.
Fighting corruption: Parliament regretted that the declared political commitment to combat corruption did not translate into tangible results. It
underlined that there is no track record of high-profile cases and that the legal and institutional framework for combating systemic corruption
such as in relation to political party finance, public procurement, conflicts of interest, and assets declaration is weak and inadequate. It
stressed the need to address swiftly any outstanding shortcomings of the judiciary and urged the rapid adoption of the action plan for the
implementation of the 2014-2018 justice sector reform.
Unity of the country: Parliament also strongly condemned the Law on Order in the Serb Republic which is still in force and undermines the
fundamental democratic rights. It urged the full implementation of the Freedom of Access to Information Act and urged leaders on all sides to
refrain from divisive, nationalist and secessionist rhetoric that polarises society as well as from actions that represent a challenge to the
cohesion, sovereignty and integrity of the country.
Members emphasised the importance of the recent decision of the Constitutional Court on the principle of constituent status and the equality of
its three constitutive peoples to elect their own legitimate political representatives based on legitimate and proportional representation in the
House of People of the Parliament of the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
They strongly condemned the decision of the RS National Assembly in October 2016 to express appreciation to former leaders of the Serb
Republic convicted of war crimes.
Respect for minorities and refugees: the resolution noted that some progress with regard to refugees and internally displaced persons, who
were displaced as a result of the Bosnian war. It called on the competent authorities to facilitate their sustainable return, access to healthcare,

employment, social protection and education and to devote further attention to compensation for damage to property which cannot be
returned.
Members called on the Commission to continue work on migration-related issues with all countries of the Western Balkans in order to make
sure that European and international norms and standards are observed.
Radicalisation: Parliament pointed out that the polarisation of the country, in combination with the deterioration of the socio-economic situation,
especially for young people, increases the danger of spreading radicalism. It called, as a matter of urgency, to boost efforts to combat
radicalisation and further measures to identify, prevent and disrupt the flow of foreign fighters as well as channels of untraceable money
intended for further radicalisation.
Protection of minorities and women: Parliament expressed concern about continued discrimination against persons with disabilities and the
Roma community. It welcomed the fact that some governments and parliaments have begun discussing LGBTI rights and drawing up specific
measures for their protection.
Moreover, it highlighted the importance of the effective implementation of the legislation on the prevention of and protection from gender-based
violence. Members welcomed the commitment of the competent authorities to implement the Istanbul Convention of the Council of Europe on
preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence.
Youth unemployment: Members also welcomed the slight reduction in unemployment but remain concerned that youth unemployment
continues to be high. They encouraged BiH to participate actively in various programmes designed for young people in the region, such as
those in the framework of the Positive Agenda for the Youth in the Western Balkans or Regional Youth Cooperation Office (RYCO).
Neighbourhood relations: Parliament welcomed BiHs continued constructive and pro-active role in promoting bilateral and regional
cooperation. It called for further efforts to resolve outstanding bilateral issues, including border demarcation with Serbia and Croatia.
Parliament welcomed the continued presence of Operation Althea, which retains the capability to contribute to the BiH authorities deterrence
capacity if the situation so requires, while focusing on capacity building and training.
Lastly, Parliament regretted the decision by BiH authorities not to back EU restrictive measures against Russia, following the latter's illegal
annexation of Crimea. It reminded BiH of the need for a unified foreign policy and that foreign policy alignment is an essential part of EU
membership.

