Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Decision

2016/0259(COD)

Procedure completed

European Year of Cultural Heritage 2018

Subject
4.45.02 Cultural programmes and actions, assistance

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
CULT

Rapporteur

Culture and Education

Appointed
08/09/2016

DIACONU Mircea
Shadow rapporteur

ZDROJEWSKI Bogdan
Andrzej

MORGANO Luigi

LEWER Andrew

MALTESE Curzio

TRÜPEL Helga

ADINOLFI Isabella
BILDE Dominique
Committee for opinion
BUDG

REGI

Budgets

Regional Development

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Education, Youth, Sport and Culture

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
NAVRACSICS Tibor

European Committee of the
Regions

Key events
30/08/2016

Legislative proposal published

12/09/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

08/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

COM(2016)0543

Summary

08/11/2016

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

17/11/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

28/02/2017

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

26/04/2017

Debate in Parliament

27/04/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

27/04/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/05/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

17/05/2017

Final act signed

17/05/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

20/05/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0340/2016

Summary

T8-0140/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0259(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Decision

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 167-p5

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CULT/8/07655

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0543

30/08/2016

EC

PE592.101

17/10/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0340/2016

17/11/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0140/2017

27/04/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)363

07/06/2017

Opinion on the legal basis

BUDG

Final act
Decision 2017/864
OJ L 131 20.05.2017, p. 0001 Summary

2016/0259(COD) - 30/08/2016 Legislative proposal

Summary

PURPOSE: to designate 2018 as the European Year of Cultural Heritage.
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the ideals, principles and values embedded in the European cultural heritage constitute a shared source of remembrance,
understanding, identity, dialogue, cohesion and creativity for Europe.
Since the adoption of the European Agenda for Culture in 2007, cultural heritage has been a priority under successive Council Work Plans for
Culture, including the current plan for the period 2015-2018.
The Council, in its conclusions on participatory governance of cultural heritage of 25 November 2014, invited the Commission to consider
presenting a proposal for a European Year of Cultural Heritage. The European Parliament, in its resolution recommended designating,
preferably for 2018, a European Year of Cultural Heritage.24
The heritage sector in Europe is facing many challenges. These include: decreasing public budgets; declining participation in traditional
cultural activities; increasing environmental and physical pressures on heritage sites; transforming value chains and expectations as a result of
the digital shift; and the illegal trafficking of cultural artefacts.
Against this backdrop, the main objective is to raise awareness of the challenges and opportunities and highlight the role of the EU in
promoting shared solutions.
CONTENT: it is proposed to designate the year 2018 as the European Year of Cultural Heritage.
Objectives: the European Year shall:
contribute to promoting the role of European cultural heritage as a pivotal component of cultural diversity and intercultural dialogue. It
should highlight the best means to ensure its conservation and safeguarding and its enjoyment by a wider and more diversified public.
This includes through audience development measures and heritage education, in full respect of the competences of the Member
States, thereby promoting social inclusion and integration;
enhance the contribution of European cultural heritage to the economy and the society, through its direct and indirect economic
potential. This includes the capacity to underpin the cultural and creative industries and inspire creation and innovation, promote
sustainable tourism, enhance social cohesion and generate long-term employment;
contribute to promoting cultural heritage as an important element of the EUs international dimension, building on the interest in partner
countries for Europes heritage and expertise. Heritage plays a major role in several programmes in the area of external relations,
mainly but not exclusively in the Middle East. The promotion of the value of cultural heritage is also a response to the deliberate
destruction of cultural treasures in conflict zone.
Specific objectives are also laid down.
Measures: the proposal presents measures which will include information and promotion campaigns, events and initiatives at European,
national, regional and local levels:
conferences, events and initiatives to promote debate and raise awareness of the importance and value of cultural heritage and to
facilitate engagement with citizens and stakeholders;
information, education and awareness-raising campaigns to convey values such as diversity and intercultural dialogue using evidence
from Europes rich heritage and to stimulate the general publics contribution in heritage protection and management and more
generally in achieving the objectives of the European Year;
sharing of experience and good practices of national, regional and local administrations, and other organisations, to disseminate
information about cultural heritage;
undertaking studies and research and innovation activities and the dissemination of their results on European or national scale.
Coordination at national level: each Member State shall appoint a national coordinator responsible for organising its participation in the
European Year. The coordinator shall ensure the coordination of relevant activities at national level.
Coordination at Union level: the Commission shall convene meetings of the national coordinators in order to coordinate the running of the
European Year and to exchange information regarding its implementation at national and European level.
International cooperation: the Commission shall cooperate with competent international organisations, in particular with UNESCO and the
Council of Europe, while ensuring the visibility of the EUs participation.
Funding: co-financing at European level of activities in support of the European Year shall be in accordance with the applicable rules, and
within the existing possibilities for priority setting on an annual or multiannual basis, to existing programmes, in particular the Creative Europe
programme. Where appropriate, other programmes and policies, within their existing legal and financial provisions, may also support the
European Year.
Monitoring and evaluation: by 31 December 2019, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament, the Council on the
implementation, results and overall assessment of the initiatives provided for in this Decision.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: no additional funding is sought for the European Year. This initiative does not require additional EU budget.
The flexibility for setting priorities on an annual or multiannual basis in the relevant programmes is sufficient to envisage an awareness-raising
campaign on a scale similar to previous European Years.

2016/0259(COD) - 17/11/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Culture and Education adopted the report by Mircea DIACONU (ADLE, RO) on the proposal for a decision of the European

Parliament and of the Council on a European Year of Cultural Heritage.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Objective of the European Year: the main objective of the European Year is the celebration of European cultural heritage as a shared
resource, resulting from a centuries-old history and the intertwining of the Member States as well as European peoples.
It shall enhance the contribution of European cultural heritage to the economy and the society, through its direct and indirect economic
potential. This includes the capacity to underpin the cultural and creative industries, small and medium sized enterprises as well as small-scale
and large-scale projects.
Working group: in the first quarter of 2017, the Commission shall set up a working group involving the European Parliament and relevant
stakeholders. By 31 December 2017, the working group shall present a work plan detailing the activities foreseen for 2018, including the
corresponding budgetary allocations, as well as the visual identity for the European Year. A number of flagship initiatives shall be identified by
the working group and implemented in the framework of the European Year.
Coordination at Member State level: the competent authorities from the Member States shall work together with the Union institutions in order
to guarantee the proper implementation of the European Year and to multiply its impact through additional activities, community involvement
and dissemination actions.
The Commission shall convene meetings of the coordinators at Member State level and representatives of the European Parliament in order to
coordinate the running of the European Year and to exchange information regarding its implementation at Member State and Union level. The
coordination at Union level of the European Year shall have a transversal approach within the Commission ensuring the participation of all
relevant Directorates General under the coordination of the Directorate General for Education and Culture with a view to creating synergies
between the various Union programmes and initiatives funding projects in the field of cultural heritage, and to better disseminating information
on the European Year.
Involvement of civil society: the structure of the European Year shall allow for the active participation of professional organisations operating in
the field of cultural heritage, of existing transnational cultural networks and of interested NGOs and cultural associations and, in particular, of
youth organisations.
Budget: a dedicated article within the general budget of the Union shall be established for the European Year. This Article shall include the
funds foreseen for the preparation of the European Year, its implementation and actions contributing to the European Year's long-term
sustainability. The overall funding in this Article shall be EUR 15 million. The indicative breakdown by year shall be as follows:
EUR 1 million in 2017,
EUR 13 million in 2018,
EUR 1 million in 2019.
Activities financed: the activities organised in the framework of the European Year may be co-financed through dedicated grants from national,
regional and local authorities in the Member States and through flexible funding mechanisms such as public-private partnerships or
crowdfunding.

2016/0259(COD) - 27/04/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 554 votes to 68, with 30 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council on a European Year of Cultural Heritage.
The European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as
follows:
Purpose: the purpose of the 2018 European Year shall be to encourage the sharing and appreciation of Europe's cultural heritage as a shared
resource, to raise awareness of common history and values, and to reinforce a sense of belonging to a common European space.
The specific objectives shall be to:
promote solutions which make cultural heritage accessible to all, including via digital means, by removing social, cultural and physical
barriers, taking into account people with special needs;
encourage synergies between cultural heritage and environment policies by integrating cultural heritage into environmental,
architectural and planning policies, and by promoting energy-efficiency;
encourage regional and local development strategies that tap into the potential of cultural heritage, including through the promotion of
sustainable tourism;
support the development of specialised skills and improve knowledge management and knowledge transfer in the cultural heritage
sector;
promote cultural heritage as a source of inspiration for contemporary creation and innovation;
raise awareness of the importance of Europe's cultural heritage through education and lifelong learning, in particular by focusing on
children, young and elderly people, local communities and hard-to-reach groups;
highlight historic events which have a symbolic importance for Europe and its cultural heritage such as the 100th anniversary of the
end of World War I and of the independence of several Member States.
Content of measures: these measures shall consist of: (i) initiatives and events to promote debate and raise awareness of the importance and
value of cultural heritage and to facilitate engagement with citizens and stakeholders; (ii) information, exhibitions, education and
awareness-raising campaigns to convey values such as diversity and intercultural; (iii) the sharing of experience and good practices and the
dissemination of information about cultural heritage; (iv) the promotion of projects and networks connected to the European Year, including via
the media and social networks.
Coordination at Member Stated and Union level: the organisation of participation in the European Year at national level is a responsibility of

the Member States. To that end, Member States shall appoint national coordinators.
The Commission shall regularly convene meetings of the national coordinators. Representatives of the European Parliament may participate in
those meetings as observers.
Stakeholders and representatives of organisations or bodies active in the field of cultural heritage, including existing transnational cultural
networks and relevant NGOs, as well as of youth organisations, shall assist it in implementing the European Year at Union level.
Protection of financial interests: the financial interests of the Union shall be protected by the application of preventive measures against fraud,
corruption and any other illegal activities, by effective checks and inspections and, if irregularities are detected, by the recovery of the amounts
unduly paid and, where appropriate, by administrative and financial penalties.
Budget: the financial envelope for the implementation of this Decision for the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2018 shall be EUR
8 million. The annual appropriations shall be authorised by the European Parliament and the Council within the limits of the multiannual
financial framework.

2016/0259(COD) - 17/05/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to designate 2018 as the European Year of Cultural Heritage.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2017/864 of the European Parliament and of the Council on a European Year of Cultural Heritage (2018).
CONTENT: this Decision designates 2018 as the European Year of Cultural Heritage (European Year). Its purpose shall be to: (i) encourage
the sharing and appreciation of Europe's cultural heritage as a shared resource; (ii) raise awareness of common history and values, and to
reinforce a sense of belonging to a common European space.
The year 2018 has a symbolic and historical importance for Europe and its cultural heritage, as it marks a number of significant events such as
the 100th anniversary of the end of World War I and of the independence of several Member States as well as the 400th anniversary of the
start of the Thirty Years' War.
In its resolution of 8 September 2015, the European Parliament recommended designating, preferably for 2018, a European Year of Cultural
Heritage.
Objectives: the European Year shall encourage and support the efforts of the Union, the Member States and regional and local authorities, in
cooperation with the cultural heritage sector and broader civil society, to protect, safeguard, reuse, enhance, valorise and promote Europe's
cultural heritage.
The main specific objectives of the European Year shall be to:
encourage approaches to cultural heritage that are people-centred, inclusive, forward-looking, more integrated, sustainable and
cross-sectoral;
promote debate, research and the exchange of good practices on the quality of conservation, safeguarding, innovative reuse and
enhancement of cultural heritage, and on contemporary interventions in the historical environment;
promote solutions which make cultural heritage accessible to all, including via digital means, by removing social, cultural and physical
barriers, taking into account people with special needs;
encourage synergies between cultural heritage and environment policies by integrating cultural heritage into environmental,
architectural and planning policies, and by promoting energy-efficiency;
encourage regional and local development strategies that tap into the potential of cultural heritage, including through the promotion of
sustainable tourism;
highlight the potential of cooperation in matters of cultural heritage for developing stronger ties within the Union and with countries
outside the Union and for encouraging intercultural dialogue, post-conflict reconciliation and conflict prevention;
strengthen initiatives to prevent the illicit trafficking of cultural goods.
The measures to be taken to achieve the objectives set out above shall include, inter alia, information, exhibitions, as well as the promotion of
projects and networks connected to the European Year, including via the media and social networks.
Coordination at Member State level: the organisation of participation in the European Year at national level is a responsibility of the Member
States. The national coordinators shall ensure the coordination of relevant activities at national level.
The Commission shall regularly convene meetings of the national coordinators in which the European Parliament may participate in those
meetings as observers.
Stakeholders and representatives of organisations or bodies active in the field of cultural heritage, including existing transnational cultural
networks and relevant NGOs, as well as of youth organisations, shall assist it in implementing the European Year at Union level.
Financing: co-financing at Union level of activities implementing the European Year shall be in accordance with the rules applicable to existing
programmes, such as the Creative Europe Programme, and within the existing possibilities for setting priorities on an annual or multiannual
basis.
The European Year shall have a specific financial envelope of EUR 8 million for the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2018.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 9.6.2017.

