Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2314(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

2016 Commission report on Kosovo

Subject
8.20 Enlargement of the Union
Geographical area
Kosovo under UNSCR 1244/1999

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/10/2016

LUNACEK Ulrike
Shadow rapporteur

ADAKTUSSON Lars

PANZERI Pier Antonio

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

VAUTMANS Hilde

KOHLÍČEK Jaromír

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

Key events
13/12/2016

Debate in Council

19/01/2017

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/02/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

09/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/06/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/06/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

14/06/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/06/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0062/2017

Summary

T8-0262/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2314(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/08488

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE594.160

19/12/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE597.480

19/01/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0062/2017

09/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0262/2017

14/06/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)574

20/11/2017

2016/2314(INI) - 09/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Ulrike LUNACEK (Greens/EFA, AT) on the 2016 Commission Report on
Kosovo.
Members recalled that the European Union has repeatedly reiterated its willingness to assist in the economic and political development of
Kosovo through a clear European perspective, in line with the European perspective of the region and Kosovo has shown aspiration in its path
towards European integration.
In this regard, they welcomed the launch of the European Reform Agenda on 11 November 2016 and the adoption of the national strategy for
the implementation of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) as a platform to facilitate implementation of this Agreement.
They called on the government of Kosovo to focus on the implementation of the comprehensive reforms that are required to meet its
obligations under the SAA, in particular holding free, fair and transparent municipal elections in 2017 which are crucial for the democratic
future of Kosovo as well as for the future of its EU integration process.
Political situation: Members expressed concern at the extreme polarisation of the political landscape in Kosovo. They urged the leaders of the
Kosovo-Serbian community to take full ownership of their place and role in the institutions of the country, acting independently from Belgrade
and constructively for the benefit of all the people of Kosovo.
Members strongly condemned the violent disruption of activities by some members of the opposition which occurred in the parliament of
Kosovo and stressed the importance of political dialogue, the active and constructive participation of all political parties in the decision-making
processes.
Recognition of Kosovo: Members noted that five Member States have not recognised Kosovo. According to Members, this recognition would
be beneficial to the normalisation of relations between Kosovo and Serbia and increase the EUs credibility in its own external policy. They
welcomed the proposal by the Commission to grant visa liberalisation, which would be a very positive step for Kosovo on the path to European
integration.
Relations with Serbia: Members welcomed the progress made in implementing the various agreements signed since August 2016 in the
normalisation process with Serbia. They called on both Kosovo and Serbia to show more engagement and sustained political will as regards
the normalisation of relations. They stressed the importance of good neighbourly relations with all countries in the Western Balkans.
They also condemned the act of sending a Serbian nationalist train from Belgrade to Northern Kosovo and expressed serious concerns about
warmongering statements and anti-EU rhetoric. They urged both parties to refrain from provocative steps and unhelpful rhetoric that could
hamper the normalisation process.
Reconciliation process: Members welcomed the establishment of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor Office in The
Hague as an essential step for ensuring justice and reconciliation. They called on Kosovo to address the issue of missing persons, including:
guaranteeing property rights effectively, barring the usurpation of properties and guaranteeing the return and reintegration of displaced
persons.
Political reforms: Members noted that the administration of justice remains slow and inefficient and is hampered by the remaining
shortcomings of criminal legislation, political and economic expediency.
They encouraged Kosovo to reform their legal system and tackle corruption.
They also called on the authorities of Kosovo to strengthen:

the protection of freedom of expression and media freedom, and at the increased political interference and pressure and intimidation
on the media;
efforts to protect the rights of all minorities in Kosovo, including Roma, Ashkali, Egyptian and Gorani communities, as well as the
LGBTI community;
the fight against drug use and trafficking in human beings;
gender mainstreaming and the fight against domestic violence;
the combat against violent extremism and radicalisation.
Economic reforms: while Members welcomed the improvement of the economic situation and the increase of tax revenues in Kosovo, they
expressed concern about the sustainability of Kosovos budget.
According to Members, it is urgent to:
bolster local industry while focusing on the competitiveness of locally manufactured products;
improve the regulatory environment of SMEs;
increase the level of employment and improve labour market conditions in particular as regards recruitment procedures.
EULEX: Members welcomed the extension of the mandate of EULEX Kosovo and called for continued EU efforts in further strengthening
independent justice, police and customs systems beyond 2018 with a view to Kosovo taking full ownership of these functions. They noted the
termination of the criminal investigation into allegations of corruption in the EULEX mission.
Refugee crisis: Members noted that so far Kosovo has not become a major transit route for refugees and migrants travelling along the Western
Balkan route. They urged the Kosovar authorities to ensure that those passing through are treated in accordance with European and
international law.
Cultural heritage: lastly, Members acknowledged Kosovos commitment to protect cultural heritage sites and called on the authorities to
implement all UN conventions on cultural heritage at all levels regardless of the status of Kosovo vis-a-vis UNESCO. They welcomed the
EU-funded programme aimed at protecting and reconstructing small cultural heritage sites with a view to fostering intercultural and
interreligious dialogue in all multi-ethnic municipalities.

2016/2314(INI) - 14/06/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 474 votes to 134, with 64 abstentions, a resolution on the 2016 Commission Report on Kosovo.
Parliament recalled that the European Union has repeatedly reiterated its willingness to assist in the economic and political development of
Kosovo through a clear European perspective, in line with the European perspective of the region and Kosovo has shown aspiration in its path
towards European integration.
Political situation: Parliament welcomed the entry into force of the EU-Kosovo Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) on 1 April 2016
as the first contractual relationship and an essential step in order to continue the process of the integration of Kosovo into the EU. It welcomed
the launch of the European Reform Agenda on 11 November 2016 and the adoption of the national strategy for the implementation of the SAA
as a platform to facilitate implementation of the SAA.
It called on Kosovo to continue to show clear political will and determination to implement the agreed roadmap including the setting up of the
coordination mechanism for the implementation of the SAA, and to seize the positive momentum created by the SAA.
Parliament noted how free, fair and transparent early general elections and municipal elections in in the second part of 2017 are crucial for the
democratic future of Kosovo as well as for the future of its EU integration process.
It welcomed the overall peaceful and orderly conduct of the early general elections of 11 June 2017 even if it expressed concern at the
problems observed by EU monitors during the election campaign. Members urged parties to swiftly form a government to continue Kosovos
path towards the EU and to commit to ratifying a border demarcation agreement with Montenegro and to continuing to build up a track record
of convictions for high-level corruption and organised crime.
It expressed concern at the persistent extreme polarisation of the political landscape and called on all the parties to show responsibility and
ownership and to create the conditions for a fruitful, solution and result-oriented dialogue with a view to defusing tension. It urged the leaders
of the Kosovo-Serbian community to take full ownership of their place and role in the institutions of the country, acting independently from
Belgrade and constructively for the benefit of all the people of Kosovo. It urged Kosovo to continue to support the access of Kosovo Serbs to
Kosovo institutions.
In general, Parliament strongly condemned the violent disruption of activities by some members of the opposition which occurred in the
parliament of Kosovo and stressed the importance of political dialogue, the active and constructive participation of all political parties in the
decision-making processes.
It underlined that the path towards EU integration requires a strategic long-term vision and sustained commitment in the adoption and
implementation of the necessary reforms.
Recognition of Kosovo: Parliament noted that five Member States have not recognised Kosovo. According to Parliament, this recognition
would be beneficial to the normalisation of relations between Kosovo and Serbia and increase the EUs credibility in its own external policy. It
welcomed the proposal by the Commission to grant visa liberalisation, which would be a very positive step for Kosovo on the path to European
integration.
It strongly condemned the act of sending a Serbian nationalist train from Belgrade to Northern Kosovo as well as warmongering statements
and anti-EU rhetoric.
It took note of the decision of the court of Colmar (France) to refuse the extradition to Serbia of and to release Mr Ramush Haradinaj, who was
acquitted in 2008 and 2012 by the ICTY and arrested in France on 4 January 2017 on the basis of an international arrest warrant issued by

Serbia in 2004 according to its law on the Organisation and Competences of State Authorities in War Crime Proceedings. It regretted that this
law has hitherto been misused to pursue citizens of countries that belonged to the former Yugoslavia, as proven by this recent case and urged
both parties to refrain from provocative steps and unhelpful rhetoric that could hamper the normalisation process.
Relations with Serbia: Parliament welcomed the progress made in implementing the various agreements signed since August 2016 in the
normalisation process with Serbia. It called on both Kosovo and Serbia to show more engagement and sustained political will as regards the
normalisation of relations. It stressed the importance of good neighbourly relations with all countries in the Western Balkans.
Reconciliation process: Parliament welcomed the establishment of the Kosovo Specialist Chambers and Specialist Prosecutor Office in The
Hague as an essential step for ensuring justice and reconciliation. It called on Kosovo to address the issue of missing persons, including:
guaranteeing property rights effectively, barring the usurpation of properties and guaranteeing the return and reintegration of displaced
persons.
Parliament welcomed the efforts made by the Commission to bring about the unblocking of the power interconnection grid between Albania
and Kosovo, which has been blocked for months by Serbia, and called for constructive cooperation between the Serbian and Kosovar
electricity authorities.
Plenary called on the Commission to make further efforts to support a true reconciliation process in the region, notably through support for
cultural projects dealing with the recent past and promoting a common and shared understanding of history and a public and political culture of
tolerance, inclusion and reconciliation.
Political reforms: Parliament noted that the administration of justice remains slow and inefficient and is hampered by the remaining
shortcomings of criminal legislation, political and economic expediency. It encouraged Kosovo to reform their legal system and tackle
corruption.
It also called on the authorities of Kosovo to strengthen:
the protection of freedom of expression and media freedom, and at the increased political interference and pressure and intimidation
on the media;
efforts to protect the rights of all minorities in Kosovo, including Roma, Ashkali, Egyptian and Gorani communities, as well as the
LGBTI community;
the fight against drug use and trafficking in human beings;
gender mainstreaming and the fight against domestic violence;
the combat against violent extremism and radicalisation.
Economic reforms: while Parliament welcomed the improvement of the economic situation and the increase of tax revenues in Kosovo, it
expressed concern about the sustainability of Kosovos budget.
According to Parliament, it is urgent to:
bolster local industry while focusing on the competitiveness of locally manufactured products;
improve the regulatory environment of SMEs;
increase the level of employment and improve labour market conditions in particular as regards recruitment procedures.
EULEX: Parliament welcomed the extension of the mandate of EULEX Kosovo and called for continued EU efforts in further strengthening
independent justice, police and customs systems beyond 2018 with a view to Kosovo taking full ownership of these functions. It noted the
termination of the criminal investigation into allegations of corruption in the EULEX mission.
Refugee crisis: Parliament noted that so far Kosovo has not become a major transit route for refugees and migrants travelling along the
Western Balkan route. It urged the Kosovar authorities to ensure that those passing through are treated in accordance with European and
international law.
Cultural heritage: lastly, Parliament acknowledged Kosovos commitment to protect cultural heritage sites and called on the authorities to
implement all UN conventions on cultural heritage at all levels regardless of the status of Kosovo vis-a-vis UNESCO. It welcomed the
EU-funded programme aimed at protecting and reconstructing small cultural heritage sites with a view to fostering intercultural and
interreligious dialogue in all multi-ethnic municipalities.

