Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2311(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

2016 Commission report on Serbia

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Serbia, from 06/2006

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/10/2016

MCALLISTER David
Shadow rapporteur

FAJON Tanja

TANNOCK Charles

VAJGL Ivo

KOHLÍČEK Jaromír

ŠOLTES Igor

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

Key events
19/01/2017

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/02/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

22/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/06/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/06/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

14/06/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/06/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2311(INI)

A8-0063/2017

Summary

T8-0261/2017

Summary

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/08485

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE594.161

19/12/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE597.481

19/01/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0063/2017

22/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0261/2017

14/06/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)574

20/11/2017

2016/2311(INI) - 22/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by David McALLISTER (EPP, DE) on the 2016 Commission Report on
Serbia.
Members recalled that Serbia, like any country aspiring to join the Union, must be judged on its own merits in terms of fulfilling, implementing
and complying with the same set of criteria.
Accession negotiations: Members welcomed the opening of negotiations with this country and the continued engagement of Serbia on the path
of integration into the EU and its constructive and well-prepared approach to the negotiations.
They underlined that the thorough implementation of reforms and policies remains a key indicator of a successful integration process.
However, they noted delays in the absorption of pre-accession aid and called on Serbia to make progress in this area.
Economic reforms: Members welcomed the progress made by Serbia in developing a functioning market economy and the improvement of the
overall economic situation in the country. They underlined the paramount role of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) for Serbias
economy and encouraged Serbia to promote entrepreneurship, particularly among young people.
Political reforms: although Members welcomed the conduct of the parliamentary elections on 24 April 2016 which were assessed positively,
Members reiterated their call on Serbia, in line with the requirements of its candidate status, to progressively align its foreign and security
policy with that of the EU, including its policy on Russia. They considered the conduct of joint Serbia-Russia military exercises regrettable.
The report commended Serbias constructive and humanitarian approach in dealing with the migration crisis. They called on Serbia to fully
respect the rights of asylum applicants in Serbia and to ensure that unaccompanied and separated minors are protected.
Rule of law: Members called for effective reforms in the judiciary field, in particular by taking steps to promote judicial independence which is
not assured in practice. They expressed concern at the lack of progress in the fight against corruption and urged Serbia to show clear political
will and commitment in tackling this issue. Members also reiterated their call for proper reform of the offence of abuse of office and abuse of
responsible position so as to prevent possible misuse or arbitrary interpretation.
Efforts are also called for in the following areas:
the fight against organised crime and criminal networks;
the prosecution of war crimes;
the fight against terrorism and money laundering.
Democracy and human rights: Members considered that the constitution needs to be revised so as to fully reflect the recommendations of the
Venice Commission, notably with regard to the independence of key institutions. They stated that further effort is needed to depoliticise the
public administration.
They noted that further sustained efforts are needed to improve the situation of persons belonging to vulnerable groups, including Roma,
persons with disabilities, persons with HIV/AIDS, LGBTI persons, migrants and asylum seekers, and ethnic minorities.
Furthermore, measures are called for as regards the freedom of expression and the media.
Protection of minorities: Members underlined that Vojvodina (Northern Serbia) has maintained a high degree of protection for minorities and
that the inter-ethnic situation has remained good. They stressed that the autonomy of Vojvodina should not be weakened and that the law on
Vojvodinas resources should be adopted without further delay, as prescribed by the constitution. Members also noted the adoption of the new
Roma social inclusion strategy 2016-2025 and called for its swift adoption. There is a large number of Roma people from Serbia seeking
asylum in the EU due to their lack of protection.

Good neighbourly relations: Members encouraged Serbia to strengthen its proactive and positive engagement with its neighbours and the
wider region. They called on Serbia to fully implement bilateral agreements with neighbouring countries and to enhance cooperation with the
neighbouring EU Member States, in particular on border areas, in order to facilitate economic development.
They noted that Serbia has shown an increasingly constructive engagement in regional cooperation initiatives such as the Danube Strategy,
the SouthEast Europe Cooperation Process, the Regional Cooperation Council, etc and called on it to implement the connectivity reform
measures associated with the connectivity agenda and the conclusions of the 2016 Paris conference on the Western Balkans and TEN-T
regulation.
International Criminal Tribunal: Members welcomed the adoption of a national strategy for the investigation and prosecution of war crimes.
They called for enhanced regional cooperation in handling war crimes and solving all outstanding issues in this respect. They called for full
cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and urged the authorities to continue working on the
issue of the fate of missing persons, locating mass graves and guaranteeing the rights of victims and their families. They reiterated their
support for the initiative to establish the regional Commission for the establishment of facts about war crimes and other serious violations of
human rights committed in the former Yugoslavia.
Regional cooperation: Members commended the opening of three new border-crossing points between Serbia and Romania, as well as
reconciliation with Albania. It welcomed Serbias continued engagement in the normalisation process with Kosovo. They called on both parties
to identify new areas of discussion for the dialogue, with the aim of improving the lives of people and comprehensively normalising relations.
Members expressed concern at the recent tensions between Serbia and Kosovo regarding the first train journey from Belgrade to Mitrovica
North, including warmongering statements and anti-EU rhetoric.
Energy: lastly, Members called on Serbia to fully implement the connectivity reform measures in the energy sector and to ratify the Paris
climate agreement.

2016/2311(INI) - 14/06/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 524 votes to 70, with 79 abstentions, a resolution on the 2016 Commission Report on Serbia.
Parliament recalled that Serbia, like any country aspiring to join the Union, must be judged on its own merits in terms of fulfilling, implementing
and complying with the same set of criteria.
Accession negotiations: Parliament welcomed the opening of negotiations with this country and the continued engagement of Serbia on the
path of integration into the EU and its constructive and well-prepared approach to the negotiations.
It underlined that the thorough implementation of reforms and policies remains a key indicator of a successful integration process. However, it
noted delays in the absorption of pre-accession aid and called on Serbia to make progress in this area.
Economic reforms: Parliament welcomed the progress made by Serbia in developing a functioning market economy and the improvement of
the overall economic situation in the country. It underlined the paramount role of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) for Serbias
economy and encouraged Serbia to promote entrepreneurship, particularly among young people.
Political reforms: although Parliament welcomed the conduct of the parliamentary elections on 24 April 2016 which were assessed positively, it
called on the authorities to fully address the recommendations of the OSCE/ODIHR election observation mission, in particular with regard to
the lack of transparency of the financing of political parties and of the election campaign. Parliament stressed that the funding of political
parties must be in accordance with the highest international standards. It called on the authorities to properly investigate claims of
irregularities, violence and intimidation that arose during the electoral process.
Taking note of the results of the presidential elections held on 2 April 2017, Parliament strongly condemned the rhetoric used during the
presidential campaign by government officials and pro-government media against other presidential candidates. It regretted the uneven access
of candidates to the media during the election campaign as well as the parliament recess during the campaign, denying opposition politicians a
public forum. It called on the authorities to properly investigate claims of various types of irregularities.
Plenary noted that Prime Minister Aleksandar Vu?i? received 55.08 % of the vote in the presidential election of 2 April 2017 and that esses
that a multiparty delegation from the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe (PACE) observed the election, and that the
OSCE/ODIHR deployed an election assessment mission (EAM).
Relations with Russia: Parliament reiterated its call on Serbia, in line with the requirements of its candidate status, to progressively align its
foreign and security policy with that of the EU, including its policy on Russia. It considered the conduct of joint Serbia-Russia military exercises
regrettable. It welcomed, however, Serbias important contribution to several EU CSDP missions and operations (EUTM Mali, EUTM Somalia,
EUNAVFOR Atalanta, EUTM RCA) and its continued participation in international peacekeeping operations.
Parliament also commended Serbias constructive and humanitarian approach in dealing with the migration crisis. It called on Serbia to fully
respect the rights of asylum applicants in Serbia and to ensure that unaccompanied and separated minors are protected.
It called on the Commission to continue the work on migration with all the countries of the Western Balkans in order to ensure that European
and international norms and standards are followed.
Rule of law: Parliament called for effective reforms in the judiciary field, in particular by taking steps to promote judicial independence which is
not assured in practice. It expressed concern at the lack of progress in the fight against corruption and urged Serbia to show clear political will
and commitment in tackling this issue. Parliament also reiterated its call for proper reform of the offence of abuse of office and abuse of
responsible position so as to prevent possible misuse or arbitrary interpretation.
Efforts are also called for in the following areas:
the fight against organised crime and criminal networks;
the prosecution of war crimes;
the fight against terrorism and money laundering.

Democracy and human rights: Parliament considered that the constitution needs to be revised so as to fully reflect the recommendations of the
Venice Commission, notably with regard to the independence of key institutions. It stated that further effort is needed to depoliticise the public
administration.
It noted that further sustained efforts are needed to improve the situation of persons belonging to vulnerable groups, including Roma, persons
with disabilities, persons with HIV/AIDS, LGBTI persons, migrants and asylum seekers, and ethnic minorities.
Furthermore, measures are called for as regards the freedom of expression and the media. Parliament stressed that political interference,
threats, violence and intimidation against journalists, including physical assaults, verbal and written threats and attacks on property, remain an
issue of concern. It called on the authorities to publicly and unequivocally condemn all attacks, to provide adequate resources to investigate
more proactively all cases of attacks against journalists and media outlets and to swiftly bring the perpetrators to justice.
Protection of minorities: Parliament underlined that Vojvodina (Northern Serbia) has maintained a high degree of protection for minorities and
that the inter-ethnic situation has remained good. It stressed that the autonomy of Vojvodina should not be weakened and that the law on
Vojvodinas resources should be adopted without further delay, as prescribed by the constitution.
Parliament also noted the adoption of the new Roma social inclusion strategy 2016-2025 and called for its swift adoption. There is a large
number of Roma people from Serbia seeking asylum in the EU due to their lack of protection.
Good neighbourly relations: Members encouraged Serbia to strengthen its proactive and positive engagement with its neighbours and the
wider region. It called on Serbia to fully implement bilateral agreements with neighbouring countries and to enhance cooperation with the
neighbouring EU Member States, in particular on border areas, in order to facilitate economic development.
It noted that Serbia has shown an increasingly constructive engagement in regional cooperation initiatives such as the Danube Strategy, the
South-East Europe Cooperation Process, the Regional Cooperation Council, etc and called on it to implement the connectivity reform
measures associated with the connectivity agenda and the conclusions of the 2016 Paris conference on the Western Balkans and TEN-T
regulation.
International Criminal Tribunal: Parliament welcomed the adoption of a national strategy for the investigation and prosecution of war crimes. It
called for enhanced regional cooperation in handling war crimes and solving all outstanding issues in this respect. It called for full cooperation
with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and urged the authorities to continue working on the issue of the fate
of missing persons, locating mass graves and guaranteeing the rights of victims and their families. Members reiterated their support for the
initiative to establish the regional Commission for the establishment of facts about war crimes and other serious violations of human rights
committed in the former Yugoslavia.
Regional cooperation: Parliament commended the opening of three new border-crossing points between Serbia and Romania, as well as
reconciliation with Albania. It welcomed Serbias continued engagement in the normalisation process with Kosovo. It regretted, however, the
decision taken by the Serbian authorities not to allow former President of Kosovo Atifete Jahjaga to attend the Mirëdita, Dobar Dan festival in
Belgrade, at which she had been invited to deliver a speech on victims of sexual violence during the war in Kosovo. It also regretted the
subsequent reciprocity measure adopted by the Kosovan authorities to ban Serbias Minister of Labour Aleksandar Vulin from entering Kosovo.
Plenary stressed that such decisions are in breach of the Brussels Agreement on freedom of movement concluded by Serbia and Kosovo.
Members called on both parties to identify new areas of discussion for the dialogue, with the aim of improving the lives of people and
comprehensively normalising relations. They expressed concern at the recent tensions between Serbia and Kosovo regarding the first train
journey from Belgrade to Mitrovica North, including warmongering statements and anti-EU rhetoric.
They called on the Commission to make further efforts to support a true reconciliation process in the region, notably through support for
cultural projects dealing with the recent past and promoting a common and shared understanding of history and a public and political culture of
tolerance, inclusion and reconciliation;
Energy: lastly, Parliament called on Serbia to fully implement the connectivity reform measures in the energy sector and to ratify the Paris
climate agreement.

