Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2019(BUD)

BUD - Budgetary procedure

Procedure completed

2017 budget: estimates of revenue and expenditure, Section I ? Parliament

Subject
8.70.57 2017 budget

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
BUDG

Rapporteur

Budgets

Appointed
03/02/2016

TARAND Indrek
Shadow rapporteur

RÜBIG Paul

DENANOT Jean-Paul

ASHWORTH Richard

TORVALDS Nils

OMARJEE Younous

VALLI Marco
ŻÓŁTEK Stanisław

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
11/04/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

12/04/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/04/2016

Debate in Parliament

14/04/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

14/04/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/04/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2019(BUD)

A8-0131/2016

Summary

T8-0132/2016

Summary

Procedure type

BUD - Budgetary procedure

Procedure subtype

Budgetary preparation

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

BUDG/8/05664

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE577.035

18/02/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE578.714

17/03/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0131/2016

12/04/2016

EP

Summary

Budgetary text adopted by Parliament

T8-0132/2016

14/04/2016

EP

Summary

2016/2019(BUD) - 12/04/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgets adopted the report by Indrek TARAND (Greens/EFA, EE) on Parliaments estimates of revenue and expenditure
for the financial year 2017.
Members stress that the share of Parliaments budget in 2017 should be maintained under 20% of heading V. They note that the level of
preliminary draft estimates for 2017, as adopted by the Bureau on 7 March 2016, corresponds to 19.26%, which is lower than that achieved in
2016 (19.39%) and the second lowest part of heading V in the past eight years. They reduce further its share of heading V to 19.17 % for 2017
.
They consider, however, that, taking into account the economic slowdown experienced by the Member States, the forecast level of inflation for
2017 should not be considered as the main benchmark for the increases of the ordinary expenditure .
Strengthened security: Members observe the increase of 2.6% for security and cybersecurity which would more than double the resources
allocated in 2016.
They call on Parliament to approve the envelope of extraordinary expenditure for security investments in 2017 following the analysis presented
in February 2016 to the Bureau and supplemented by the screening made following the events of 22 March 2016 ( EUR 47.6 million) and the
envelope of extraordinary expenditure linked to the phasing out of the temporary derogation for the use of the Irish language (EUR 3.7 million).
2017 figures: Members call on Parliament to set the overall level of its estimates for 2017 to EUR 1 900 873 000, corresponding to a total
increase of 3.4 % compared to the 2016 budget. They underline that Parliament should be provided with sufficient resources needed to comply
with its core function as a legislative body and budgetary authority. While stressing that the need for budgetary rigour, ensuring a proper level
of financing for the Parliament is appropriate for the exercise of European democracy.
Transparency, accessibility and readability: Members consider that, as for the budgetary process, any relevant information should be
presented to Members of the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets at every stage of the procedure in a timely and intelligible manner and
with the necessary level of detail and breakdowns in order to enable the Bureau, the Committee on Budgets and the political groups to conduct
proper deliberations and base decisions on a comprehensive picture of the state and needs of Parliament's budget. They also underline the
need for precision and transparency in the evolution of the budget from one year to the other.
Members reiterate their call for a medium and long term budgetary planning, including a clear distinction between investments and operational
expenditure relating to the functioning of Parliament as well as its statutory obligations (including on rents and acquisitions).
Security and cybersecurity: Members call for a medium and long term budgetary planning, including clear information with regard to
expenditure relating to security and cybersecurity. They invite the Bureau to update the Global Security Concept and communicate it, as fast
as possible and at the latest by June 2016. They consider that any measure in this field should be based on a clear evaluation of Parliament's
needs and proportionality with the incurred risks. They call for information on the financial consequences of the interinstitutional administrative
cooperation arrangements in the field of security.
They also consider that the security system outside the Parliament's premises should continue to be guaranteed by the Belgian authorities.
Empowering Members mandate: Members note the ongoing measures to empower Members in their mandate. They welcome the extension of
the Members' Digital Portal (e-Portal) and the increasing quality of advice and research provided to Members and committees. They are of the
opinion that Members' need in their constituencies should be evaluated, also taking into account differences between constituencies. In the
interests of efficiency, Members request that the possibility of signing internal documents digitally should be made commonplace, across all
instances, such as signing forms, written declarations etc., while ensuring reliability and security.
Members consider it appropriate to maintain the appropriations for the envelope of the expenditure regarding parliamentary assistance for
2017 at same level as for 2016, subject to legally binding indexation applicable under the Staff Regulation. They believe that the current
depiction of Members' parliamentary activities on Parliament's website is not accurate and does not reflect the real activities and involvement
of Members. They suggest that the current use of ranking websites is scrapped while improving the information regarding the activities of
individual Members on the official Parliament website.
Buildings policy: Members recall that the mid-term building strategy, which was adopted by the Bureau in 2010, is currently under revision.
They call on the Bureau to present a long term strategy for Parliament buildings. They reiterate that long-term investments, such as
Parliament's building projects, need to be handled prudently and transparently. They reiterate their call for a transparent decision-making

process in the field of buildings policy, based on early information and believe that a report on the reasons of the delay and the higher costs of
the House of European History should feed into the long term building strategy.
They call for the position with regard to Parliament's buildings stock to be faithfully reflected in the budget. Accordingly, they also call for the
cost of the Konrad Adenauer Building to be clearly set out in Parliament's definitive budget, and for property-related investment to be
incorporated into the budget, in future, so as to obviate the need for mopping-up transfers.
They propose therefore to introduce, as of 2018, a specific line for investments in building constructions which would use as a basis for
funding in 2018 the funds which are proposed in 2017 for extraordinary expenditure. Considering the extraordinary circumstances in 2017,
which require high investment in the security infrastructure, they propose to use any funds not used by the end of 2017 to pay for the
construction expenses for the Adenauer building in order to avoid a maximum of interest rate payments to banks for loans which have to be
contracted in order to finance the construction.
One place of work: Members consider that the structural and organisational reforms aimed at achieving greater efficiency, environmental
sustainability, and effectiveness should continue through the thorough examination of possible synergies and savings. They recall the
substantial savings that could be made by having only one place of work instead of three (Brussels, Strasbourg, Luxembourg). They underline
that this process should be led without endangering Parliament's legislative excellence, its budgetary powers and powers of scrutiny, or the
quality of working conditions for Members, assistants, and staff.
Members also make a series of observations on the questions of the institutions internal staff, mobility (ensuring easy access and overall best
use of the new direct train connection between Brussels-Luxembourg train station and Zaventem airport), and communication on the visibility
of Parliaments work, as well as on environment-related issues.

2016/2019(BUD) - 14/04/2016 Budgetary text adopted by Parliament
The European Parliament adopted by 409 votes to 221, with 13 abstentions, a resolution on Parliaments estimates of revenue and expenditure
for the financial year 2017.
Parliament stresses that the share of Parliaments budget in 2017 should be maintained under 20% of heading V. It notes that the level of
preliminary draft estimates for 2017, as adopted by the Bureau on 7 March 2016, corresponds to 19.26%, which is lower than that achieved in
2016 (19.39%) and the second lowest part of heading V in the past eight years. It reduces further its share of heading V to 19.17 % for 2017 .
Parliament considers, however, that, taking into account the economic slowdown experienced by the Member States, the forecast level of
inflation for 2017 should not be considered as the main benchmark for the increases of the ordinary expenditure .
Extraordinary expenditure: Parliament confirms that extraordinary expenditure representing a 0.2 % increase, compared to the 2016 budget,
for the phasing out of the temporary derogation measures for the use of the Irish language has been requested . It notes the request for a 2.6
% increase for security and cybersecurity, which would more than double the resources allocated in 2016 .
Parliament approves the envelope of extraordinary expenditure for security investments in 2017 following the analysis presented in February
2016 to the Bureau and supplemented by the screening made following the events of 22 March 2016 ( EUR 47.6 million) and the envelope of
extraordinary expenditure linked to the phasing out of the temporary derogation for the use of the Irish language (EUR 3.7 million).
Parliament limits the increase of its ordinary expenditure for 2017, without the two extraordinary envelopes, to 1.4 % compared to the ordinary
expenditure of the 2016 budget and 0.6% compared to the 2016 budget.
2017 figures: Parliament sets the overall level of its estimates for 2017 to EUR 1 900 873 000, corresponding to a total increase of 3.4 %
compared to the 2016 budget. It considers that it should be provided with sufficient resources needed to comply with its core function as a
legislative body and budgetary authority. While stressing that the need for budgetary rigour, ensuring a proper level of financing for the
Parliament is appropriate for the exercise of European democracy.
Transparency, accessibility and readability: Parliament considers that, as for the budgetary process, any relevant information should be
presented to Members of the Bureau and the Committee on Budgets at every stage of the procedure in a timely and intelligible manner and
with the necessary level of detail and breakdowns in order to enable the Bureau, the Committee on Budgets and the political groups to conduct
proper deliberations and base decisions on a comprehensive picture of the state and needs of Parliament's budget. It also underlines the need
for precision and transparency in the evolution of the budget from one year to the other.
Parliament reiterates its call for a medium and long term budgetary planning, including a clear distinction between investments and operational
expenditure relating to the functioning of Parliament, as well as its statutory obligations (including on rents and acquisitions).
Security and cybersecurity: Parliament calls for a medium and long term budgetary planning, including clear information with regard to
expenditure relating to security and cybersecurity. It invites the Bureau to update the Global Security Concept and communicate it, as fast as
possible and at the latest by June 2016. It considers that any measure in this field should be based on a clear evaluation of Parliament's needs
and proportionality with the incurred risks. It calls for information on the financial consequences of the interinstitutional administrative
cooperation arrangements in the field of security.
It also considers that the security system outside the Parliament's premises should continue to be guaranteed by the Belgian authorities.
Empowering Members mandate: Parliament notes the ongoing measures to empower Members in their mandate. It welcomes the extension of
the Members' Digital Portal (e-Portal) and the increasing quality of advice and research provided to Members and committees.
Parliament is of the opinion that the need of Members in their constituencies should be evaluated, also taking into account differences
between constituencies, in order to better empower the Members in their constituency work. It believes that mobile workspaces for Members
and support in constituencies should be based on real needs and use assessment, and should not generate any significant or recurring
additional costs to the Parliament. It insists that no hardware should be provided as the GEA provides sufficient resources for the purchase of
state-of-the-art devices.
In the interests of efficiency, Parliament requests that the possibility of signing internal documents digitally should be made commonplace,
across all instances, such as signing forms, written declarations etc., while ensuring reliability and security.

Parliament considers it appropriate to maintain the appropriations for the envelope of the expenditure regarding parliamentary assistance for
2017 at same level as for 2016, subject to legally binding indexation applicable under the Staff Regulation. It believes that the current depiction
of Members' parliamentary activities on Parliament's website is not accurate and does not reflect the real activities and involvement of
Members. They suggest that the current use of ranking websites is scrapped while improving the information regarding the activities of
individual Members on the official Parliament website.
Members expenses: Parliament reiterates its call on the Bureau to define more precise rules regarding the accountability of the expenditure
authorised under the general expenditure allowance, which could include cost effective measures such as Members publishing their spending
records, as already done by a growing number of Members, and could be accompanied by a simplified system for repaying unused funds.
Buildings policy: Parliament recalls that the mid-term building strategy, which was adopted by the Bureau in 2010, is currently under revision. It
calls on the Bureau to present a long term strategy for Parliament buildings. They reiterate that long-term investments, such as Parliament's
building projects, need to be handled prudently and transparently. They reiterate their call for a transparent decision-making process in the
field of buildings policy, based on early information and believe that a report on the reasons of the delay and the higher costs of the House of
European History should feed into the long term building strategy. In an amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament considers that, in the
current economic context, no further Parliamentarium projects should be launched without prior consultation with and approval of the
Committee on budgets.
Parliament calls for the position with regard to its buildings stock to be faithfully reflected in the budget. Accordingly, it also calls for the cost of
the Konrad Adenauer Building (Luxembourg) to be clearly set out in Parliament's definitive budget, and for property-related investment to be
incorporated into the budget, in future, so as to obviate the need for mopping-up transfers.
It proposes therefore to introduce, as of 2018, a specific line for investments in building constructions which would use as a basis for funding in
2018 the funds which are proposed in 2017 for extraordinary expenditure. Considering the extraordinary circumstances in 2017, which require
high investment in the security infrastructure, it proposes to use any funds not used by the end of 2017 to pay for the construction expenses for
the Adenauer building in order to avoid a maximum of interest rate payments to banks for loans which have to be contracted in order to
finance the construction.
One place of work: Parliament considers that the structural and organisational reforms aimed at achieving greater efficiency, environmental
sustainability, and effectiveness should continue through the thorough examination of possible synergies and savings. It recalls the substantial
savings that could be made by having only one place of work instead of three (Brussels, Strasbourg, Luxembourg). It underlines that this
process should be led without endangering Parliament's legislative excellence, its budgetary powers and powers of scrutiny, or the quality of
working conditions for Members, assistants, and staff.
Mobility: Parliament has reservations about the proposal to internalise the chauffeur service, replacing the external service provider with
Parliament's contractual agents, which will correspond to approximately EUR 3.7 million of immediate additional expense. It considers that a
well organised external contract concluded pursuant to applicable public procurement rules, where the external service provider is clearly
obliged to take responsibility for security and background checks as well as for decent working conditions and pay, should be considered as
an alternative option. It would consider the internalisation only if its costs do not exceed the costs related to the current system, and if it allows
decent working conditions and pay for drivers. It believes that the car fleet should consist of more cost- and fuel-efficient and secure cars. It
stresses the fact that preference should be given to the use of minivans and buses, to and from the airport, at scheduled times.
Parliament also makes a series of observations on the questions of the institutions internal staff, and communication on the visibility of
Parliaments work, as well as on environment-related issues.

