Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2006(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

International Accounting Standards (IAS) evaluation and activities of the
International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) Foundation, European
Financial Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG) and the Public Interest
Oversight Board (PIOB)

Subject
2.50.08 Financial services, financial reporting and auditing

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
10/09/2015

STOLOJAN Theodor
Dumitru
Shadow rapporteur

BERÈS Pervenche

KAMALL Syed

VAN NIEUWENHUIZEN
Cora

DE MASI Fabio

GIEGOLD Sven
KAPPEL Barbara
Committee for opinion
CONT

Rapporteur for opinion

Budgetary Control

Appointed
03/02/2016

CZARNECKI Ryszard

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Economic and Financial Affairs

HILL Jonathan

Key events
21/01/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

26/04/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

03/05/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

06/06/2016

Debate in Parliament

07/06/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

07/06/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st

A8-0172/2016

Summary

T8-0248/2016

Summary

reading/single reading
07/06/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2006(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/05413

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE575.121

12/01/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE578.642

02/03/2016

EP

PE576.690

08/04/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0172/2016

03/05/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0248/2016

07/06/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)612

18/11/2016

Committee opinion

CONT

2016/2006(INI) - 03/05/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Theodor Dumitru STOLOJAN (EPP, RO) on
International Accounting Standards (IAS) evaluation and the activities of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) Foundation,
the European Financial Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG) and the Public Interest Oversight Board (PIOB).
Members recalled that the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and the international standards on auditing (ISA) are one
essential component needed for the efficient functioning of the internal market and of the capital markets. The purpose of the IFRS is to
strengthen accountability by reducing the information gap between investors and companies, to protect investment, to bring transparency
through enhancing the international comparability and quality of financial information, to enable investors and other market participants to
make informed economic decisions.
The European Union has delegated the development of the international financial accounting standards to the International Accounting
Standards Board (IASB), an independent self-regulatory private body.
Evaluation of the application of IFRS in the EU ten years since their application: Members noted the Commissions IAS evaluation report on the
application of the IFRS in the EU and its assessment that the objectives of the IAS Regulation have been met. They regretted that the
Commission has not yet proposed the legal changes that are required to solve the shortcomings identified in its evaluation.
With regard to the endorsement criteria, Members recalled that an IFRS should not be contrary to the true and fair view principle as included in
the Accounting Directive, which requires that financial statements must give a true and fair view of a companys assets and liabilities, financial
position and profit or loss.
The Commission is asked to:
comply with the Maystadt recommendation regarding expansion of the public good criterion, i.e. that accounting standards should
neither jeopardise financial stability in the EU nor hinder the EUs economic development, and to ensure that this criterion will be fully
respected during the endorsement process;
together with EFRAG, issue clear guidelines on the meaning of the public good and the true and fair view principle in order to arrive at
a common understanding of these endorsement criteria;
put forward a proposal to incorporate Maystadt's definition of the 'public good' criterion into the IAS Regulation.
The report called on the standard setter to ensure that the IFRS are coherent within the existing body of accounting standards and to promote
convergence at international level. It called for a more coordinated approach in developing new standards, including coordinated timelines for
application, and urged the Commission to put forward diligently legal proposals to this end.

Members noted that the effects of an accounting standard must be fully understood: accordingly, it should be a priority for the IASB and
EFRAG to strengthen their impact analyses, notably in the field of macroeconomics, and to assess the different needs of the wide variety of
stakeholders, including long-term investors and companies, as well as the general public. They believed that a less complex accounting
standards system would contribute to more uniform implementation so that company financial data are comparable between Member States.
The report asked the IASB, the Commission and EFRAG to involve Parliament and the Council at an early stage when developing financial
reporting standards in general and in the endorsement process in particular. It called on the Commission to create a space for stakeholders to
discuss fundamental principles of accounting in Europe and to grant Parliament the possibility of receiving a short list of EFRAG board
president candidates. Parliament should play the role of an active promoter of IFRS.
The committee noted the Commissions intention to explore with the IASB the possibility of developing common high-quality and simplified
accounting standards for SMEs which could be used, on a voluntary basis, at EU level by SMEs listed on Multilateral Trading Facilities (MTFs),
and more specifically SME growth markets. It believed that, as a condition for work to continue in this field, IFRS have to be less complex, and
that SME interests should be sufficiently represented on the IASB.
The report welcomed the Commissions intention to examine the case for coordinating the EU rules relating to dividend distribution. It also
called on EFRAG and the Commission to examine whether accounting standards allow tax fraud and tax avoidance and to make all the
necessary changes to prevent potential abuse.
Activities of the IFRS Foundation, EFRAG and the PIOB: the report supported the Commission recommendations that the Monitoring Board of
the IFRS Foundation should shift the focus of its attention from the issue of internal organisation to discussing matters of public interest that
could be referred to the IFRS Foundation.
Members believed, however that further progress should be made as regards the governance of the IFRS Foundation and the IASB, in
particular in terms of transparency, prevention of conflicts of interest and diversity of hired experts. They were particularly in favour of:
the Commission's proposal to consider the reporting needs of investors with different investment time horizons and to provide specific
solutions, in particular for long-term investors, when developing their standards;
better integration of the IASB into the system of international financial institutions;
steps to ensure broad representation (such as consumer representation agencies and finance ministries) of interests and public
accountability that will guarantee high-quality accounting standards.
Noting the dominance of private actors on the IASB, Members called on the Commission to urge the IFRS Foundation to aim for a more
diversified and balanced financing structure, including on the basis of fees and public sources, thus preventing conflicts of interests.
Lastly, the report stressed that the EFRAG reform must improve the European contribution to the development of the new IFRS and could
participate in the reform of governance of the IFRS Foundation.

2016/2006(INI) - 07/06/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 559 votes to 36, with 80 abstentions, a resolution on International Accounting Standards (IAS)
evaluation and the activities of the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) Foundation, the European Financial Reporting Advisory
Group (EFRAG) and the Public Interest Oversight Board (PIOB).
Importance of IFRS and ISA standards: Members recalled that the International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS) and the international
standards on auditing (ISA) are one essential component needed for the efficient functioning of the internal market and of the capital markets .
The purpose of the IFRS is to strengthen accountability by reducing the information gap between investors and companies, to protect
investment, to bring transparency through enhancing the international comparability and quality of financial information, to enable investors
and other market participants to make informed economic decisions.
The International Accounting Standard Board (IASB) functions under the umbrella of the IFRS Foundation. The EU contributes around 14 % of
the IFRS Foundations budget and is therefore its largest financial contributor.
Evaluation of the application of IFRS in the EU ten years since their application: Parliament noted the Commissions IAS evaluation report on
the application of the IFRS in the EU and its assessment that the objectives of the IAS Regulation have been met. It regretted that the
Commission has not yet proposed the legal changes that are required to solve the shortcomings identified in its evaluation.
Parliament called on the standard setter to ensure that the IFRS are coherent within the existing body of accounting standards and to promote
convergence at international level. It called for a more coordinated approach in developing new standards, including coordinated timelines for
application, in particular with regard to the implementation of IFRS 9 Financial Instruments and the new IFRS 4 Insurance Contracts. It urged
the Commission to put forward diligently legal proposals to this end.
Endorsement process and criteria: Members recalled that an IFRS should not be contrary to the true and fair view principle as included in the
Accounting Directive, which requires that financial statements must give a true and fair view of a companys assets and liabilities, financial
position and profit or loss.
The Commission is asked to:
comply with the Maystadt recommendation regarding expansion of the public good criterion, i.e. that accounting standards should
neither jeopardise financial stability in the EU nor hinder the EUs economic development, and to ensure that this criterion will be fully
respected during the endorsement process;
together with EFRAG, issue clear guidelines on the meaning of the public good and the true and fair view principle on the basis of ECJ
case-law and the Accounting Directive in order to arrive at a common understanding of these endorsement criteria;
put forward a proposal to incorporate Maystadt's definition of the 'public good' criterion into the IAS Regulation.
Simplified standards: according to Members, the effects of an accounting standard must be fully understood. It should be a priority for the
IASB and EFRAG to strengthen their impact analyses, notably in the field of macroeconomics, and to assess the different needs of the wide
variety of stakeholders, including long-term investors and companies, as well as the general public. Moreover, a less complex accounting

standards system would contribute to more uniform implementation so that company financial data are comparable between Member States.
Further involvement of the Parliament: the resolution asked the IASB, the Commission and EFRAG to involve Parliament and the Council at an
early stage when developing financial reporting standards in general and in the endorsement process in particular. It called on the Commission
to create a space for stakeholders to discuss fundamental principles of accounting in Europe and to grant Parliament the possibility of
receiving a short list of EFRAG board president candidates. Parliament should play the role of an active promoter of IFRS.
Taking account of SMEs interests: Parliament noted the Commissions intention to explore with the IASB the possibility of developing common
high-quality and simplified accounting standards for SMEs which could be used, on a voluntary basis, at EU level by SMEs listed on
Multilateral Trading Facilities (MTFs), and more specifically SME growth markets. It believed that, as a condition for work to continue in this
field, IFRS have to be less complex, and that SME interests should be sufficiently represented on the IASB.
Parliament welcomed the Commissions intention to examine the case for coordinating the EU rules relating to dividend distribution. It also
called on EFRAG and the Commission to examine whether accounting standards allow tax fraud and tax avoidance and to make all the
necessary changes to prevent potential abuse.
Activities of the IFRS Foundation, EFRAG and the PIOB: Parliament supported the Commission recommendations that the Monitoring Board
of the IFRS Foundation should shift the focus of its attention from the issue of internal organisation to discussing matters of public interest that
could be referred to the IFRS Foundation.
Members believed, however that further progress should be made as regards the governance of the IFRS Foundation and the IASB, in
particular in terms of transparency, prevention of conflicts of interest and diversity of hired experts. Parliament was particularly in favour of:
the Commission's proposal to consider the reporting needs of investors with different investment time horizons and to provide specific
solutions, in particular for long-term investors, when developing their standards;
better integration of the IASB into the system of international financial institutions;
steps to ensure broad representation (such as consumer representation agencies and finance ministries) of interests and public
accountability that will guarantee high-quality accounting standards.
Noting the dominance of private actors on the IASB, Parliament called on the Commission to urge the IFRS Foundation to aim for a more
diversified and balanced financing structure, including on the basis of fees and public sources, thus preventing conflicts of interests.
Lastly, Parliament stressed that the EFRAG reform must improve the European contribution to the development of the new IFRS and could
participate in the reform of governance of the IFRS Foundation.

