Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2016/0148(COD)

Procedure completed, awaiting publication in Official Journal
05/04/2017 Decision to enter into interinstitutional negotiations confirmed
by plenary (Rule 69c)

Cooperation between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of
consumer protection laws
Repealing Regulation (EU) No 2006/2004 2003/0162(COD)
Subject
2.80 Cooperation between administrations
4.60.06 Consumers' economic and legal interests
7.40.02 Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO

Rapporteur

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Appointed
17/06/2016

SEHNALOVÁ Olga
Shadow rapporteur

COELHO Carlos

SULÍK Richard

SELIMOVIC Jasenko

REDA Julia
TROSZCZYNSKI
Mylène
Committee for opinion
BUDG

ITRE

CULT

JURI

Budgets

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Culture and Education

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Legal Affairs

11/07/2016
CHRYSOGONOS
Kostas

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Justice and Consumers

Commissioner
JOUROVÁ Věra

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
25/05/2016

Legislative proposal published

09/06/2016

Committee referral announced in

COM(2016)0283

Summary

Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
28/11/2016

Debate in Council

20/02/2017

Debate in Council

21/03/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

21/03/2017

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

27/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0077/2017

13/07/2017

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE608.048
GEDA/T/(2017)006586

14/11/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/11/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

30/11/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

12/12/2017

Final act signed

12/12/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

Summary

T8-0426/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0148(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Repealing Regulation (EU) No 2006/2004 2003/0162(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed, awaiting publication in Official Journal

Committee dossier

IMCO/8/06759

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0283

25/05/2016

EC

Document attached to the
procedure

SWD(2016)0164

26/05/2016

EC

Document attached to the
procedure

SWD(2016)0165

26/05/2016

EC

Reasoned opinion

SE_PARLIAMENT

PE585.524

28/06/2016

NP

Reasoned opinion

AT_BUNDESRAT

PE587.480

25/08/2016

NP

Reasoned opinion

BG_PARLIAMENT

PE587.658

08/09/2016

NP

Summary

Reasoned opinion

PE589.331

28/09/2016

NP

Committee draft report

PE594.014

30/11/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in
committee

PE597.438

16/01/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in
committee

PE599.857

23/02/2017

EP

PE595.729

08/03/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for
plenary, 1st reading/single
reading

A8-0077/2017

27/03/2017

EP

Coreper letter confirming
interinstitutional agreement

GEDA/T/(2017)006586

05/07/2017

CSL

T8-0426/2017

14/11/2017

EP

Committee opinion

CZ_CHAMBER

JURI

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

Summary

Summary

2016/0148(COD) - 25/05/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to develop more modern, efficient and effective enforcement cooperation mechanisms in the consumer protection area and
contribute to the completion of the Digital Single Market.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: Regulation 2006/2004 on cooperation between national authorities responsible for enforcement of consumer protection laws
(the Regulation on consumer protection cooperation, the "CPC Regulation") has strengthened the enforcement of consumer laws across the
EU. However, a high level of non-compliance with the key Union consumer rules persists in the main consumer markets.
The coordinated screenings of online e-commerce websites ("sweeps") carried out by CPC authorities since 2007 show rates of
non-compliance with basic consumer rules, between 32% and 69%, in the checked markets. Further, a conservative estimate based on a
representative sample of five online sectors (clothing, electronic goods, recreation, consumer credit and package travel) shows that 37% of EU
e-commerce did not respect Union consumer law in 2014.
The Commission evaluation report under the CPC Regulation concluded that the current Regulation needs to be replaced to respond to the
challenges of the digital economy and the development of cross-border retail trade in the EU.
A legislative proposal is therefore needed to address the identified shortcomings of the CPC Regulation. The general objective of the proposal
is to develop modern, efficient and effective CPC mechanisms that will reduce the consumer detriment caused by cross-border and
widespread infringements to Union consumer law.
The Single Market strategy adopted by the Commission on 28 October 2015 further reiterated that the Commission will improve the
enforcement of Union consumer law by national authorities through the reform of the CPC Regulation.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: among the five policy options examined, the preferred option is the option to revise the CPC Regulation by extending
its scope and strengthening its efficiency.
It was estimated for the subset of five online markets studied in the impact assessment that a decrease of 10 points in the non-compliance rate
of 37% could reduce the detriment from an estimated EUR 770 million per year to about EUR 539 million, i.e. by 30%.
CONTENT: the Commission proposes to modernise the current CPC Regulation, by deepening the level of harmonisation, in order to address
the above issues and to boost the cross-border enforcement of Union consumer laws in the Single Market.
The main elements of the proposal are as follows:
Introductory provisions: the proposal updates the definitions to take account the extension of the Regulation to widespread infringements and
ceased infringements (infringements of short duration that ceased before enforcement measures can be taken, but which may be causing
harm to consumers afterwards. It introduces a limitation period for the possibility to impose penalties (five years from the termination of such
infringements) and sets rules for the calculation of the limitation period and for its suspension.
Competent authorities and their powers: this Chapter: (i) defines how to designate competent authorities and single liaison offices for this
Regulation; (ii) clarifies the roles of the single liaison offices; (iii) calls on the Member States to ensure smooth cooperation among the
members of the enforcement network in their territory; (iv) requires Member States to ensure that other national authorities support the work of
the competent authorities.
Further minimum powers have been added, such as the power to make test purchases and carry out mystery shopping, power to adopt interim
measures, block websites and the power to impose penalties and to safeguard consumer compensation in a cross-border context.
Mutual Assistance Mechanism: this mechanism shall be used to address intra-Union infringements, which affect consumers in one Member
State but have a cross-border element (e.g. the responsible trader is located in another Member State). The proposal newly sets out that the

requested authority has an obligation to reply to a mutual assistance request within the time limit set by implementing measures.
Coordinated surveillance, investigation and enforcement mechanism for widespread infringements: the proposal provides for instruments to
address widespread infringements. These include coordinated actions, common actions against widespread infringements with
Union-dimension and concerted investigations of consumer markets. The proposal also establishes a new instrument to address widespread
infringements with Union-dimension which are likely to harm consumers in a large part of the Union. It sets out the thresholds that determine
which suspected infringements have a Union-dimension. The Commission establishes whether the thresholds for Union-dimension are fulfilled
and launches the common action by decision. It has also an obligation to coordinate investigation and other measures that Member States
need to take to stop the infringement. Participation in a common action is mandatory for competent authorities in Member States concerned by
the infringement.
Surveillance Mechanism: the new surveillance mechanism replaces the current CPC system of alerts. It combines the alerts under the current
CPC Regulation with wider exchange of information that is relevant and necessary for timely detection of widespread infringements. Other
entities may participate in the alert mechanism through external alerts.
Professional and commercial secrecy: the proposed Regulation ensures protection of professional and commercial secrets. It also provides
that the information collected using the minimum powers under the Regulation will only be used for the purposes of ensuring compliance with
the laws that protect consumers' interests. Annex: it is proposed to include the following EU legislative act to the Annex of the CPC Regulation:
Directive on consumer rights; Directive on services in the internal market; Directive on credit agreements; Directive on payment accounts;
Regulation on railway passenger rights and obligations; Regulation concerning the rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced
mobility when travelling by air; Regulation on common rules for the operation of air services in the Community.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the Commission estimated that there will be approximately four common actions per year against widespread
infringements with Union-dimension. This will trigger an additional workload for the Commission, estimated to require two full-time officials to
coordinate these common actions. These resources will be obtained through the redistribution and refocusing of the existing personnel.
The Commission will also incur additional costs in monitoring the functioning of the mutual assistance and alert mechanisms. The
Commission's total additional costs for its enhanced coordination and monitoring role are estimated to be below EUR 300 000 per year and
these costs will be covered by internal reallocation of resources.

2016/0148(COD) - 27/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted the report by Olga SEHNALOVÁ (S&D, CZ) on the proposal for a
regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on cooperation between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of
consumer protection laws.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position, adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure,
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Scope: this Regulation shall apply to intra-Union infringements, widespread infringements and widespread infringements with a Union
dimension as respectively, even where those infringements have ceased before an enforcement procedure started or could be completed.
Members proposed a clear set of definitions, including the terms: "'widespread infringement with a Union dimension", "competent authority",
"single liaison office", "sweeps".
Widespread infringement with a Union dimension shall mean a widespread infringement that harmed, harms or is likely to harm consumer's
collective interests in a majority of Member States accounting together for at least a majority of the population of the Union.
Limitation period: the competent authorities may investigate infringements and prevent traders from engaging in them in the future. Within five
years from the cessation of the infringement, the competent authorities may have the power to impose sanctions, order compensation for
consumers and order the restitution of profits obtained as a result of infringements.
Competent authorities and single liaison offices: each Member State shall designate the competent authorities and a single liaison office that
are responsible for the application of this Regulation. The coordination role of the single liaison office should be entrusted in each Member
State to a public authority that has sufficient powers and necessary resources to undertake that key role.
Powers of competent authorities: Members stated that each Member State shall confer on their competent authorities the investigation and
enforcement powers and shall provide them with the resources necessary for the application of this Regulation. The text lists the powers that
competent authorities of each Member State shall dispose in order to carry out the duties assigned to them by this Regulation.
The competent authorities shall exercise powers proportionately, efficiently and effectively in accordance with Union law, including the
principles of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, applicable procedural safeguards and the Union rules on data
protection, and national law.
When a decision is being made whether to impose a sanction, due regard shall be given to the nature, gravity and duration of the infringement,
taking into account the number of consumers affected and the level of damage suffered by them and the intentional or negligent character of
the infringement.
Requests for information: Members proposed to lay down a 30 day time-limit for replying to requests for information and specified that the
requested authority shall without undue delay, on request from an applicant authority, take all necessary enforcement measures to bring about
the cessation or prohibition of the intra-Union.
The Commission shall adopt implementing acts laying down the standard forms and steps of the procedure on the request for information and
enforcement measures.
Launching of coordinated actions and designation of the coordinator: where a competent authority or the Commission has a reasonable
suspicion that a widespread infringement is taking place, it shall notify the competent authorities of the Member States concerned by that
infringement and the Commission, as applicable, without delay.

When the threshold for a widespread infringement with a Union dimension is met, the Commission shall launch a coordinated action and shall
ensure the coordination of the action.
A competent authority may decline to take part in a coordinated action if, for instance, a criminal investigation or judicial proceedings have
already been initiated in respect of the same widespread infringement or the widespread infringement with a Union dimension and against the
same trader in the Member State concerned.
The provisions on investigative measures, commitments, enforcement measures in coordinated actions and the closure of these actions have
been clarified.
Sweeps: coordinated screening of online ecommerce websites (sweeps) is another form of enforcement coordination that has proven to be an
effective tool against infringements. Members stated that these should be retained and strengthened in the future, including by extending its
application to offline sectors. They shall be coordinated by the Commission.
Alert mechanism: entities having the appropriate expertise and legitimate interest in consumer protection shall be entitled to participate in the
alert mechanism set up by the Regulation. The participation of professional associations shall also be authorised.

2016/0148(COD) - 14/11/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 591 votes to 95, with 15 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on cooperation between national authorities responsible for the enforcement of consumer protection
laws.
The European Parliaments position adopted at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as
follows:
Scope: this Regulation applies to intra-Union infringements, widespread infringements and widespread infringements with a Union dimension,
even if those infringements have ceased before enforcement starts or is completed. 'Widespread infringement with a Union dimension' means
a widespread infringement that has done, does or is likely to do harm to the collective interests of consumers in at least two-thirds of the
Member States, accounting, together, for at least two-thirds of the population of the Union.
Competent Authorities and Single Liaison Offices: each Member State shall designate one or more competent authorities and the single liaison
office responsible for the application of the Regulation. Those competent authorities, the other public authorities and, where appropriate, the
designated bodies should cooperate effectively to enable the proper application of the Regulation within the Member States.
A competent authority may instruct a designated body to gather the necessary information regarding an infringement covered by this
Regulation or to take the necessary enforcement measures available to it under national law, in order to bring about the cessation or
prohibition of that infringement.
Powers of competent authorities: the latter shall have at least the following investigative powers:
the power of access to any relevant documents, data or information related to an infringement covered by this Regulation;
the power to require any public authority, body or agency within their Member State or any natural person or legal person to provide
any relevant information, to establish whether an infringement covered by this Regulation has occurred or is occurring, including
tracing financial and data flows, ascertaining the identity of persons involved in financial and data flows, and ascertaining bank
account information and ownership of websites;
the power to carry out necessary on-site inspections, including the power to enter any premises, land or means of transport that the
trader concerned by the inspection uses for purposes related to his trade, business, craft or profession;
the power to purchase goods or services as test purchases, where necessary, under a cover identity (mystery shopping).
In addition, competent authorities shall have at least the following enforcement powers:
the power to adopt interim measures to avoid the risk of serious harm to the collective interests of consumers;
the power to receive from the trader, on the trader's initiative, additional remedial commitments for the benefit of consumers that have
been affected by the alleged infringement covered by this Regulation, or, where appropriate, to seek to obtain commitments from the
trader to offer adequate remedies to the consumers that have been affected by that infringement;
the power to bring about the cessation or the prohibition of infringements covered by this Regulation;
the power to remove content or to restrict access to an online interface or to order the explicit display of a warning to consumers when
they access an online interface;
the power to order domain registries or registrars to delete a fully qualified domain name and to allow the competent authority
concerned to register it;
the power to impose penalties, such as fines or periodic penalty payments.
The competent authorities shall also have the power:
to start investigations or proceedings on their own initiative to bring about the cessation or prohibition of infringements;
to publish any final decision, trader's commitments or orders, including the publication of the identity of the trader responsible for an
infringement covered by this Regulation.
Competent authorities may consult consumer organisations, trader associations, designated bodies or other persons concerned, regarding the
effectiveness of the proposed commitments in bringing the infringement covered by this Regulation to an end.
Mutual assistance mechanism: it is proposed to set a deadline of 30 days to respond to requests for information from the requesting authority.
The requested authority shall determine the appropriate enforcement measures needed to bring about the cessation or prohibition of the
intra-Union infringement and shall take them without delay and not later than six months after receiving the request.
Launch of coordinated actions: where there is a reasonable suspicion of a widespread infringement, the competent authorities concerned by
that infringement shall, by agreement, launch a coordinated action.

The Commission shall report to the competent authorities any suspected infringement covered by the Regulation. If it suspects that a wide
scale Union-wide crime has been committed, it should inform the Member States giving the reasons for launching a possible coordinated
action. If after investigation, the competent authorities concerned come to the conclusion that an infringement could be committed, then they
should initiate a coordinated action.
Action to combat wide-scale crime across the Union shall always be coordinated by the Commission.
The text provided that a competent authority may refuse to participate in a coordinated action, for example if judicial proceedings have already
been initiated or if an investigation has shown that the actual or potential effects of the alleged infringement are negligible.
Sweeps: sweeps are another form of enforcement coordination that has proven to be an effective tool against infringements of Union laws that
protect consumers' interests, and should be retained and strengthened in the future, for both online and offline sectors. They shall be
coordinated by the Commission.
Union-wide alerts: Member States shall confer on designated bodies, European Consumer Centres, consumer organisations and associations,
and, where appropriate, trader associations, that have the necessary expertise, the power to issue external alerts to the competent authorities
of the relevant Member States and the Commission of suspected infringements covered by this Regulation and to provide the necessary
information available to them.

