Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2012(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Application of Council Directive 2004/113/EC implementing the principle of
equal treatment between men and women in the access to and supply of
goods and services
See also Directive 2004/113/EC 2003/0265(CNS)
Subject
4.10.04 Gender equality

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
FEMM

Rapporteur

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

Appointed
16/11/2015

KOZŁOWSKA-RAJEWICZ
Agnieszka
Shadow rapporteur

REGNER Evelyn

GIRLING Julie

MLINAR Angelika

PIMENTA LOPES João

DELLI Karima

VON STORCH Beatrix
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

ITRE

Appointed

25/01/2016
NILSSON Jens

JURI

Legal Affairs

15/03/2016
MAŠTÁLKA Jiří

LIBE

European Commission

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
05/05/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

21/01/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

06/02/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

20/02/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/03/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/03/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

14/03/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/03/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

COM(2015)0190

Summary

A8-0043/2017

Summary

T8-0074/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2012(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Implementation
See also Directive 2004/113/EC 2003/0265(CNS)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

FEMM/8/05519

Documentation gateway
Follow-up document

COM(2015)0190

05/05/2015

EC

PE592.221

20/10/2016

EP

PE585.500

14/11/2016

EP

PE593.809

15/11/2016

EP

PE589.255

29/11/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0043/2017

20/02/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0074/2017

14/03/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)390

22/08/2017

Committee draft report
Committee opinion

TRAN

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

JURI

Summary

2016/2012(INI) - 20/02/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Womens Rights and Gender Equality adopted an own-initiative report by Agnieszka KOZ?OWSKA-RAJEWICZ (EPP, PL)
on the application of Council Directive 2004/113/EC implementing the principle of equal treatment between men and women in the access to
and supply of goods and services.
As a reminder, Directive 2004/113/EC extends the principle of equal treatment of men and women beyond the realm of employment and the

labour market and into the field of access to and supply of goods and services. It prohibits both direct and indirect discrimination based on sex
in the access to and supply of goods and services which are available to the public, in both the public and private sectors.
Members regretted that the application of the Directive is not uniform and varies across the Member States. They called for the remaining gaps
in its implementation to be addressed in some Member States and across certain sectors.
They suggested in particular increasing awareness about the provisions of the Directive to enhance the perceived importance of equal
treatment in the field of goods and services.
The insurance sectors: the report welcomed the implementation of the Test-Achats ruling in national legislation by the Member States and the
fact that national legislation has been amended in a legally binding manner. However, it pointed out that there are still challenges related to the
conformity of national legislation with the ruling, for example in medical insurance schemes and in relation to the full elimination of
discrimination on the grounds of pregnancy and maternity.
Members considered that ensuring proper and full implementation of the ruling in all Member States and areas is crucial. The conformity with
the ruling across Member States should be monitored in periodic reports by the Commission and any gaps should be addressed as a priority.
Member States are called upon to make a greater effort and enhance clarity in protecting the rights and welfare of pregnant women. They
should not experience higher costs on the sole grounds of their pregnancy. Awareness should be raised among service providers as to the
special protection afforded to pregnant women.
Transport sector and public spaces: Members stressed the need to enhance preventive measures against harassment experienced by women
in transport. They called on the Commission and the Member States to facilitate the exchange of best practices in this area and called for
progress to be made regarding the EUs accession to the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women
and domestic violence (Istanbul Convention).
Furthermore, Members regretted the fact that parents and carers of small children still face physical access barriers and other obstacles such
as insufficient access to baby changing facilities on the premises of service providers. Members emphasised the need to safeguard the rights
of both mothers and fathers to enjoy equal opportunities in the company of their children on the premises of service providers.
The Commission therefore to consider all obstacles and constraints to accessibility encountered by women as the main users of public
transportation services and by carers of small children and carers in general.
The collaborative economy: Members highlighted the new possible areas of application of the Directive, in particular as a result of digitalisation
of certain services and sectors as well as the proliferation of collaborative forms of service provision. They pointed out that the recently
published Commission communication entitled European agenda for the collaborative economy should serve as a first step for promoting and
regulating this sector effectively.
The Commission should integrate the principles of gender mainstreaming and reflect the regulations of the Directive to safeguard equal
treatment of women and men and effectively prevent harassment in the services offered within the collaborative economy and ensure
adequate safety.
Differential treatment: the largest share of issues addressed and complaints received by the equality bodies in the Member States concern
differential treatment predominantly within the leisure and entertainment sector. They concern justification of unequal treatment based on the
derogation provided in Article 4(5) that leads, for example, to differential pricing, refusals to provide services and differing conditions of access
for women and men.
Members considered that the relative lack of positive action based on Article 4(5) across Member States constitutes a gap in the
implementation of the Directive. They called for the promotion of forms of positive action.
Enhancing the application of the Directive: the Commission is urged to prioritise addressing the transposition issues with the Member States
concerned by means of concrete measures, and to support them in implementing the Directive in a more consistent manner;.
Given the varying degree of effectiveness with which national equality bodies carry out their tasks, Member States are called on to guarantee
sufficient competence and independence in accordance with the provisions of the Directive and national law as well as sufficient resources for
national equality bodies.
The Commission, the Member States and equality bodies are called on to raise awareness about the provisions of the Directive among both
service providers and users in order to implement the principle of equal treatment in this field and reduce the number of breaches of the
Directive left unreported.

2016/2012(INI) - 14/03/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 499 votes to 104, with 81 abstentions, a resolution on the application of Council Directive 2004/113/EC
implementing the principle of equal treatment between men and women in the access to and supply of goods and services.
As a reminder, Directive 2004/113/EC extends the principle of equal treatment of men and women beyond the realm of employment and the
labour market and into the field of access to and supply of goods and services. It prohibits both direct and indirect discrimination based on sex
in the access to and supply of goods and services which are available to the public, in both the public and private sectors.
Concerned that the application of the Directive is not uniform, Members called for the elimination of any remaining gaps in the implementation
of the Directive in some sectors in certain Member States. In this regard, they suggested raising awareness about the provisions of the
Directive to enhance the perceived importance of equal treatment in the field of goods and services.
Insurance, banking and financial sectors: in the Test-Achats ruling, the Court of Justice concluded that Article 5(2) of the Directive works
against the achievement of the objective of equal treatment between men and women. This provision was considered to be invalid with effect
from 21 December 2012 and as a result unisex premiums and benefits are mandatory in all Member States.
Parliament welcomed the implementation of the ruling in national legislation by the Member States and the fact that national legislation has
been amended in a legally binding manner. However, it pointed out that there are still challenges related to the conformity of national

legislation with the ruling, for example in medical insurance schemes and in relation to the full elimination of discrimination on the grounds of
pregnancy and maternity.
Members called on the Commission to monitor the proper and full implementation of the ruling in the Member States in order to safeguard
women against unqualified pregnancy-related costs, as pregnant women should not experience higher costs on the sole grounds of their
pregnancy.
Transport sector and public spaces: Parliament stressed the need to enhance preventive measures against harassment experienced by
women in transport. It called on the Commission and the Member States to facilitate the exchange of best practices in this area and called for
progress to be made regarding the EUs accession to the Council of Europe Convention on preventing and combating violence against women
and domestic violence (Istanbul Convention).
Furthermore, Members regretted the fact that parents and carers of small children still face physical access barriers and other obstacles such
as insufficient access to baby changing facilities on the premises of service providers.
The Commission is called upon to consider all obstacles and constraints to accessibility encountered by women as the main users of public
transportation services and by carers of small children and carers in general.
The collaborative economy: the Commission is asked to integrate the principles of gender mainstreaming and reflect the regulations of the
Directive to safeguard equal treatment of women and men and effectively prevent harassment in the services offered within the collaborative
economy. The zero-tolerance policy towards harassment should be further strengthened in the sector and there is a need to create clear
procedures for users to report cases of abuse.
Differential treatment: the largest share of issues addressed and complaints received by the equality bodies in the Member States concern
differential treatment predominantly within the leisure and entertainment sector. They concern justification of unequal treatment based on the
derogation provided in Article 4(5) that leads, for example, to differential pricing, refusals to provide services and differing conditions of access
for women and men.
Members called for the promotion of forms of positive action in this area.
Enhancing the application of the Directive: the Commission recommended, inter alia:
addressing, as a priority, the transposition issues with the Member States concerned;
ensuring sufficient competence and independence as well as sufficient resources for national equality bodies;
improving access to justice for victims of discrimination by giving independent equality bodies the competences to provide assistance,
including free legal aid, and the right to represent individuals in cases of alleged discrimination;
improving comprehensive, comparable specific data collection on harassment and sexual harassment in the area of equal access to
goods and services;
examining the possibilities to enhance equal treatment of women and men in advertising and to promote best practices in this field.

