Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2076(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU action plan against wildlife trafficking

Subject
3.70.01 Protection of natural resources: fauna, flora, nature, wildlife,
countryside; biodiversity
6.20.02 Export/import control, trade defence
6.20.05 Multilateral and plurilateral economic and trade agreements and
relations

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ENVI

Rapporteur

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Appointed
13/04/2016

BEARDER Catherine
Shadow rapporteur

PETIR Marijana

MELIOR Susanne

DEMESMAEKER Mark

OMARJEE Younous

TAYLOR Keith

AFFRONTE Marco
D'ORNANO Mireille
Committee for opinion
DEVE

Rapporteur for opinion

Development

Appointed
23/06/2016

HAYES Brian
INTA

International Trade

23/05/2016
MCCLARKIN Emma

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

PECH

Fisheries

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
28/06/2016
SERRÃO SANTOS
Ricardo

JURI

Legal Affairs

24/05/2016
CHRYSOGONOS
Kostas

European Commission

Key events

Commission DG

Commissioner

Environment

VELLA Karmenu

26/02/2016

Non-legislative basic document published

12/05/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

13/10/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

18/10/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

23/11/2016

Debate in Parliament

24/11/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

24/11/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

24/11/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

COM(2016)0087

Summary

A8-0303/2016

Summary

T8-0454/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2076(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ENVI/8/06099

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2016)0087

26/02/2016

EC

Committee draft report

PE582.074

06/07/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE589.210

09/09/2016

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

DEVE

PE584.184

12/09/2016

EP

Committee opinion

JURI

PE584.147

28/09/2016

EP

Committee opinion

INTA

PE584.212

04/10/2016

EP

Committee opinion

PECH

PE585.608

11/10/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0303/2016

18/10/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0454/2016

24/11/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)148

22/03/2017

2016/2076(INI) - 26/02/2016 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to propose EU action plan against trafficking in wildlife.
BACKGROUND: wildlife trafficking particularly in elephants and rhinos, corals, pangolins, tigers and great apes - has become one of the
world's most profitable organised crimes. As an example, the illicit ivory trade has more than doubled since 2007, and is over three times
greater than it was in 1998. Between 2007 and 2013, rhino poaching increased by 7000% in South Africa, endangering the very survival of this
species. Sources estimate the profits from such trafficking at between EUR 8 and EUR 20 billion annually.

The EU has an important role to play in tackling this traffic, as Europe is currently a destination market and a hub for trafficking in transit to
other regions. It is also a region from which certain species are sourced for illegal trade.
Numerous measures to combat wildlife trafficking have been adopted under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species
(CITES), a key international treaty regulating the international trade in wildlife, to which the EU became a party in 2015. The EU has already
shown leadership in tackling the illegal trade in natural resources by adopting ambitious policies on timber and fishery products.
The European Parliament called for an Action Plan in a resolution adopted in January 2014. The establishment of an EU Action Plan has also
been supported by many EU Member States, international organisations, NGOs, and concerned businesses at a stakeholder consultation on
the EU approach against wildlife trafficking, launched by the Commission in February 2014.
CONTENT: the EU Action Plan demonstrates that the EU is ready to live up to international expectations and commitments, and that it is
raising the level of its ambition as regards action against the illegal trade in wildlife. It is a major contribution towards the Sustainable
Development Goals set under the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development agreed by heads of state at a UN summit in September 2015.
The EU Action Plan comprises a series of measures to be taken by EU institutions and/or Member States. It provides the impetus and
framework for making better use of existing EU resources. The measures are essentially designed to improve cooperation between all the
players concerned, make more effective use of existing tools and policies, and strengthen synergies between them, so that wildlife trafficking
can be better tackled across the EU and globally.
The measures, which are designed to address a complex problem holistically by involving all relevant organisations, are based on three
priorities:
1) Preventing wildlife trafficking and addressing its root causes:
reduce the demand for and the supply of illegal wildlife products, both within the EU and globally, by supporting specific campaigns
and further limiting ivory trade within and from the EU ;
ensure that rural communities in source countries are more engaged in wildlife conservation, and that they benefit more from it;
engage more actively with relevant business sectors, ranging from those active in wildlife trade or using wildlife products to those that
provide services to the trade;
take multilateral and bilateral measures to tackle corruption, a crucial enabling factor for wildlife trafficking throughout the enforcement
chain.
2) Implementing and enforcing existing rules and combating organised wildlife crime more effectively:
review shortcomings in implementation for all Member States, and develop strategies for tackling them, to ensure that existing rules
are enforced more consistently across the EU;
strengthen the strategic aspect of checks and enforcement by setting enforcement priorities jointly and having Europol and Eurojust
provide dedicated support for cross-border cases;
boost the capacity of all links in the enforcement chain and the judiciary to take effective action against wildlife trafficking in the EU. By
improving inter-agency data flow and by sharing best practice at EU level;
ensure targeted awareness-raising amongst specialists on organised crime, cybercrime and money laundering;
ensure that Member States laws on organised crime cover wildlife trafficking and that appropriate penalties can be imposed for
trafficking ;
improve international cooperation on enforcement through participation in international law enforcement operations, technical
assistance and targeted financial support.
3) Strengthening the global partnership of source, consumer and transit countries against wildlife trafficking:
take measures to step up funding to support developing countries in their efforts to combat wildlife trafficking;
use more efficiently the diplomatic tools of the EU and its Member States and other tools, notably EU trade policy, in relations with key
source, transit and consumer countries and relevant regional organisations;
develop better tools to tackle the links between wildlife trafficking and security that exist in some regions;
use the existing multilateral processes, in international agreements and fora, to keep the issue on the global agenda.
Monitoring and evaluation: the Action Plan covers the five years from 2016 to 2020. The Commission services and the EEAS will establish a
scoreboard to monitor implementation. The Commission will report to the Council and the European Parliament by July 2018 on
implementation of the action plan, Progress made and the success of the action plan in curbing wildlife trafficking will be evaluated in 2020. On
that basis, the Commission will consider what further action is needed.
The Action Plan will supersede Commission Recommendation No 2007/425/EC identifying a set of actions for the enforcement of Regulation
(EC) No 338/97 on the protection of species of wild fauna and flora by regulating trade therein.

2016/2076(INI) - 18/10/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted an own-initiative report by Catherine BEARDER (ADLE, UK) in
response to the Commission communication aiming to propose an EU action plan against wildlife trafficking.
Members recalled that wildlife trafficking is an organised international crime which is estimated to be worth approximately EUR 20 billion
annually, becoming one of the biggest and most profitable forms of organised cross-border crime.
Wildlife trafficking has major negative impacts on biodiversity, existing ecosystems, the natural heritage of the countries of origin, natural
resources and the conservation of species. It is a serious and growing threat to global security.
Welcoming the Commission action plan against wildlife trafficking, Members called on the European Commission, the Member States, the
European External Action Service and the EU agencies Europol and Eurojust to recognise that wildlife crime is a serious and growing threat
and to address it with the greatest political urgency.

The report highlighted the need: (i) for comprehensive and coordinated approaches across policy areas including trade, development, foreign
affairs, transport and tourism, and justice and home affairs; (ii) to provide adequate financial resources in the EU budget and the national
budgets in order to ensure effective implementation of this plan; (iii) to set up an ongoing detailed monitoring and evaluation mechanism to
measure progress.
The Commission is called upon to establish a dedicated Wildlife Trafficking Coordinators office, mirroring the model used to fight human
trafficking.
Preventing wildlife trafficking and addressing its root causes: Members called for a targeted and coordinated series of awareness-raising
campaigns by the EU, third countries, stakeholders and civil society with the aim of reducing demand related to the illegal trade in wildlife
products. They called on the EU to address corruption and the shortcomings of international governance measures across the wildlife
trafficking chain.
The report insisted on the need to provide assistance, guidance and training to authorities in source, transit and destination countries
concerning investigation, enforcement and judicial procedures at local, regional and national level.
The governments of the supply countries are urged to: (i) improve the rule of law and create effective deterrents by strengthening criminal
investigation, prosecution and sentencing; (ii) enact stronger laws treating illicit wildlife trafficking as a serious crime; (iii) commit to a
zero-tolerance policy on corruption.
Making implementation and enforcement more effective: Member States are called upon to put in place wildlife trafficking action plans detailing
enforcement policies and penalties, and to publish and exchange the information on seizures and arrests relating to wildlife crimes, in order to
ensure consistency and harmonised approaches between Member States.
Members proposed that the penalties for wildlife trafficking, especially in areas with vulnerable marine ecosystems or falling within the Natura
2000 network, should be sufficiently severe as to deter potential offenders. They also stressed that in order to avoid the migration of wildlife
criminal networks, the harmonisation of policies and legal frameworks with respect to wildlife crime is particularly important.
Members are urged to set appropriate levels of sanctions for wildlife crime offences and for the Commission to take steps towards establishing
and implementing common minimum rules concerning the definition of criminal offences and sanctions relating to wildlife trafficking.
Strengthening the global partnership: the report called on the Commission and the Member States to step up dialogue and cooperation with
source, transit and destination countries in the wildlife trafficking supply chain and to provide them with technical and economic assistance and
diplomatic support. It called for a trust fund or similar facility to be set up with the objective of safeguarding protected areas and combating
wildlife trafficking and poaching.
The Commission is called upon to include mandatory and enforceable sustainable development chapters in all EU trade agreements and
negotiations, with specific reference to halting illegal trade in wildlife in all economic sectors.
EU as a destination market, source and transit point: Members called on the EU to review the existing legislative framework with a view to
supplementing it with a prohibition on the making available and placing on the market, transport, acquisition and possession of wildlife that has
been illegally harvested or traded in third countries. They suggested:
the adoption of a precautionary approach for the import of hunting trophies from species protected under the EU Wildlife Trade
Regulations;
the full and immediate ban at European level of trade, export or re-export within the EU and to destinations outside the EU of ivory.
The report also called on the EU to strengthen the existing control instruments, including the use of traceability mechanisms. The transport
sector should play a pivotal role, for example by implementing an early warning detection system. The role of public-private partnerships is
highlighted in this regard.
Lastly, the report called for Member States to introduce in-country compliance monitoring with regular checks on traders and permit holders
such as pet shops, breeders, research centres and nurseries, and including monitoring of trades such as fashion, art, medicine and catering,
that may use illegal plant and animal parts.

2016/2076(INI) - 24/11/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
Parliament adopted by 567 votes to 5, with 39 abstentions, a resolution in response to the Commission communication aiming to propose an
EU action plan against wildlife trafficking.
International crime in need of a coordinated approach: Members recalled that wildlife trafficking is an organised international crime which is
estimated to be worth approximately EUR 20 billion annually, becoming one of the biggest and most profitable forms of organised cross-border
crime. There are links between wildlife crime and other forms of organised crime, including money laundering and the financing of militias and
terrorist groups.
Welcoming the Commission action plan against wildlife trafficking, Parliament called on the European Commission, the Member States, the
European External Action Service and the EU agencies Europol and Eurojust to recognise that wildlife crime is a serious and growing threat
and to address it with the greatest political urgency.
The resolution highlighted the need:
for comprehensive and coordinated approaches across policy areas including trade, development, foreign affairs, transport and
tourism, and justice and home affairs;
to provide adequate financial resources in the EU budget and the national budgets in order to ensure effective implementation of this
plan;
to set up an ongoing detailed monitoring and evaluation mechanism to measure progress.
The Commission is called upon to establish a dedicated Wildlife Trafficking Coordinators office, mirroring the model used to fight human
trafficking.

Preventing wildlife trafficking and addressing its root causes: Members called for a targeted and coordinated series of awareness-raising
campaigns by the EU, third countries, stakeholders and civil society with the aim of reducing demand related to the illegal trade in wildlife
products. They called on the EU to address corruption and the shortcomings of international governance measures across the wildlife
trafficking chain.
The governments of the supply countries are urged to:
improve the rule of law and create effective deterrents by strengthening criminal investigation, prosecution and sentencing;
enact stronger laws treating illicit wildlife trafficking as a serious crime;
commit to a zero-tolerance policy on corruption.
Making implementation and enforcement more effective: Member States are called upon to put in place wildlife trafficking action plans and to
publish and exchange the information on seizures and arrests relating to wildlife crimes.
Parliament called on the Member States to:
set appropriate levels of sanctions for wildlife crime offences and for the Commission to take steps towards establishing and
implementing common minimum rules concerning the definition of criminal offences and sanctions relating to wildlife trafficking;
engage with the operators of social media platforms, search engines and e-commerce platforms on the problem of the illegal internet
trade in wildlife. The Commission and the Member States are called upon to strengthen control measures and to develop policies to
address potential illegal activity on the internet.
Strengthening the global partnership: Parliament called on the Commission and the Member States to step up dialogue and cooperation with
source, transit and destination countries in the wildlife trafficking supply chain and to provide them with technical and economic assistance and
diplomatic support. It called for a trust fund or similar facility to be set up with the objective of safeguarding protected areas and combating
wildlife trafficking and poaching.
The Commission is called upon to include mandatory and enforceable sustainable development chapters in all EU trade agreements and
negotiations, with specific reference to halting illegal trade in wildlife in all economic sectors.
EU as a destination market, source and transit point: Parliament underlined that trophy hunting has contributed to large-scale declines in
endangered species. It suggested:
the adoption of a precautionary approach for the import of hunting trophies from species protected under the EU Wildlife Trade
Regulations;
the full and immediate ban at European level of trade, export or re-export within the EU and to destinations outside the EU of ivory.
The resolution also called on the EU to strengthen the existing control instruments, including the use of traceability mechanisms. The transport
sector should play a pivotal role, for example by implementing an early warning detection system. The role of public-private partnerships is
highlighted in this regard.
Lastly, Parliament called for Member States to introduce in-country compliance monitoring with regular checks on traders and permit holders
such as pet shops, breeders, research centres and nurseries, and including monitoring of trades such as fashion, art, medicine and catering,
that may use illegal plant and animal parts.

