Procedure file
Basic information
2016/0205(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Awaiting final decision

EU/Canada Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA)

Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
Geographical area
Canada

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
INTA

Rapporteur

International Trade

Appointed
13/07/2016

PABRIKS Artis
Shadow rapporteur

MOISĂ Sorin

CAMPBELL
BANNERMAN David

SCHAAKE Marietje

MINEUR Anne-Marie

JADOT Yannick

BEGHIN Tiziana
FERRAND Edouard
Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
08/09/2016

TANNOCK Charles
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

09/11/2016
PIRINSKI Georgi

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

10/11/2016
STAES Bart

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Trade

Commissioner
MALMSTRÖM Cecilia

Key events
05/07/2016

Initial legislative proposal published

21/09/2016

Legislative proposal published

18/10/2016

Debate in Council

COM(2016)0443

Summary

10975/2016

Summary

21/11/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

24/01/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/01/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

15/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

15/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

15/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0009/2017

Summary

T8-0030/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0205(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 100-p2; Treaty on the Functioning
of the EU TFEU 207-p4; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 091;
Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 218-p7; Treaty on the Functioning
of the EU TFEU 218-p6a

Stage reached in procedure

Awaiting final decision

Committee dossier

INTA/8/07056

Documentation gateway
Initial legislative proposal

COM(2016)0443

05/07/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

COM(2016)0444

05/07/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

COM(2016)0470

05/07/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

10973/2016

14/09/2016

CSL

Legislative proposal

10975/2016

21/09/2016

CSL

Committee draft report

PE593.835

31/10/2016

EP

Summary

Summary

Committee opinion

AFET

PE592.207

29/11/2016

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE593.983

08/12/2016

EP

PE595.613

13/12/2016

EP

PE595.582

13/01/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0009/2017

30/01/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0030/2017

15/02/2017

EP

Summary

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

ENVI

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

2016/0205(NLE) - 05/07/2016 Initial legislative proposal

PURPOSE: to conclude the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement between Canada of the one part, and the European Union and
its Member States, of the other part.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: on the basis of negotiating directives adopted by the Council, the Commission has negotiated the Comprehensive Economic
and Trade Agreement (CETA) with a view to establishing a state of the art and privileged economic relationship with Canada.
Canada is a strategic partner of the European Union and they have reached an ambitious agreement which will open up new opportunities for
trade and investment for economic actors on both sides of the Atlantic.
Both sides have also underlined through this agreement the importance of economic activity taking place within a framework of clear and
transparent regulation defined by public authorities, and that they consider the right to regulate in the public interest as a basic underlying
principle of the Agreement.
The CETA negotiations were completed and initialled at the level of the Chief Negotiators on 1 August 2014.
It is now necessary to conclude this comprehensive agreement on behalf of the Union.
CONTENT: the Commission called on the Council to adopt a Decision to conclude the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement
(CETA) between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and Canada, of the other part.
Aim of the Agreement: the CETA is a comprehensive trade and investment agreement which contains provisions on:
national treatment and market access for goods,
trade remedies,
technical barriers to trade,
sanitary and phytosanitary measures,
customs and trade facilitation,
subsidies,
investment,
cross-border trade in services,
temporary entry and stay of natural persons for business purposes,
mutual recognition of professional qualifications,
domestic regulation,
financial services,
international maritime transport services,
telecommunications,
electronic commerce,
competition policy,
state enterprises,
monopolies, and enterprises granted special rights or privileges,
government procurement,
intellectual property,
regulatory cooperation,
trade and sustainable development,
trade and labour,
trade and environment,
bilateral dialogues and cooperation,
administrative and institutional provisions,
transparency and dispute settlement.
Specific trade aim: CETA will significantly improve business opportunities for European companies in Canada. With CETA, European
companies will receive the best treatment that Canada has ever offered to any trading partner, thus levelling the playing field on the Canadian
market for EU companies.
By opening markets, CETA should support growth and jobs in the EU and bring further benefits for European consumers. It has the potential to
keep prices down and provide consumers with greater choice of quality products. CETA will not change EU standards. Standards and
regulations related to food safety, product safety, consumer protection, health, environment, social or labour standards etc. will remain
untouched. All imports from Canada will have to satisfy all EU product rules and regulations ? without exception .
Customs duties: CETA will bring tangible benefits to European consumers and companies by eliminating or cutting customs duties?
some of the most far reaching cuts achieved by the EU in a trade agreement. This will provide important market opportunities for
European companies including SMEs.
Services: CETA is by far the most far reaching agreement ever concluded by EU in the area of services and investment. European
firms will have more opportunities to provide specialised maritime transport services like dredging, moving empty containers, and
shipping of certain cargo within Canada. European firms will also have new advantages when it comes to getting investment projects
approved in Canada, protecting their investments and enforcing their rights in case of unfair treatment through a balanced and
effective dispute settlement system. For all services sectors, such as environmental services, telecom and finance, market access is
ensured, both at federal level and - for the first time ? provincial level. In CETA ? as in all its trade agreements ? the EU protects public
services. Again, Canadian investors and service providers will have to respect applicable EU regulations.
Investment protection: CETA includes all the innovations of the EU's new approach on investment and its dispute settlement
mechanism, thus meeting the expectations of stakeholders for a fairer, more transparent and institutionalised system for the
settlement of investment disputes. It introduces important innovations in this field, ensuring a high level of protection for investors,
while fully preserving the right of governments to regulate and pursue legitimate public policy objectives such as the protection of
health, safety or the environment.
Mutual recognition of professional qualifications: the agreement provides a framework to facilitate the mutual recognition of

qualifications in regulated professions such as architects, accountants and engineers. The relevant professional organisations in the
EU and Canada now have a framework that sets out the conditions for the negotiation of mutual recognition agreements for their
respective professions.
Easier transfers of company staff and other professionals: CETA will make it easier for firms to move staff temporarily between the EU
and Canada. This will facilitate European companies' operations in Canada.
Access to Canadian public tenders: Canada has opened up its government tenders to EU companies to a greater extent than with any
of its other trading partners. EU firms will be able to bid to provide goods and services not only at federal level but also to Canadian
provinces and municipalities, the first non-Canadian firms to be able to do so.
Conformity assessments: the EU and Canada have agreed to accept each other?s conformity assessment certificates in areas such
as electrical goods, electronic and radio equipment, toys, machinery or measuring equipment. This means that a conformity
assessment body in the EU can test EU products for export to Canada according to Canadian rules and vice versa.
Better protection for EU innovation and creative works: CETA will create a more level playing field between Canada and the EU on
intellectual property rights. It will strengthen the protection of copyrights (alignment with EU rules on protection of technological
measures and digital rights management as well as on the liability of internet service providers) and enforcement (namely by
foreseeing the possibility of provisional measures and injunctions for intermediaries involved in infringing activities). Canada also
agreed to strengthen its border measures against counterfeit trademark goods, pirated copyright goods and counterfeit geographical
indication goods.
Traditional European products: many medium-sized and smaller businesses trading in agricultural products will benefit from Canada
agreeing to protect 143 geographical indications for high-quality European products, such as Roquefort cheese, balsamic vinegar from
Modena or Dutch Gouda cheese and many others.
Sustainable Development: in CETA, the EU and Canada affirm their commitment to sustainable development. Both agree that trade
and investment should further environmental protection and labour rights ? and not be at their expense. The EU and Canada are
committed to CETA helping to ensure that economic growth, social development and environmental protection are mutually
supportive.
Settling disputes: CETA also sets up a process for settling disputes, including government consultations and a panel of experts.
Institutional component of the Agreement: the Agreement establishes a CETA Joint Committee that will continuously monitor the
implementation, operation and impact of this agreement. The CETA Joint Committee is comprised of representatives of the European Union
and representatives of Canada who will meet once a year or at the request of a Party and will supervise the work of all specialised committees
and other bodies established under this Agreement.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the CETA will be the first to incorporate the new Investment Court System (ICS) in the context of the
Investment Dispute Resolution System. Accordingly, an amount of EUR 500 000 of additional yearly expenditure is foreseen from 2017
onwards (subject to ratification) to finance the permanent structure comprising a First Instance and an Appeal Tribunal.
It is estimated that foregone duty will reach an amount of EUR 311 million upon full implementation of the Agreement.

2016/0205(NLE) - 21/09/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) between Canada, of the one part, and the European
Union and its Member States, of the other part.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: in accordance with a Council Decision, the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) between Canada, of the
one part, and the European Union and its Member States, of the other part, was signed and subject to its conclusion at a later date.
Pursuant to Article 218(7) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, it is appropriate for the Council to authorise the Commission
to approve modifications to Annex 20-A of the Agreement to be adopted by the CETA Joint Committee.
It is now necessary to conclude this Comprehensive Agreement on behalf of the Union.
CONTENT: under this proposal, it is proposed that the Council approve the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) between
Canada, of the one part, and the European Union and its Member States, of the other part, on behalf of the Union.
Objectives of the Agreement: CETA is a comprehensive trade and investment agreement which contains provisions on:
national treatment and market access for goods,
trade remedies,
technical barriers to trade,
sanitary and phytosanitary measures,
customs and trade facilitation,
subsidies,
investment,
cross-border trade in services,
transparency and dispute settlement, etc.
Trade objective: CETA will significantly improve business opportunities for European companies in Canada. It will not change EU standards.
Standards and regulations related to food safety, product safety, consumer protection, health, environment, social or labour standards etc. will
remain untouched.
All imports from Canada will have to satisfy all EU product rules and regulations without exception.
Other important provisions relating to customs duties, services, public procurement and sustainable development are provided (please refer to
the summary of the Commission's initial proposal of 5.7.2016 for further information).

Joint Committee and interpretation provisions: the Agreement provides for the creation of a CETA Joint Committee that will continuously
monitor the implementation, operation and impact of this agreement. The CETA Joint Committee is comprised of representatives of the
European Union and representatives of Canada who will meet once a year or at the request of a Party and will supervise the work of all
specialised committees and other bodies established under this Agreement.
Modifications to Annex 20-A of the Agreement through decisions of the CETA Joint Committee shall be approved by the Commission on behalf
of the Union.
It is also stated that if an opposition is received in the framework of the examination carried out under Article 20.19.1, and no agreement can
be reached between interested parties, the Commission shall adopt its position in accordance with the procedure laid down in Article 57(2) of
Regulation (EU) No 1151/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council on quality schemes for agricultural products and foodstuffs.

2016/0205(NLE) - 30/01/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on International Trade adopted the report by Artis PABRIKS (EPP, LV) on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the
Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) between Canada, of the one part, and the European Union and its Member States,
of the other part.
The committee recommended that the European Parliament give its consent to conclusion of the agreement.
In the explanatory statement accompanying the report, it was recalled that CETA is the first FTA the EU has completed with another major
established OECD economy. It is also the most ambitious agreement both the EU and Canada have concluded.
Canada is a strong trade and investment partner for the European Union. For Canada, the EU is the second most important trading partner
(after the US). Canada is also the fourth-largest investor in the EU.
The main points of the Agreement are as follows:
Trade in goods: CETA will eliminate almost all customs duties, at a value of EUR 400 million for goods originating in the EU. There are,
however, some restrictions to free market access, including a few agricultural products, public services, audio-visual services and transport
services. Several agricultural goods considered as sensitive will either be offered as quotas (i.e. dairy) or excluded completely (poultry and
egg).
Trade in services: CETA will provide new and better market access for European suppliers of services in which EU companies are world
leaders, ranging from maritime services, telecoms, and engineering to environmental services and accountancy. It will make it easier for
service suppliers to travel between the EU and Canada to connect with their customers. CETA will also establish a framework to simplify the
recognition of profession qualifications, e.g. for architects.
All services markets are liberalised except those explicitly excluded. Exclusions include public services such as health care, education and
other social services, as well as water distribution, audio-visual services and some air services.
Public procurement: Canada has opened up its government tenders to EU companies to a greater extent than with any of its other trading
partners. EU firms will be able to bid to provide goods and services not only at the federal level but also at the level of Canadian provinces and
municipalities.
Canada has also agreed to publish all its public tenders in a single procurement website. This will be of particular importance for SMEs in the
EU.
Geographical Indications: Canada agreed to provide protection for over 140 European GIs of food and drink products at a level equivalent to
that provided in the EU. A list of these GIs is included in an Annex of the Agreement, and may be supplemented later with other Geographical
Indications.
Investment: CETA contains a separate investment chapter, including all relevant investment protection provisions. It puts forward a new
investment court system and enhanced rules on investment protection. The new system makes the resolution of investment disputes fairer and
more transparent.
In conclusion, the final agreement represents a balanced and comprehensive outcome of significant economic value for the EU, fully in line
with what was set out in the negotiating mandate and the resolution adopted by the European Parliament.
Beyond the economic aspects, the Agreement is also of geopolitical importance, as it will strengthen relations between the EU and one of its
closest allies.

2016/0205(NLE) - 15/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 408 votes to 254, with 33 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion of the Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (CETA) between Canada, of the one part, and the European Union and its
Member States, of the other part.
In line with the recommendations made by the Committee on International Trade and the opinions of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the
Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety, Parliament gave its
consent to the conclusion of the Agreement.

