Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2270(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Minimum income policies as a tool to tackle poverty

Subject
4.10.05 Social inclusion, poverty, minimum income

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL

Rapporteur

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
25/10/2016

AGEA Laura
Shadow rapporteur

BACH Georges

GUTIÉRREZ PRIETO
Sergio

GERICKE Arne

CALVET CHAMBON
Enrique

PIMENTA LOPES João

ŽDANOKA Tatjana
MÉLIN Joëlle
Committee for opinion
ECON

Rapporteur for opinion

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
12/10/2016

VIEGAS Miguel

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

THYSSEN Marianne

Key events
24/11/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/09/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

06/10/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

23/10/2017

Debate in Parliament

24/10/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

24/10/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0292/2017

Summary

T8-0403/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2270(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/8/07680

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE597.608

09/02/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE601.150

16/03/2017

EP

PE601.226

29/06/2017

EP

PE602.938

28/09/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0292/2017

06/10/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0403/2017

24/10/2017

EP

Summary

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

ECON

2016/2270(INI) - 06/10/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Laura AGEA (EFDD, IT) on minimum income policies as
a tool for fighting poverty.
In 2010, the European Union and its Member States committed themselves to reducing the number of people at risk of poverty and social
exclusion by 20 million by 2020.
According to the Commission, 119 million people in the EU, or nearly 25% of the total population, are at risk of poverty and social exclusion
despite the social benefits they receive. In some Member States this fact is accompanied by persistently high unemployment rates, particularly
among young people.
Minimum income schemes: Member States are encouraged to introduce adequate minimum income systems, accompanied by back-to-work
support measures and education and training programmes tailored to the personal and family situation of the beneficiary in order to support
households with inadequate income and enable them to have a decent standard of living. These schemes are seen to be an active inclusion
tool which promote social participation and inclusion.
According to Members, all those in need to have access to sufficient minimum income schemes to be able to meet their basic requirements,
including for the most excluded such as homeless people. Such an income should be considered in conjunction with the right to access to
universal public and social services.
Given that decent jobs are the best way to combat poverty, Members stressed the importance of boosting growth, investment and job creation.
The report also stressed the importance of the European Semester in encouraging Member States that do not yet have minimum income
schemes to introduce systems of adequate supplementary resources. It also highlighted the importance of the European Semester in
monitoring the adequacy of existing minimum income schemes and their impact on reducing poverty, specifically through the country specific
recommendations.
In addition, the minimum income scheme should be embedded in a strategic approach towards social integration. To this end, Members
recommended that effective social protection measures regarding parts of peoples lives such as the guarantee of housing, health care,
education and training, should be adopted in parallel with the implementation of the minimum income scheme.
The report called for:
the importance of defining appropriate eligibility criteria adapted to the socioeconomic situation in the Member States, to make it
possible to benefit from an adequate minimum income scheme;
the adoption of recommendations and guidelines to address the problem of high non-take-up among those eligible for minimum
income;
specific action to be put in place to determine a minimum income threshold, based on relevant indicators including reference budgets,
in order to safeguard economic and social cohesion and reduce the risk of poverty in all Member States;
due account to be taken of the number of dependants, in particular children or people with high dependence;
the importance of increasing participation in lifelong learning of workers, the unemployed and vulnerable social groups, as well as the
need to improve the level of professional qualifications and the acquisition of new skills.

The minimum income scheme should be temporary and should always be accompanied by active labour market integration measures. When
setting adequate minimum income schemes, Member States should take into account the Eurostat at-risk-of poverty threshold, set at 60% of
national median equivalised disposable income (after social transfers).
Public employment programmes: Members took note of certain public employment programmes, which consist of the option, for those who
want to and are able to work, to have a transitional job, in the public sector or in non-profit private entities or social economy enterprises.
The report stressed that these programmes should (i) promote work with rights, based on collective bargaining and labour legislation; (ii)
contribute to improving workers employability and facilitating their access to the regular labour market.

2016/2270(INI) - 24/10/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 451 votes to 147, with 42 abstentions, a resolution on minimum income policies as a tool for fighting
poverty.
Although Europe is one of the wealthiest regions in the world, recent data have highlighted the rise in poverty and severe material deprivation
in Europe and growing inequalities between Member States.
According to the Commission, 119 million people in the EU, nearly 25% of citizens, are at risk of poverty and social exclusion despite the
social benefits they receive. Around 4 million people across the EU experience homelessness every year. In some Member States this fact is
accompanied by persistently high unemployment rates, particularly among young people.
Minimum income schemes: Parliament called on Member States to introduce adequate minimum income schemes, accompanied by
back-to-work support measures and education and training programmes tailored to the personal and family situation of the beneficiary in order
to support households with inadequate income and enable them to have a decent standard of living. These schemes are seen to be an active
inclusion tool which promote social participation and inclusion.
All those in need to have access to sufficient minimum income schemes to be able to meet their basic requirements, including for the most
excluded such as homeless people. Such an income should be considered in conjunction with the right to access to universal public and social
services. According to Members, the right to social assistance is a fundamental right and that adequate minimum income schemes help people
to live a life in dignity.
Given that decent jobs are the best way to combat poverty, Members stressed the importance of boosting growth, investment and job creation.
The resolution also stressed the importance of the European Semester in monitoring the adequacy of existing minimum income schemes and
their impact on reducing poverty, specifically through the Country Specific Recommendations.
Financing: underlining the importance of adequate public funding to finance minimum income schemes, Parliament called on the Commission
to examine, in the forthcoming revision of the Structural Funds Regulation, and in particular in the framework of the European Social Fund and
the EU Programme for Employment and Social Innovation (EaSI), the funding possibilities for helping every Member State establish a
minimum income scheme.
Strategic approach: Parliament considered that minimum income schemes should be embedded in a strategic approach towards social
inclusion, involving both general policies and targeted measures in terms of housing, healthcare, education and training, social services and
other services of general interest.
Parliament called for:
the importance of defining appropriate eligibility criteria adapted to the socioeconomic situation in the Member States, to make it
possible to benefit from an adequate minimum income scheme;
the adoption of recommendations and guidelines to address the problem of high non-take-up among those eligible for minimum
income;
specific action to be put in place to determine a minimum income threshold, based on relevant indicators including reference budgets,
in order to safeguard economic and social cohesion and reduce the risk of poverty in all Member States;
due account to be taken of the number of dependants, in particular children or people with high dependence;
the importance of increasing participation in lifelong learning of workers, the unemployed and vulnerable social groups, as well as the
need to improve the level of professional qualifications and the acquisition of new skills.
The minimum income scheme should be temporary and should always be accompanied by active labour market integration measures. When
setting adequate minimum income schemes, Member States should take into account the Eurostat at-risk-of poverty threshold, set at 60% of
national median equivalised disposable income (after social transfers).
Public employment programmes: Members took note of certain public employment programmes, which consist of the option, for those who
want to and are able to work, to have a transitional job, in the public sector or in non-profit private entities or social economy enterprises.
The resolution stressed that these programmes should (i) promote work with rights, based on collective bargaining and labour legislation; (ii)
contribute to improving workers employability and facilitating their access to the regular labour market.

