Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2226(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Extension of the provisions of the EC/Uzbekistan Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement to bilateral trade in textiles
See also 2010/0323(NLE)
Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.40.04.06 Relations with central Asian countries
Geographical area
Uzbekistan

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
INTA

Rapporteur

International Trade

Appointed
07/09/2016

ARENA Maria
Shadow rapporteur

QUISTHOUDT-ROWOHL
Godelieve

STARBATTY Joachim

TAKKULA Hannu

LE HYARIC Patrick

BUCHNER Klaus

BORRELLI David
FERRAND Edouard
Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
22/09/2014

LUNACEK Ulrike

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Trade

MALMSTRÖM Cecilia

Key events
10/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

15/11/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/12/2016

Debate in Parliament

14/12/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

A8-0330/2016

Summary

14/12/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/12/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0490/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2226(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure
See also 2010/0323(NLE)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 099-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

INTA/8/07728

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE589.226

20/09/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.254

18/10/2016

EP

PE589.215

25/10/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0330/2016

15/11/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0490/2016

14/12/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)243

04/07/2017

Committee opinion

AFET

2016/2226(INI) - 15/11/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on International Trade adopted an own-initiative report by Maria ARENA (S&D, BE) containing a motion for a non-legislative
resolution on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of a Protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement establishing a
partnership between the European Communities and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Uzbekistan, of the other part,
amending the Agreement in order to extend the provisions of the Agreement to bilateral trade in textiles, taking account of the expiry of the
bilateral textiles Agreement.
Members recalled that this own-initiative report follows on from a report (from December 2011) in which the European Parliament decided to
postpone its decision on consent to the EU-Uzbekistan Textiles Protocol, adopting an interim report to address allegations of the use of child
and forced labour in the cotton harvest in Uzbekistan.
In that interim report, it was concluded that the European Parliament would only consider consent if the ILO observers were granted access by
the Uzbek authorities to undertake close and unhindered monitoring and confirmed that concrete reforms were implemented and have yielded
substantial results in such a way that the practice of forced labour and child labour is effectively in the process of being eradicated at national,
provincial and local level.
Important action has been taken since this time with in particular the decision by the Government of Uzbekistan to authorise the ILO to monitor
the cotton harvest and to engage in broad cooperation with ILO through a Decent Work Country Programme.
Members welcomed the substantial progress that has been made in Uzbekistan since 2013, including the adoption of laws which prohibit the
use of child labour, achieving the almost total eradication of child labour.
Members stated that, because of the efforts by the Government of Uzbekistan in this area, Parliament should give consent to the
EU-Uzbekistan Textiles Protocol. Such consent will constitute a positive sign of encouragement to the Uzbek Government to further pursue its
efforts.
Continued forced labour: Members are concerned about reports by independent monitors of state-led mobilisation of citizens, including the
forced labour of public employees and students, in the 2016 pre-harvest work. They called on the next Uzbek president to raise a new human
rights paradigm by immediately terminating the continued use of forced labour and child labour in the cotton harvest.
The Commission and the EEAS are called upon to provide Parliament regularly with detailed information on the situation in Uzbekistan.

Members called on the Parliament to reserve the right to call on the Commission and the Council to activate Articles 2 and 95 of the
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement so as to take all necessary, general and specific measures if the commitment to eradicate child and
forced labour is not lived up to.
Further reforms: Members called on the Commission and the EU Delegation in Tashkent to contribute through policy dialogue and assistance
programmes to structural reform in Uzbekistan. They stressed that that the assistance provided by the EU over the past years, focusing on the
rule of law and the judiciary, and aiming at triggering reforms and streamlining the work of the Uzbek parliament, must bring tangible results.
EU aid to Uzbekistan should also be aimed at weaning the country off cotton monoculture, and at decreasing its dependence on exports, by
diversifying the economy.
Members also encouraged the Government of Uzbekistan to work towards the ratification and effectively implementation of all 27 GSP+ core
international conventions, in order to be able to apply for GSP+ tariff preferences.
Transition process: Members called on the Commission and the EEAS to monitor the political transition in Uzbekistan and to press for
concrete, measurable human rights improvements.
They stressed that the EU should make full use of the extension of the PCA in order to ensure that the Uzbek authorities are engaged in a
transition process, following the sudden death of the president, that leads to better governance, a strengthening of the rule of law, democratic
reforms and a substantial improvement of the human rights situation. In this regard, Members urged the Uzbek authorities to respect fully their
international commitments as regards the protection of human rights.

2016/2226(INI) - 14/12/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 567 votes to 68, with 69 abstentions, a non-legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion of a Protocol to the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement establishing a partnership between the European Communities and
their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Uzbekistan, of the other part, amending the Agreement in order to extend the
provisions of the Agreement to bilateral trade in textiles, taking account of the expiry of the bilateral textiles Agreement.
Parliament recalled that this non-legislative resolution follows on from a report (from December 2011) in which the European Parliament
decided to postpone its decision due to allegations of the use of child and forced labour in the cotton harvest in Uzbekistan.
In that interim report, it was concluded that the European Parliament would only consider consent if the ILO observers were granted access by
the Uzbek authorities to undertake close and unhindered monitoring and confirmed that concrete reforms were implemented and have yielded
substantial results in such a way that the practice of forced labour and child labour is effectively in the process of being eradicated at national,
provincial and local level.
Important action has been taken since this time with in particular the decision by the Government of Uzbekistan to authorise the ILO to monitor
the cotton harvest and to engage in broad cooperation with ILO through a Decent Work Country Programme.
Substantial progress has been made in Uzbekistan since 2013, including the adoption of laws which prohibit the use of child labour, achieving
the almost total eradication of child labour.
Given the efforts by the Government of Uzbekistan in this area, Parliament should give consent to the EU-Uzbekistan Textiles Protocol. Such
consent will constitute a positive sign of encouragement to the Uzbek Government to further pursue its efforts.
Continued forced labour: Parliament expressed concern about reports by independent monitors of state-led mobilisation of citizens, including
the forced labour of public employees and students, in the 2016 pre-harvest work. It called on the next Uzbek president to raise a new human
rights paradigm by immediately terminating the continued use of forced labour and child labour in the cotton harvest. It shared the view that the
Decent Work Country Programme should be extended beyond 2016, and should be deepened so as to consider the modernisation of the
Uzbek economy and the improvement of employment policy in such areas as occupational health, safety and labour inspection.
The Commission and the EEAS are called upon to provide Parliament regularly with detailed information on the situation in Uzbekistan.
Parliament stated that it reserves the right to call on the Commission and the Council to activate Articles 2 and 95 of the Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement so as to take all necessary, general and specific measures if the commitment to eradicate child and forced labour is
not lived up to.
Further reforms: Parliament called on the Commission and the EU Delegation in Tashkent to contribute through policy dialogue and assistance
programmes to structural reform in Uzbekistan. It stressed that that the assistance provided by the EU over the past years, focusing on the
rule of law and the judiciary, and aiming at triggering reforms and streamlining the work of the Uzbek parliament, must bring tangible results.
EU aid to Uzbekistan should also be aimed at weaning the country off cotton monoculture, and at decreasing its dependence on exports, by
diversifying the economy, which could gradually alleviate the disastrous environmental situation with regard, in particular, to what is left of the
Aral Sea.
Parliament also encouraged the Government of Uzbekistan to work towards the ratification and effectively implementation of all 27 GSP+ core
international conventions, in order to be able to apply for GSP+ tariff preferences.
Transition process: Parliament called on the Commission and the EEAS to monitor the political transition in Uzbekistan and to press for
concrete, measurable human rights improvements.
It stressed that the EU should make full use of the extension of the PCA in order to ensure that the Uzbek authorities are engaged in a
transition process, following the sudden death of the president, that leads to better governance, a strengthening of the rule of law, democratic
reforms and a substantial improvement of the human rights situation.
Lastly, Parliament urged the Uzbek authorities to respect fully their international commitments as regards the protection of human rights.

