Procedure file
Basic information
2016/0103(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure completed

EU/Marshall Islands Agreement: short-stay visa waiver

Subject
6.40.09 Relations with Oceanian countries
7.10.04 External borders crossing and controls, visas
Geographical area
Marshall Islands

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
23/05/2016

GABRIEL Mariya
Shadow rapporteur

DALLI Miriam

STEVENS Helga

HYUSMENOVA Filiz

VERGIAT
Marie-Christine

VALERO Bodil

VON STORCH Beatrix
Committee for opinion
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Migration and Home Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
AVRAMOPOULOS Dimitris

Key events
08/04/2016

Initial legislative proposal published

20/06/2016

Legislative proposal published

07/07/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

08/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

15/11/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

COM(2016)0188

Summary

09775/2016

Summary

A8-0335/2016

Summary

01/12/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

01/12/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

07/02/2017

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

07/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

11/02/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0463/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0103(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 218-p6a; Treaty on the
Functioning of the EU TFEU 077-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/06220

Documentation gateway
Initial legislative proposal

COM(2016)0188

08/04/2016

EC

Summary

Document attached to the procedure

COM(2016)0186

08/04/2016

EC

Legislative proposal

09775/2016

20/06/2016

CSL

Document attached to the procedure

09774/2016

20/06/2016

CSL

Committee draft report

PE583.930

28/09/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0335/2016

15/11/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0463/2016

01/12/2016

EP

Summary

Summary

Final act
Decision 2017/233
OJ L 036 11.02.2017, p. 0003 Summary

2016/0103(NLE) - 08/04/2016 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude the Agreement between the European Union and the Marshall Islands on the short-stay visa waiver.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: Regulation (EU) No 509/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council amended Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 listing
the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of a visa when crossing the external borders of the Member States and those whose
nationals are exempt from that requirement.
Regulation (EU) No 509/2014 was adopted on 20 May 2014 and entered into force on 9 June 2014. It is applied by all Member States with the
exception of Ireland and the United Kingdom.
In July 2014, the Commission presented a Recommendation to the Council to authorise it to start negotiations on visa waiver agreements with

each of the following 17 countries.
The first series of visa waiver agreements were signed on 6 May 2015 (United Arab Emirates), 26 May 2015 (Timor-Leste) and 28 May 2015
(Dominica, Grenada, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Trinidad and Tobago and Vanuatu) and provisionally apply from
the date of signature pending their entry into force. The Council has authorised the signature of a second series of visa waiver agreements
with Tonga (signed on 20 November 2015), Colombia (signed on 2 December 2015), Kiribati (date of signature to be determined) and Palau
(signed on 7 December 2015). These four agreements provisionally apply from the day following the date of signature pending their entry into
force.
The negotiations with the Marshall Islands were opened on 17 December 2014. The agreement was initialled by an exchange of letters
between the chief negotiators on 11 December 2015 (Marshall Islands) and 13 January 2016 (Union).
The Commission considers that the objectives set by the Council in its negotiating directives were attained and that the draft visa waiver
agreement is acceptable to the Union.
CONTENT: the Commission calls on the Council to adopt a decision aiming to approve the Agreement between the European Union and the
Marshall Islands on the short-stay visa waiver.
The final content of the agreement may be summarised as follows:
Purpose and duration of stay: the agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of the
Marshall Islands when travelling to the territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period. A joint
declaration on the interpretation of this period of 90 days in any 180-day period is attached to the agreement.
The agreement takes into account the situation of the Member States that do not yet apply the Schengen acquis in full . As long as they are not
part of the Schengen area without internal borders, the visa waiver confers a right for the nationals of the Marshall Islands to stay for 90 days
in any 180-day on the territory of each of those Member States (currently Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus and Romania), independently of the period
calculated for the whole Schengen area.
A provision has been included in the agreement stating that the Marshall Islands may suspend or terminate the agreement only in respect of
all the Member States of the European Union and that the Union may also only suspend or terminate the agreement in respect of all of its
Member States.
Scope: the visa waiver covers all categories of persons (ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all
kinds of purposes, except for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity. For those travelling to carry out a paid activity, each Member State
and also the Marshall Islands remain free to impose the visa requirement on the citizens of the other Party in accordance with the applicable
Union or national law. A joint declaration is attached to the agreement on the interpretation of the category of persons travelling for the purpose
of carrying out a paid activity.
Territorial application: in the case of France and the Netherlands, the visa waiver would entitle nationals of the Marshall Islands to stay only in
those Member States? European territories.
The provisions of the Agreement do not apply to the United Kingdom or to Ireland.
A joint declaration on the association of Norway, Iceland, Switzerland and Liechtenstein to the implementation, application and development of
the Schengen acquis is annexed to the agreement.
Lastly, the Agreement sets up a Joint Committee of experts for the management of the Agreement.

2016/0103(NLE) - 20/06/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of the Marshall Islands on the short-stay visa waiver.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: Regulation (EU) No 509/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council amended Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 which
lists the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of a visa when crossing the external borders of the Member States and those
whose nationals are exempt from that requirement.
The Regulation, adopted on 20 May 2014, entered into force on 9 June 2014. It is applied by all Member States, with the exception of Ireland
and the United Kingdom.
In July 2014, the Commission presented a Recommendation to the Council to authorise it to start negotiations on visa waiver agreements with
17 countries including the Marshall Islands.
The first series of visa waiver agreements were signed on 6 May 2015 (United Arab Emirates), 26 May 2015 (Timor-Leste) and 28 May 2015
(Dominica, Grenada, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Trinidad and Tobago and Vanuatu) and provisionally apply from
the date of signature pending their entry into force.
The Council has authorised the signature of a second series of visa waiver agreements with Tonga (signed on 20 November 2015), Colombia
(signed on 2 December 2015), Kiribati (date of signature to be determined) and Palau (signed on 7 December 2015).
The negotiations with the Marshall Islands were opened on 17 December 2014 and conducted by exchange of letters. The agreement was
initialled by an exchange of letters between the chief negotiators on 11 December 2015 (Marshall Islands) and 13 January 2016 (Union).
The Commission considered that the objectives set by the Council in its negotiating directives were attained and that the draft visa waiver
agreement is acceptable to the Union.
CONTENT: the Commission proposed that the Council adopt a decision to approve the Agreement between the European Union and the

Marshall Islands on the short-stay visa waiver.
The final content of it can be summarised as follows:
Purpose and duration of the Agreement: the Agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens
of the Marshall Islands when travelling to the territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period. A
joint declaration on the interpretation of this period of 90 days in any 180-day period is attached to the agreement.
The Agreement takes into account the situation of the Member States that do not yet apply the Schengen acquis in full. As long as they are not
part of the Schengen area without internal borders, the visa waiver confers a right for the nationals of the Marshall Islands to stay for 90 days
in any 180-day on the territory of each of those Member States (currently Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus and Romania), independently of the period
calculated for the whole Schengen area.
A provision has been included stating that the Marshall Islands may suspend or terminate the agreement only in respect of all the Member
States of the European Union and that the Union may also only suspend or terminate the agreement in respect of all of its Member States.
Scope: the visa waiver covers all categories of persons (holders of ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passports) travelling for all
kinds of purposes, except for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity. For this latter category, each Member State and also the Marshall
Islands remain free to impose the visa requirement on the citizens of the other Party in accordance with the applicable Union or national law. A
joint declaration is attached to the Agreement on the interpretation of the category of persons travelling for the purpose of carrying out a paid
activity.
Territorial application: in the case of France and the Netherlands, the visa waiver would entitle nationals of the Marshall Islands to stay only in
those Member States European territories.
The provisions of the Agreement shall not apply to the United Kingdom or Ireland.
A joint declaration on the association of Norway, Iceland, Switzerland and Liechtenstein to the implementation, application and development of
the Schengen acquis is attached to the proposal.
Lastly, the Agreement establishes a Joint Committee for the management of the Agreement.

2016/0103(NLE) - 15/11/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the report by Mariya GABRIEL (EPP, BG) on the draft Council decision on
the conclusion, on behalf of the Union, of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of the Marshall Islands on the
short-stay visa waiver.
To recall, the agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of the Marshall Islands when
travelling to the territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period . The visa waiver covers all
categories of persons (ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all kinds of purposes, except for the
purpose of carrying out a paid activity.
The agreement was signed on 27 June 2016 in Brussels. Since that date, the agreement has been applied provisionally.
The report is accompanied by a short justification stating that the agreement represents a culmination of the deepening of relations between
the European Union and the Marshall Islands- which is politically highly significant in the context of the Cotonou Agreement and is an
additional way of stepping up economic and cultural relations and intensifying political dialogue on various issues, including human rights and
fundamental freedoms.
In economic terms, the visa waiver agreement could have positive effects by simplifying travel for businesspeople, facilitating
investment and boosting tourism. The economy of the Republic of Marshall Islands is based primarily on the service sector as well as
some fishing and agriculture. The Marshall Islands has few natural resources and imports far exceed exports. While EU trade relations
with the Republic of Marshall Islands are very limited, they have potential for development. The EU is currently negotiating a
comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement with fourteen Pacific countries, including the Republic of Marshall Islands. The
Rapporteur notes that the visa waiver agreement reaffirms Unions commitment to strengthen partnership with the country.
Politically, the Marshall Islands is a stable presidential democracy in free association with the U.S. The Union's political dialogue with
the Marshall Islands focuses on protecting its vulnerable environment, especially in relation to climate change on the one hand and on
defending human rights and gender issues on the other hand. In this context, the agreement represents a significant step towards
more regular and enhanced political dialogue.
With regard to mobility, the information available indicates that confidence in visa applicants is high and the rate of refusal of visas is
low. In 2014 and 2015, no nationals of the Marshall Islands were arrested for being illegally present in the EU and there has been no
refusal of entry at the EU external border or return decision concerning Marshall Islands nationals. Furthermore, no asylum
applications have been submitted by nationals of the Marshall Islands. In this context, the country does not represent any threat in
terms either of irregular migration or of security and public order.
As regards the implementation and monitoring of the agreement, the rapporteur:
called on the Commission to observe any developments in relation to issues of clandestine immigration, public policy and security, but
also the Unions external relations with the third countries concerned, including, in particular, considerations relating to respect for
human rights and fundamental freedoms;
called on the Commission and the authorities of the Marshall Islands to ensure full reciprocity of the visa waiver, which should permit
equal treatment of all citizens, particularly all citizens of the Union;
encouraged the Commission to review the composition of the joint management committees for future agreements so that Parliament
might be involved in the work of the Joint Committee.
Lastly, the rapporteur also queried the practice of signing visa waiver agreements and applying them provisionally before the European
Parliament has approved them, a practice that is liable to reduce Parliaments room for manoeuvre.

2016/0103(NLE) - 01/12/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 560 votes to 53, with 27 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion, on behalf of the Union, of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of the Marshall Islands on the short-stay
visa waiver.
In line with the recommendation made by the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, Parliament gave its consent to the
conclusion of the agreement.
The Agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of the Marshall Islands when travelling
to the territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period. The visa waiver covers all categories of
persons (ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all kinds of purposes, except for the purpose of
carrying out a paid activity.
The provisions of the Agreement shall not apply to the United Kingdom or Ireland.

2016/0103(NLE) - 07/02/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to approve the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Marshall Islands on the short-stay visa waiver.
NON LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2017/233 on the conclusion, on behalf of the Union, of the Agreement between the European
Union and the Republic of the Marshall Islands on the short-stay visa waiver.
CONTENT: the Council approved the Agreement between the European Union and the Marshall Islands on the short-stay visa waiver , on
behalf of the Union.
To recall, the Commission negotiated on behalf of the Union an agreement with the Marshall Islands on the short-stay visa waiver. This
Agreement was signed and was provisionally applied from 28 June 2016.
The Agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the Union and for the citizens of the Marshall Islands when travelling to the
territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period . The visa waiver covers all categories of
persons (ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all kinds of purposes, except for the purpose of
carrying out a paid activity.
For those travelling to carry out a paid activity, each Member State and also the Marshall Islands remain free to impose the visa requirement
on the citizens of the other Party in accordance with the applicable Union or national law. Member States and the Marshall Islands have
reserved the right to prevent a person entering their respective territories or making a short stay there, if one or several conditions relating to
short stay or entry are not fulfilled.
The Agreement sets up a Joint Committee of experts for the management of the Agreement. The Union is to be represented within that Joint
Committee by the Commission, which will be assisted by the representatives of the Member States.
The Decision constitutes a development of the provisions of the Schengen a cquis in which the United Kingdom and Ireland do not take part.
The latter two Member States are therefore not taking part in the adoption of the Decision and are not bound by it or subject to its application.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 7.2.2017.

