Procedure file
Basic information
2016/0126(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure completed

EU/USA Agreement: protection of personal information relating to the
prevention, investigation, detection, and prosecution of criminal offenses
See also 2016/3004(RSP)
Subject
1.20.09 Protection of privacy and data protection
6.40.11 Relations with industrialised countries
7.40.04 Judicial cooperation in criminal matters
Geographical area
United States

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
12/09/2016

ALBRECHT Jan Philipp
Shadow rapporteur

VOSS Axel

LAURISTIN Marju

STEVENS Helga

IN 'T VELD Sophia

ERNST Cornelia

WINBERG Kristina
Committee for opinion
AFET

JURI

Foreign Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Legal Affairs

11/07/2016
DZHAMBAZKI Angel

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Justice and Consumers

Commissioner
JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
29/04/2016

Initial legislative proposal published

20/05/2016

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

12/07/2016

Legislative proposal published

12/09/2016

Committee referral announced in

COM(2016)0237

Summary

08523/2016

Summary

Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
24/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

28/11/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

30/11/2016

Debate in Parliament

01/12/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

01/12/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

01/12/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

10/12/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0354/2016

Summary

T8-0465/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0126(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament
See also 2016/3004(RSP)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 016-p2; Treaty on the Functioning
of the EU TFEU 218-p6a

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/06417

Documentation gateway
Initial legislative proposal

COM(2016)0237

29/04/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

COM(2016)0238

29/04/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

08557/2016

18/05/2016

CSL

Legislative proposal

08523/2016

12/07/2016

CSL

Committee draft report

PE592.131

21/10/2016

EP

PE592.225

09/11/2016

EP

PE594.012

16/11/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0354/2016

28/11/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0465/2016

01/12/2016

EP

Summary

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

Final act
Decision 2016/2220
OJ L 336 10.12.2016, p. 0001 Summary

JURI

Summary

Summary

2016/0126(NLE) - 29/04/2016 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude, on behalf of the European Union, an Agreement between the United States of America and the European Union on
the protection of personal information relating to the prevention, investigation, detection, and prosecution of criminal offenses.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: in 2006, a High Level Contact Group ("HLCG"), composed of senior officials from the Commission, the Council Presidency
and the U.S. Departments of Justice, Homeland Security and State, was established to explore ways that would enable the EU and the U.S. to
work more efficiently together in the exchange of law enforcement information while ensuring that the protection of personal data and privacy
are guaranteed. The conclusion reached in the HLCG final report of October 20091 was that an international agreement binding both the EU
and the U.S. to apply agreed common data protection principles for transatlantic data transfers in the law enforcement area was the best
option.
On 3 December 2010, the Council adopted a decision authorising the Commission to open negotiations on such an agreement between the
European Union and the United States of America. On 28 March 2011, the Commission opened negotiations. On 8 September 2015, the
Parties initialled the text.
The Agreement should now be concluded on behalf of the European Union.
CONTENT: the Commission proposes that the Council adopt a decision approving, on behalf of the EU, the Agreement between the United
States of America and the European Union on the protection of personal information relating to the prevention, investigation, detection, and
prosecution of criminal offenses.
The Agreement aims to establish a comprehensive framework of data protection principles and safeguards when personal information is
transferred for criminal law enforcement purposes between the U.S., on the one hand, and the EU or its Member States on the other . The
objective is to ensure a high level of personal data protection when transferred between the U.S., on the one hand, and the EU or its Member
States on the other, for law enforcement purposes and, thereby, enhance cooperation between the parties.
Whilst not being itself the legal basis for any transfer of personal information to the U.S., the Agreement supplements, where necessary, data
protection safeguards in existing and future data transfer agreements or national provisions authorising such transfers.
1) Scope and general objectives: the Agreement aims to establish for the first time, a data protection instrument that covers in a
comprehensive and consistent manner all data transfers in a given area (i.e. transatlantic data exchanges in the field of police cooperation and
judicial cooperation in criminal matters).
Furthermore, the Agreement will substantiate in the transatlantic context the general requirements on international data transfers laid down in
the future directive on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of
prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and the free movement of such
data adopted on 14 April 2016.
2) Data protection principles and safeguards: the Agreement covers important principles governing personal data processing as well as key
safeguards and limitations:
Purpose and use limitations: processing (which includes transfers) can take place only for explicit and legitimate purposes within the scope of
the Umbrella Agreement, i.e. the prevention, investigation, detection or prosecution of criminal offences.
The Agreement ensures the application of the safeguards to the entire "life cycle" of a given data set from the original transfer from the EU to
its processing by a U.S. competent authority and vice-versa, as well as its possible further processing by another U.S. authority or, in the case
of a data transfer from the U.S. to a competent authority of the EU or (one of) its Member States, its possible further sharing with/processing
by another EU or Member State authority.
Onward transfer: if a U.S. authority intends to further transfer data it has received from the EU or one of its Member States to a third
country/international organisation not bound by the agreement, it will first have to obtain consent from the law enforcement authority in the EU
which has originally transferred the data to the United States. This rule equally applies where an authority of the EU or one of its Member
States intends to further transfer data it has received from the U.S. to a third country/international organisation.
The provisions expressly take into account the special sensitivity of the transfer in bulk of data of unsuspected persons (e.g. PNR data of every
passenger taking a flight, independently of any specific suspicion). The Agreement requires that any further transfer of personal information
other than in relation to specific cases, may only take place under specific conditions that provide due justification for the onward transfer.
In addition, the Parties to the Agreement must take measures to ensure:
data quality and integrity of information ;
information security and notification of an information security incident ;
effective methods (such as logs) for demonstrating the lawfulness of processing and use of personal information;
specific retention periods in order to ensure that data will not be retained for longer than necessary and appropriate. The retention
periods will be subject to periodic reviews and will have to be published or otherwise made publicly available.
Special categories of data: the processing of personal data revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions or religious or other beliefs,
trade-union membership or personal information concerning health or sexual life, may only take place when appropriate safeguards are in
place in accordance with law (e.g. masking the information after effecting the purpose for which the data was processed or requiring
supervisory approval to access the information).
3) Individual rights: data subjects will be able, for the first time, to avail themselves of rights of general application for any transatlantic transfer
of personal data in the criminal law enforcement sector, these being:
the right to access data and the right to rectification of data which concern them ;
the right to administrative redress if an individual disagrees with the outcome of his or her request for access/rectification of personal

data;
the right to seek judicial redress for the i) denial of access, ii) denial of rectification or iii) unlawful disclosure by the authorities of the
other Party
4) Aspects relating to the application of the Agreement and oversight : measures must be put in pace in order to:
promote accountability of the authorities processing personal data covered by the Agreement;
establish one or more public authorities exercising independent oversight functions and powers, including review, investigation and
intervention;
ensure cooperation between oversight authorities; national contact points shall be established to assist with the identification of the
oversight authority to be addressed in a particular case;
conduct periodic joint reviews of the implementation and effectiveness of the Agreement.
The Agreement will be of unlimited duration (which is justified by the nature of the Agreement as a framework providing for protections and
safeguards, as well as in the light of the possibility of suspending and terminating the Agreement).

2016/0126(NLE) - 12/07/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude, on behalf of the European Union, the Agreement between the United States of America and the European Union on
the protection of personal information relating to the prevention, investigation, detection, and prosecution of criminal offenses.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the Agreement between the United States of America and the European Union on the protection of personal information
relating to the prevention, investigation, detection, and prosecution of criminal offenses was signed on 2 June 2016, subject to its conclusion at
a later date.
The Agreement should now be approved on behalf of the Union.
The Union has competence covering all the provisions of the Agreement.
In particular, the Union adopted Directive (EU) 2016/680 of the European Parliament and of the Council1 on the protection of natural persons
with regard to the processing of personal data by competent authorities for the purposes of the prevention, investigation, detection or
prosecution of criminal offences or the execution of criminal penalties, and on the free movement of such data. This Directive provides
transfers by Member States subject to appropriate safeguards.
CONTENT: the draft Council Decision seeks to approve, on behalf of the European Union, the Agreement between the United States of
America and the European Union on the protection of personal information relating to the prevention, investigation, detection, and prosecution
of criminal offenses.
The Agreement aims at establishing a comprehensive framework of data protection principles and safeguards when personal information is
transferred for criminal law enforcement purposes between the United States, on the one hand, and the European Union or its Member States
on the other. Its objective is to ensure a high level of data protection and, thereby, enhance cooperation between the parties.
Whilst not being itself the legal basis for any transfer of personal information to the United States, the Agreement supplements, where
necessary, data protection safeguards in existing and future data transfer agreements or national provisions authorising such transfers.
The United Kingdom and Ireland are not bound by the rules laid down in the Agreement which relate to the processing of personal data by the
Member States when carrying out activities which fall within the scope of Chapter 4 or 5 of Title V of Part Three of the TFEU where the United
Kingdom and Ireland are not bound by the rules governing the forms of judicial cooperation in criminal matters or police cooperation which
require compliance with the provisions laid down in the Agreement.
Denmark is not bound by the rules laid down in the Agreement or subject to their application which relate to the processing of personal data by
the Member States when carrying out activities which fall within the scope of Chapter 4 or 5 of Title V of Part Three of the TFEU.

2016/0126(NLE) - 28/11/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the report by Jan Philipp ALBRECHT (Greens/EFA, DE) on the draft
Council decision on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Agreement between the United States of America and the
European Union on the protection of personal information relating to the prevention, investigation, detection, and prosecution of criminal
offenses.
The committee recommended that the European Parliament give its consent to the conclusion of the Agreement.
In the short justification accompanying the draft resolution, it is recalled that, following calls by the European Parliament, on 3 December 2010,
the Council adopted a decision authorising the Commission to open negotiations on an Agreement between the European Union and the
United States of America on the protection of personal data when transferred and processed for the purpose of preventing investigating,
detecting or prosecuting criminal offences, including terrorism, in the framework of police cooperation and judicial cooperation in criminal
matters.
On 28 March 2011, the Commission opened negotiations with the U.S. Department of Justice. Over the course of the negotiations, the
Parliament was regularly informed.
The text of the agreement was initialled on 8 September 2015.

Following the adoption by the U.S. Congress of the Judicial Redress Act on 24 February 2016, on 18 July 2016, the Council decided to
request the European Parliament to give its consent to the conclusion of the Agreement.
The purpose of the Agreement is to ensure a high level of protection of the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals, in particular the
right to privacy with the respect to the processing of personal data when personal data are transferred to competent authorities of the
European Union and its Member States and the US for these purposes.
The Agreement contains provisions setting out the basic data protection principles, namely:
purpose and use limitations of personal data transferred;
data quality and integrity and retention periods;
rules on onward transfers, both to domestic authorities of the contracting party and to third country authorities or international
organisation not bound by the Agreement. In the latter case, the prior consent of the law enforcement authority originally transferring
the data is required.
One of the main novelties of the Umbrella Agreement is that it will allow the citizens of each Party to be able to seek judicial redress for the i)
denial of access, ii) denial of rectification or iii) unlawful disclosure by the authorities of the other Party . These rights are exercised pursuant to
the law of the State where they are invoked.
In order to overcome the lack of rights for non-US citizens, the US Congress adopted the Judicial Redress Act on 24 February 2016. This Act
will extend to the citizens of covered countries (e.g. the Member States) some judicial redress grounds provided under the 1974 US Privacy
Act.
Regarding the exemptions possible under Section 552a(j)(2) of the US Privacy Act, the data subject rights conferred by the Umbrella
Agreement are formulated in an unconditional manner and accordingly, the US authorities may not invoke exemptions of the US Privacy Act
for law enforcement databases to deny an effective judicial redress to EU citizens as it is currently the case for law enforcement databases
such as for PNR data or the TFTP.
The Umbrella Agreement provides that the Parties shall have in place one or more public oversight authorities that exercise independent
oversight functions and powers, including review, investigation and intervention, where appropriate on their own initiative. It shall be subject to
periodic joint reviews.
The Rapporteur concluded that the agreement constitutes major progress for the protection of personal data when transferred between the EU
and the US in the context of law enforcement activities.

2016/0126(NLE) - 01/12/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 481 votes to 75, with 88 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Agreement between the United States of America and the European Union on the
protection of personal information relating to the prevention, investigation, detection, and prosecution of criminal offenses.
In line with the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, the European Parliament gave its consent to the conclusion of the
Agreement.
The Agreement aims at establishing a comprehensive framework of data protection principles and safeguards when personal information is
transferred for criminal law enforcement purposes between the United States, on the one hand, and the European Union or its Member States
on the other. Its objective is to ensure a high level of data protection.

2016/0126(NLE) - 02/12/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to conclude, on behalf of the European Union, an Agreement between the United States of America and the European Union on
the protection of personal information relating to the prevention, investigation, detection, and prosecution of criminal offences.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2016/2220 on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Agreement between the
United States of America and the European Union on the protection of personal information relating to the prevention, investigation, detection,
and prosecution of criminal offences.
CONTENT: under this Decision, the Agreement between the United States of America and the European Union on the protection of personal
information relating to the prevention, investigation, detection, and prosecution of criminal offences is approved on behalf of the European
Union. It was signed on 2 June 2016, subject to its conclusion at a later date.
Purpose: the Agreement aims to ensure a high level of protection of personal information and enhance cooperation between the United States
and the European Union and its Member States, in relation to the prevention, investigation, - detection or prosecution of criminal offences,
including terrorism.
For this purpose, this Agreement establishes the framework for the protection of personal information when transferred between the United
States, on the one hand, and the European Union or its Member States, on the other.
This Agreement in and of itself shall not be the legal basis for any transfers of personal information. A legal basis for such transfers shall
always be required. The Agreement supplements data protection safeguards in existing and future data transfer agreements or national
provisions authorising such transfers.
Data protection principles and safeguards: the Agreement covers important principles governing personal data processing as well as key
safeguards and limitations:
purpose and use limitations: the transfer of personal information shall be for specific purposes authorised by the legal basis for the
transfer and the further processing of personal information by a Party shall not be incompatible with the purposes for which it was

transferred;
onward transfer: where a Competent Authority of one Party has transferred personal information relating to a specific case to a
Competent Authority of the other Party, that information may be transferred to a State not bound by the present Agreement or
international body only where the prior consent of the Competent Authority originally sending that information has been obtained;
maintaining quality and integrity of information: the Parties shall take reasonable steps to ensure that personal information is
maintained with such accuracy, relevance, timeliness and completeness as is necessary and appropriate for lawful processing of the
information;
- information security and notification of an information security incident: the Parties shall ensure that they have in place appropriate technical,
security and organisational arrangements for the protection of personal information against all of the following: (a) accidental or unlawful
destruction; (b) accidental loss; and (c) unauthorised disclosure, alteration, access, or other processing;
- the setting of precise retention periods to ensure that data will not be retained longer than is necessary and appropriate. Processing of
personal information revealing racial or ethnic origin, political opinions or religious or other beliefs, trade union membership or personal
information concerning health or sexual life shall only take place under appropriate safeguards in accordance with law.
The Parties shall ensure that any individual is entitled to seek access to his or her personal information and request a rectification if they
consider it to be either inaccurate or has been improperly processed. They shall also ensure that any individual is entitled to seek
administrative redress where he or she believes that his or her request for access has been improperly denied.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 10.12.2016.

