Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2231(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Framework Agreement on Partnership and Cooperation between the
European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and Mongolia, of
the other part
See also 2015/0114(NLE)
Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.30.02 Financial and technical cooperation and assistance
6.40.08 Relations with Asian countries
Geographical area
Mongolia

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
05/10/2016

SCHOLZ Helmut
Shadow rapporteur

KELAM Tunne

BENIFEI Brando

TANNOCK Charles

KYUCHYUK Ilhan

MESZERICS Tamás

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

Key events
05/12/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

12/12/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

15/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

15/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2231(INI)

A8-0383/2016

Summary

T8-0033/2017

Summary

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative
See also 2015/0114(NLE)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 099-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/07638

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE592.260

18/10/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE594.032

15/11/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0383/2016

12/12/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0033/2017

15/02/2017

EP

Summary

2016/2231(INI) - 12/12/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Helmut SCHOLZ (GUE/NGL, DE) containing a motion for a
non-legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the conclusion of the Framework Agreement on Partnership and Cooperation
between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and Mongolia, of the other part.
Members stressed that the EU and Mongolia have many converging positions regarding most major international challenges. They
appreciated the friendly and constructive relations between the EU and Mongolia. Recognising Mongolias specific geographical position
between China, Russia and the countries of Central Asia and North-East Asia, with its importance for stability within the region, Members
stressed the democratic transformation of country and of the challenges that exist in the areas of sustainable development and economy,
finance, good governance, fighting corruption, social security and environmental protection and political polarisation.
The committee went on to highlight certain aspects of the draft framework agreement on partnership and cooperation:
Institutional framework and diplomatic representation: Members began by emphasising the need to further enhance the parliamentary
dimension of EU-Mongolia relations. They regretted the absence from the PCA text of articles that would establish a Parliamentary
Cooperation Committee (PCC) under the PCA to undertake democratic scrutiny of the implementation of the agreement and encouraged
negotiations, therefore, on a new protocol to remedy the situation. The committee was concerned at the fact that diplomatic relations with
Mongolia are currently still being run from the EU Delegation to China. It urged the Council and the VP/HR to turn the European Union Liaison
Office in Ulaanbaatar into a fully-fledged EU Delegation.
Democracy, the rule of law, good governance and human rights: whilst welcoming Mongolias efforts to consolidate democratic progress and
the rule of law, Members encouraged Mongolia to address the outstanding challenges of respect for independence of the judiciary. They
recommended that the country strengthen its cooperation with the EU, the OSCE and the UN on dealing with corruption. They also
recommended that Mongolia, in accordance with the already ratified Convention on the Rights of the Child, legally ban corporal punishment.
Sustainable development: Members welcomed the substantial progress made by Mongolia in economic development and poverty reduction.
They encouraged Mongolia in its efforts to achieve sustained economic growth, but expressed concern at the sharp slowdown in GDP growth,
which in 2011 stood at record levels (17.3 %) but was only 2.3 % in 2015. The committee welcomed the fact that EU development assistance
to the country for 2014-2020 has been more than doubled standing at EUR 65 million, in comparison with the 2007-2013 figure of EUR 30
million. It encouraged Mongolias participation in regional programmes financed by the EU.
Trade and economic relations: Members noted that the EU has become Mongolias third-biggest trading partner, and that Mongolian goods
already enter the EU market virtually tariff-free under the current Generalised Scheme of Preferences. They noted that European investment in
Mongolia has so far remained limited, and encouraged the EU and Mongolia to intensify their trade and investment relations. The committee
stressed the importance of a stable business and legal environment for an increase in investment from the EU.
Regional and global challenges and cooperation: recognising the pivotal role Mongolia can play between the dynamic economies of China,
Russia, South Korea and Japan and the Central Asian countries, and at the same time as an intermediary between Europe and the East Asian
region, Members highlighted Mongolias third neighbour foreign policy concept. This includes relations with the EU, balanced against
constructive and intense relations with its influential strategic partners and direct neighbours Russia and China.
Lastly, the committee noted Mongolias contribution to UN peacekeeping around the world.

2016/2231(INI) - 15/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 619 votes to 63, with 15 abstentions, a non-legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the

conclusion of the Framework Agreement on Partnership and Cooperation between the European Union and its Member States, of the one
part, and Mongolia, of the other part.
Parliament stressed that the EU and Mongolia have many converging positions regarding most major international challenges. It appreciated
the friendly and constructive relations between the EU and Mongolia. Recognising Mongolias specific geographical position between China,
Russia and the countries of Central Asia and North-East Asia, with its importance for stability within the region, Members stressed the
democratic transformation of country and of the challenges that exist in the areas of sustainable development and economy, finance, good
governance, fighting corruption, social security and environmental protection and political polarisation.
Parliament recognised that the democratic transformation which commenced in the 1990s is continuing consistently and acknowledged the
tangible progress made in terms of socio-economic reforms.
Parliament went on to highlight certain aspects of the draft framework agreement on partnership and cooperation:
Institutional framework and diplomatic representation: Parliament began by emphasising the need to further enhance the parliamentary
dimension of EU-Mongolia relations. It regretted the absence from the PCA text of articles that would establish a Parliamentary Cooperation
Committee (PCC) under the PCA to undertake democratic scrutiny of the implementation of the agreement and encouraged negotiations,
therefore, on a new protocol to remedy the situation. Members were concerned at the fact that diplomatic relations with Mongolia are currently
still being run from the EU Delegation to China. They urged the Council and the VP/HR to turn the European Union Liaison Office in
Ulaanbaatar into a fully-fledged EU Delegation.
Democracy, the rule of law, good governance and human rights: whilst welcoming Mongolias efforts to consolidate democratic progress and
the rule of law, Parliament encouraged Mongolia to address the outstanding challenges of respect for independence of the judiciary. It
recommended that the country strengthen its cooperation with the EU, the OSCE and the UN on dealing with corruption. It also recommended
that Mongolia, in accordance with the already ratified Convention on the Rights of the Child, legally ban corporal punishment.
Parliament called for the respect for freedom of the media and freedom of expression in Mongolia and encouraged the Mongolian Parliament
to codify such fundamental rights explicitly and to implement them under strong scrutiny.
Parliament commended the project supported by the EU in support of LGBTI rights in Mongolia even though it is worried by the ongoing
discrimination and harassment committed against the LGBTI community.
Sustainable development: Members welcomed the substantial progress made by Mongolia in economic development and poverty reduction.
They encouraged Mongolia in its efforts to achieve sustained economic growth, but expressed concern at the sharp slowdown in GDP growth,
which in 2011 stood at record levels (17.3 %) but was only 2.3 % in 2015. Parliament welcomed the fact that EU development assistance to
the country for 2014-2020 has been more than doubled standing at EUR 65 million, in comparison with the 2007-2013 figure of EUR 30
million. It encouraged Mongolias participation in regional programmes financed by the EU.
The resolution noted that in 2014 extractive industries in Mongolia accounted for 17 % of GDP and 89 % of the countrys total exports. It
welcomed, in this context, the active participation of Mongolia in the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI), which aims to make
this sector more accountable and transparent.
Trade and economic relations: Parliament noted that the EU has become Mongolias third-biggest trading partner, and that Mongolian goods
already enter the EU market virtually tariff-free under the current Generalised Scheme of Preferences. It noted that European investment in
Mongolia has so far remained limited, and encouraged the EU and Mongolia to intensify their trade and investment relations.
It encouraged further integration of Mongolia into the global and regional economy, within frameworks such as the Prairie Road, the Silk
Road/One Belt One Road or the Trans-Eurasian Belt.
Parliament also stressed the importance of a stable business and legal environment for an increase in investment from the EU.
Regional and global challenges and cooperation: recognising the pivotal role Mongolia can play between the dynamic economies of China,
Russia, South Korea and Japan and the Central Asian countries, and at the same time as an intermediary between Europe and the East Asian
region, Parliament highlighted Mongolias third neighbour foreign policy concept. This includes relations with the EU, balanced against
constructive and intense relations with its influential strategic partners and direct neighbours Russia and China.
Lastly, it noted Mongolias contribution to UN peacekeeping around the world and praised its role in bringing together academics from both
Koreas, China and Russia, as well as for hosting reunions of families split by the division of the Korean peninsula.

