Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2224(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Legitimate measures to protect whistle-blowers acting in the public interest
when disclosing the confidential information of companies and public bodies

Subject
1.20.09 Protection of privacy and data protection
8.50 EU law

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

JURI Legal Affairs
(Associated committee)

Appointed
12/04/2017

ROZIÈRE Virginie
Shadow rapporteur

LE GRIP Constance

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

CAVADA Jean-Marie

CHRYSOGONOS
Kostas

DURAND Pascal

FERRARA Laura
LEBRETON Gilles
Committee for opinion
CONT

Rapporteur for opinion

Budgetary Control

Appointed
19/10/2016

DE JONG Dennis
ECON Economic and Monetary Affairs
(Associated committee)
EMPL

08/11/2016
SCOTT CATO Molly

Employment and Social Affairs

27/10/2016
CASA David

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

23/03/2017
FLANAGAN Luke Ming

ITRE

CULT

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Culture and Education

08/09/2016
KRASNODĘBSKI
Zdzisław

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

05/09/2016
PAGAZAURTUNDÚA
RUIZ Maite

AFCO

Constitutional Affairs

29/09/2016

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
15/09/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

15/09/2016

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

02/10/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

11/10/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

23/10/2017

Debate in Parliament

24/10/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

24/10/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0295/2017

Summary

T8-0402/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2224(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/07745

Documentation gateway
Committee opinion

CULT

Committee draft report

PE601.025

31/05/2017

EP

PE606.289

26/06/2017

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE601.037

13/07/2017

EP

Committee opinion

ENVI

PE604.553

13/07/2017

EP

PE609.386

26/07/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

ECON

PE604.737

06/09/2017

EP

Committee opinion

CONT

PE604.740

07/09/2017

EP

Committee opinion

LIBE

PE606.049

08/09/2017

EP

Committee opinion

AFCO

PE607.865

12/09/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0295/2017

11/10/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0402/2017

24/10/2017

EP

Summary

2016/2224(INI) - 11/10/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Virginie ROZIÈRE (S&D, FR) on legitimate measures to protect
whistle-blowers acting in the public interest when disclosing the confidential information of companies and public bodies.
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs, exercising its prerogative as an associated committee in accordance with Article 54 of the
Rules of Procedure, also gave its opinion on the report.
Whistle-blowers play a central role in reporting unlawful or improper conduct which undermines the general interest and functioning of society.
However, the protection of whistle-blowers is fragmented in Europe, which creates legal uncertainty in cross-border situations in particular.
Protecting whistle-blowers: before the end of 2017, the Commission is invited to present a legislative proposal laying down the protection of
whistle-blowers across the board in both public and private sectors and in national and European institutions.
Citizens and journalists should be given legal protection rather than be prosecuted for disclosing information in the public interest. Also, EU
legislation should establish a clear procedure for the correct handling of alerts and for effective protection of whistle-blowers . Companies that
take fully verified retaliatory action against whistle-blowers may not receive EU funds nor enter into contracts with public bodies.
Members regretted the fact that only a few Member States have sufficiently advanced early warning system protection systems. They called
on Member States that have not yet adopted relevant legislation to do so in the near future and called on the Commission to consider the
creation of a platform for the exchange of good practice in this field between Member States, as well as with third countries.
Member States and EU institutions are invited to promote the positive role that whistle-blowers play, in particular through awareness-raising
and protection campaigns.
Reporting mechanism: Members called for a reliable system for internal reporting to competent authorities and outside the organisation.
Employers should be encouraged to introduce internal reporting procedures and each organisation should establish clear reporting channels
with an independent or impartial person or entity to collect reports. Each worker should be informed of the applicable reporting procedure,
which should ensure confidentiality and a reasonable period of time in the handling of the report.
Protection given to whistle-blowers: Members considered that when a person is recognised as a whistle-blower, measures should be taken to
protect them against any retaliation and for compensation to be granted for any harassment suffered. Retaliation should be penalised and
sanctioned effectively.
Whistle-blowers should also have the opportunity to lodge an application for interim relief to prevent retaliation, such as dismissal.
Members also suggested that clearly regulated means of reporting anonymously should be introduced. The identity of the whistle-blower and
any information enabling his identification may not be revealed without his or her consent and any breach confidentiality of identity should be
subject to criminal penalties and sanctions.
Supporting whistleblowers: Members recalled that, beyond professional risks, whistle-blowers face personal, psychological, social and
financial risks.
For this reason, Members considered it necessary to provide psychological support, the granting of legal aid to whistle-blowers who request it
and lack sufficient resources, as well as the granting of social and financial aid where necessary in the event of civil or judicial proceedings
against them. The Commission is urged look into the feasibility of entrusting the European Ombudsman in this context.
Members called for the establishment of a centralised European authority for the effective protection of whistle-blowers and people who assist
their acts. They also called on Member States to establish independent bodies, with sufficient budgetary resources and appropriate specialists,
responsible for collecting reports, verifying their credibility, following up on the response given and providing guidance to whistle-blowers.
Lastly, the report stressed that investigations into issues raised by whistle-blowers should be conducted independently and as quickly as
possible, while also protecting the rights of individuals that might be implicated by a disclosure.

2016/2224(INI) - 24/10/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 399 votes to 101 with 166 abstentions, a resolution on legitimate measures to protect whistle-blowers
acting in the public interest when disclosing the confidential information of companies and public bodies.
A replacement resolution, tabled by the ENF group, was rejected in plenary by 45 votes to 555 with 66 abstentions.
Parliament recalled that whistle-blowers play a central role in reporting unlawful or improper conduct, which undermines the general interest
and functioning of society. Citizens and journalists should benefit from legal protection rather than prosecution when disclosing information in
the public interest. However, the protection of whistle-blowers is fragmented in Europe, which creates legal uncertainty in cross-border
situations in particular.
Protecting whistle-blowers at EU level: Parliament asked the Commission to present a legislative proposal before the end of 2017, laying down
establishing protection for whistle-blowers across the board in both public and private sectors and in national and European institutions.
EU legislation should establish a clear procedure for the correct handling of alerts and for effective protection of whistle-blowers. It should
ensure that companies that take fully verified retaliatory action against whistle-blowers might not receive EU funds nor enter into contracts with
public bodies.
Parliament called on Member States that have not yet adopted relevant legislation to do so in the near future. It called on the Commission to
monitor Member States provisions on whistle-blowers and to consider the creation of a platform for the exchange of good practice in this field
between Member States, as well as with third countries.
Noting that whistle-blowing should be promoted as an act of good citizenship, Members called for the promotion the positive role that

whistle-blowers play, in particular through awareness-raising and protection campaigns.
Reporting mechanism: bearing in mind the absence of clearly identified means of protection and of safe reporting, Parliament called for a
reliable system for internal reporting to competent authorities and outside the organisation. Employers should be encouraged to introduce
internal reporting procedures and each organisation should establish clear reporting channels with an independent or impartial person or entity
to collect reports. Each worker should be informed of the applicable reporting procedure, which should ensure confidentiality and a reasonable
period of time in the handling of the report.
Protection given to whistle-blowers: Members considered that when a person is recognised as a whistle-blower, measures should be taken to
protect them against any retaliation and for compensation to be granted for any harassment suffered. Retaliation should be penalised and
sanctioned effectively. These provisions should be part of the Commissions draft directive.
Whistle-blowers should also have the opportunity to lodge an application for interim relief to prevent retaliation, such as dismissal. Parliament
condemned the practice of gagging orders, which involve filing or threatening to file lawsuits against the whistle-blower in an effort to bring
about self-censorship or financial, mental or psychological exhaustion.
Members also suggested that clearly regulated means of reporting anonymously should be introduced. The identity of the whistle-blower and
any information enabling his identification may not be revealed without his or her consent and any breach confidentiality of identity should be
subject to criminal penalties and sanctions.
Supporting whistleblowers: beyond professional risks, whistle-blowers face personal, psychological, social and financial risks.
For this reason, Parliament considered it necessary to provide psychological support, the granting of legal aid to whistle-blowers who request it
and lack sufficient resources, as well as the granting of social and financial aid where necessary in the event of civil or judicial proceedings
against them. The Commission is urged look into the feasibility of entrusting the European Ombudsman in this context.
Members called for:
the establishment of a centralised European authority for the effective protection of whistle-blowers and people who assist their acts;
Member States to establish independent bodies, with sufficient budgetary resources and appropriate specialists, responsible for
collecting reports, verifying their credibility, following up on the response given and providing guidance to whistle-blowers.
Lastly, the resolution stressed that investigations into issues raised by whistle-blowers should be conducted independently and as quickly as
possible, while also protecting the rights of individuals that might be implicated by a disclosure.

