Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2312(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

2016 Commission report on Albania

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Albania

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/10/2016

FLECKENSTEIN Knut
Shadow rapporteur

KUKAN Eduard

KYUCHYUK Ilhan

MESZERICS Tamás

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

Key events
13/12/2016

Debate in Council

19/01/2017

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

31/01/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

03/02/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

14/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

15/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

15/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2312(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A8-0023/2017

Summary

T8-0036/2017

Summary

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/08486

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE594.191

25/11/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE595.408

11/01/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0023/2017

03/02/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0036/2017

15/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)358

31/08/2017

2016/2312(INI) - 03/02/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Knut FLECKENSTEIN (S&D, DE) on the Commissions report of 2016
on Albania.
Members recalled that Albania has made progress towards accession to the European Union. They welcomed Albanias continuous progress
on EU-related reforms, in particular the adoption of constitutional amendments paving the way for a deep and comprehensive judicial reform.
Towards the accession of Albania to the EU: Members fully supported Albanias accession to the EU, and called for the accession negotiations
to be opened as soon as there is credible and sustainable progress in the implementation of comprehensive judicial reform. They expected
Albania to consolidate the progress achieved and to maintain the pace of progress on implementation of all key priorities.
Whilst recalling the main priorities for Albania regarding the strengthening of reforms leading to EU accession (particularly in constitutional
affairs and the institutional reform of the judiciary) Members welcomed the new justice reform strategy for 2017-2020, as well as the increased
budgetary means for implementation.
They called for further electoral reforms and called on Albanias political parties to respect both the spirit and the letter of the law on the
exclusion of criminal offenders from public office.
Overall, Members noted the efforts towards a more citizen-friendly public administration and wanted to see further improvements regarding
recruitment and promotion procedures on the basis of merit and performance.
Fight against corruption: Members stressed the need for a more adequate legal framework for conflicts of interest, the regulation of lobbying
and better interinstitutional cooperation, especially between police and prosecution services. They felt that a stricter framework was necessary
for the fight against organized crime and drug trafficking.
Members remained concerned that corruption remains high and prevalent in many areas and continues to pose a serious problem, eroding
peoples trust in public institutions. They were also concerned that key anti-corruption institutions continue to be subject to political interference
and have limited administrative capacities.
Further measures are also necessary to fight against arms trafficking.
Respecting the rights of minorities and asylum seekers: Members urged the competent authorities to continue improving the climate of
inclusion and tolerance for all minorities in the country. They underlined the need to improve access to employment and all public and social
services, education, health, social housing and legal aid for Roma and Egyptians.
Members encouraged Albania to improve further its legal framework for refugees. They called for a further strengthening of cooperation
between the EU and Albania in order to protect refugees' rights in line with international standards and EU fundamental values. In this regard,
they expressed concern at the recent rise in cases of human trafficking, notably unaccompanied minors, women and girls. Members were also
concerned about discrimination against and lack of appropriate measures for the protection of women and girls belonging to disadvantaged
and marginalised groups, as well as LGBTI people.
Media independence: the report reiterated the critical importance of professional and independent private and public service media. It called
for measures to raise the professional and ethical standards of and prevalence of regular work contracts for journalists, to enhance the
transparency of government advertising in the media, and to ensure the independence, impartiality and accountability of the regulatory
authority and the public broadcaster.
Economic performance: Members urged improved enforcement of contracts and better tax collection, and implementation of the judicial
reforms in order to improve the business environment. Further efforts are needed to fight the informal economy.
The report highlighted the fact that the environmental impact of hydropower plants is often not properly assessed. Members advised the
government to consider the establishment of a Vjosa National Park and to abandon plans for new hydropower plants along the Vjosa river and
its tributaries. Overall, more measures are required for further alignment with EU legislation in the field of energy.

Albanian asylum seekers: the report noted that the number of asylum applications lodged by Albanians in EU Member States that have been
deemed unfounded has increased again. It urged the government to take immediate and determined action to address this phenomenon.
Neighbourhood relations: lastly, Members underlined the importance of ensuring good neighbourly relations, which remain essential as an
integral part of the enlargement process. They welcomed Albania's constructive and proactive role in promoting regional cooperation and good
neighbourly relations with other enlargement countries and neighbouring EU Member States. In this regard, they commended both Albania
and Serbia on their continued commitment to improving bilateral relations. However, they noted the recent frictions in relations between
Albania and Greece, and recommended that both sides abstain from actions or statements that could have a negative impact on relations.

2016/2312(INI) - 15/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 546 votes to 85 with 62 abstentions, a resolution on the Commissions report of 2016 on Albania.
Parliament recalled that Albania has made progress towards accession to the European Union. It welcomed Albanias continuous progress on
EU-related reforms, in particular the adoption of constitutional amendments paving the way for a deep and comprehensive judicial reform.
Towards the accession of Albania to the EU: Parliament welcomed the Commissions recommendation for opening accession negotiations with
Albania; fully supports Albanias accession to the EU and called for the accession negotiations to be opened as soon as there is credible and
sustainable progress in the implementation of comprehensive judicial reform and the fight against organised crime and corruption, in order to
keep the reform momentum. It stated that Albania should consolidate the progress achieved and maintain the pace of progress on
implementation of all key priorities.
Whilst recalling the main priorities for Albania regarding the strengthening of reforms leading to EU accession (particularly in constitutional
affairs and the institutional reform of the judiciary), Parliament welcomed the new justice reform strategy for 2017-2020, as well as the
increased budgetary means for implementation.
It called for further electoral reforms and called on Albanias political parties to respect both the spirit and the letter of the law on the exclusion
of criminal offenders from public office.
Overall, Members noted the efforts towards a more citizen-friendly public administration and wanted to see further improvements regarding
recruitment and promotion procedures on the basis of merit and performance.
Fight against corruption: Parliament stressed the need for a more adequate legal framework for conflicts of interest, the regulation of lobbying
and better interinstitutional cooperation, especially between police and prosecution services. It felt that a stricter framework was necessary for
the fight against organized crime and drug trafficking.
Parliament remained concerned that corruption remains high and prevalent in many areas and continues to pose a serious problem, eroding
peoples trust in public institutions. It was also concerned that key anti-corruption institutions continue to be subject to political interference and
have limited administrative capacities.
Further measures are also necessary to fight against arms trafficking.
Respect for minorities: Parliament recalled, among the key priorities, the need to reinforce the protection of human rights, minority rights and
anti-discrimination policies.
It urged the competent authorities to continue improving the climate of inclusion and tolerance for all minorities in the country in line with
European minority protection standards, including by enhancing the role of the State Committee on Minorities. It called on Albania to adopt the
framework law on the protection of minorities and to ratify the European Charter for Regional and Minority Languages.
It underlined the need to improve living conditions for Roma, Egyptians and other ethnic minorities. Members called for concrete actions such
as the civic registration (birth certificates and IDs) of Roma and Egyptians and for continued efforts in improving their access to employment
and all public and social services, education, health, social housing and legal aid. Despite improvements, the inclusion of Roma children in the
education system remains the lowest in the region.
The resolution recommended that the rights of people with Bulgarian ethnicity in the Prespa, Golo Brdo and Gora regions be enshrined in law
and ensured in practice. It encouraged the Albanian government to continue its cooperation with LGBTI civil society organisations.
Asylum and migration: Parliament encouraged Albania to improve further its legal framework for refugees. It called for a further strengthening
of cooperation between the EU and Albania in order to protect refugees' rights in line with international standards and EU fundamental values.
In this regard, Parliament expressed concern at the recent rise in cases of human trafficking, notably unaccompanied minors, women and girls.
Media independence: Parliament reiterated the critical importance of professional and independent private and public service media. It called
for measures to raise the professional and ethical standards of and prevalence of regular work contracts for journalists, to enhance the
transparency of government advertising in the media, and to ensure the independence, impartiality and accountability of the regulatory
authority and the public broadcaster.
Economic performance: Parliament urged improved enforcement of contracts and better tax collection, and implementation of the judicial
reforms in order to improve the business environment. Further efforts are needed to fight the informal economy.
Respect for the environment: Parliament noted with concern the limited nature of the administrative capacities for enforcement of
environmental law, as well as the poor waste management and water management. It underlined the need to improve the quality of
environmental impact assessments, as well as to guarantee public participation and consultation of civil society in relevant projects. Parliament
also expressed concern about the fact that, according to the Commission, 44 of 71 hydropower plant projects are under construction in
protected areas.
Members highlighted that the environmental impact of hydropower plants is often not properly assessed to ensure compliance with
international standards and relevant EU nature legislation. They advised the government to consider the establishment of a Vjosa National
Park along the whole length of the river and to abandon plans for new hydropower plants along the Vjosa river and its tributaries.
Parliament urged further alignment with EU legislation in the field of energy, particularly on the adoption of a national energy strategy, in order

to increase energy independence and efficiency.
Albanian asylum seekers: Parliament noted that the number of asylum applications lodged by Albanians in EU Member States that have been
deemed unfounded has increased again. It urged the government to take immediate and determined action to address this phenomenon.
Neighbourhood relations: lastly, Parliament underlined the importance of ensuring good neighbourly relations, which remain essential as an
integral part of the enlargement process. It welcomed Albania's constructive and proactive role in promoting regional cooperation and good
neighbourly relations with other enlargement countries and neighbouring EU Member States.
In this regard, they commended both Albania and Serbia on their continued commitment to improving bilateral relations and welcomed the
decision by the Albanian authorities to align the countrys foreign policy with Council Decision (CFSP) 2016/1671, renewing the restrictive EU
measures against Russia.
However, Parliament noted the recent frictions in relations between Albania and Greece, and recommended that both sides abstain from
actions or statements that could have a negative impact on relations.

