Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2247(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Banking union - Annual report 2016

Subject
2.50.04 Banks and credit
2.50.10 Financial supervision

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
15/06/2016

HÜBNER Danuta Maria
Shadow rapporteur

DELVAUX Mady

LOONES Sander

TREMOSA I
BALCELLS Ramon

CARTHY Matt

GIEGOLD Sven

VALLI Marco

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

KING Julian

Key events
06/10/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

11/10/2016

Debate in Council

08/11/2016

Debate in Council

06/12/2016

Debate in Council

25/01/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/02/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

14/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

15/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

A8-0019/2017

Summary

15/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

T8-0041/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2247(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/07727

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE589.459

11/10/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE595.751

20/12/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE595.752

20/12/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0019/2017

02/02/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0041/2017

15/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)358

31/08/2017

2016/2247(INI) - 02/02/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Danuta Maria HÜBNER (EPP, PL) on Banking Union Annual Report 2016.
The establishment of the Banking Union (BU) is an indispensable component of a monetary union and a fundamental building block of a
genuine Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). However, further efforts are needed as the Banking Union remains incomplete as long as it
lacks a fiscal backstop and a third pillar on deposit insurance.
Supervision of non-performing loans: Members expressed concern at the high level of non-performing loans (NPLs), as, according to ECB
data, by April 2016 banks in the euro area held EUR 1014 billion in such loans. It is crucial to reduce this level. While welcoming the efforts
already being made to reduce the level of NPLs in some Member States, the Commission is called upon to assist Member States in, among
other things, the establishment of dedicated asset management companies (or bad banks) and enhanced supervision. They reiterated, in this
context, the importance of the ability to sell off NPLs in order to free up capital, which is especially important for bank lending to SMEs. They
welcomed the Commissions proposal on insolvency and restructuring including early restructuring and second chance, in the framework of the
CMU and called on Member States, pending its adoption and in order to complement it, to improve their relevant legislation, especially with
regard to the length of recovery procedures, the functioning of judicial systems, and more generally their legal framework concerning the
restructuring of debt, and to implement necessary sustainable structural reforms aimed at economic recovery in order to tackle NPLs.
Access to finance: Members stressed that reliable access to finance and the sound allocation of capital in Europe's bank-based financing
model depend heavily on robust balance sheets and proper capitalisation, the restoration of which after the financial crises was not and is not
uniformly assured across the Union, thus hampering economic growth. The report stated that the European banking sector plays a key role in
financing the European economy and that this is supported by a strong supervision system. They welcomed, therefore, the intention of the
Commission to maintain the SME Supporting Factor in the upcoming revision of CRD/ CRR and to extend it beyond its current threshold.
Representation in the BCBS: Members stressed the importance of the role of the Commission, the ECB and the EBA in terms of engaging in
the work of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and providing Parliament and the Council with transparent and
comprehensive updates on the state of play of the BCBS discussions. According to Members, the EU should work on having an appropriate
representation in the BCBS, notably for the euro area. The BCBS and other fora should help promote a level playing field at the global level by
mitigating - rather than exacerbating - the differences between jurisdictions.
Bank structural reform: the report underlined the need to introduce a bank structural reform, including the reversal of the burden of proof, to
end the problem of very large institutions being too big to fail.
National Systemic Risk Boards: while welcoming the establishment of National Systemic Risk Boards, Members stressed that the
establishment of the Banking Union reinforces the need to strengthen macro-prudential policy at the European level in order to properly
address potential cross-border spill-overs of systemic risk. The Commission is urged to propose a coherent and effective macro-prudential
supervision in its overall review of the macro-prudential framework in 2017. Members highlighted the need to reduce the institutional

complexity and lengthy process in the interaction between ESRB, ECB/ Single Supervisory Mechanism ( SSM) and national authorities, and
between competent and designated national authorities, in the field of macro-prudential supervision.
They also highlighted that the outcome of the referendum on the UKs membership of the EU requires an assessment of the whole European
System of Financial Supervision (ESFS), including the voting modalities inside the ESAs, in particular of the double majority mechanism
provided under the EBA regulation. They stressed that possible negotiations following the referendum should not lead to an unlevel playing
field between EU and non-EU financial institutions, and should not be used to promote deregulation in the financial sector.
Minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL): Members stressed that proper attention should be paid, in calibrating
and/or phasing in new MREL requirements, to the need to create a market for MREL-eligible liabilities. They highlighted the importance of
maintaining discretion for the resolution authority when setting MREL, and of making sure that banks hold sufficient subordinated and
bail-inable debt.
Members suggested the adoption on legislation with the purpose of clarifying the responsibilities and powers of, respectively, resolution
authorities and competent authorities, concerning early intervention measures to be taken in cases of breaches of MREL requirements.
Deposit insurance: Members reiterated their call for a third pillar in order to complete the Banking Union. They stated that the protection of
deposits is a common concern for all EU citizens. The role of the Commission is to guarantee a level playing field in this area across the EU
and that it should avoid any fragmentation within the internal market.

2016/2247(INI) - 15/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 504 votes to 153 with 28 abstentions, a resolution on Banking Union - Annual Report 2016.
The establishment of the Banking Union (BU) is an indispensable component of a monetary union and a fundamental building block of a
genuine Economic and Monetary Union (EMU). However, further efforts are needed, as the Banking Union remains incomplete as long as it
lacks a fiscal backstop and a third pillar on deposit insurance.
Supervision of non-performing loans: Members expressed concern at the high level of non-performing loans (NPLs), as, according to ECB
data, by April 2016 banks in the euro area held EUR 1014 billion in such loans.
While welcoming the efforts already being made to reduce the level of NPLs in some Member States, Parliament called on the Commission to
assist Member States in, among others, the establishment of dedicated asset management companies (or bad banks) and enhanced
supervision. It reiterated, in this context, the importance of the ability to sell off NPLs in order to free up capital, which is especially important
for bank lending to SMEs.
Members welcomed the Commissions proposal on insolvency and restructuring and called on Member States, pending its adoption, to
improve their relevant legislation, and more generally their legal framework concerning the restructuring of debt, and to implement necessary
sustainable structural reforms aimed at economic recovery in order to tackle NPLs.
Risks associated with sovereign debt: the resolution stressed that an appropriate prudential treatment of sovereign debt might create
incentives for banks to better manage their sovereign exposures. The European framework should enable market discipline in delivering
sustainable policies and providing high- quality and liquid assets for the financial sector and safe liabilities for governments.
Access to finance: Members stressed that reliable access to finance and the sound allocation of capital in Europe's bank-based financing
model depend heavily on robust balance sheets and proper capitalisation, the restoration of which after the financial crises was not and is not
uniformly assured across the Union, thus hampering economic growth. They stated that the European banking sector plays a key role in
financing the European economy and that this is supported by a strong supervision system. They welcomed, therefore, the intention of the
Commission to maintain the SME Supporting Factor in the upcoming revision of CRD/ CRR and to extend it beyond its current threshold.
Systemically important banks: Parliament notes the risks stemming from too-big-to-fail financial institutions. It is committed to working swiftly
on the legislative proposals for the implementation in the Union of measures designed to reduce risk that have been approved at the
international level (particularly total loss-absorbing capacity, central clearing of derivatives, and capital and leverage ratio add-on for globally
systemic banks). It welcomed efforts to pursue improvements to the stress-testing framework.
Representation in the BCBS: Members stressed the importance of the role of the Commission, the ECB and the EBA in terms of engaging in
the work of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and providing Parliament and the Council with transparent and
comprehensive updates on the state of play of the BCBS discussions. According to Members, the EU should work on having an appropriate
representation in the BCBS, notably for the euro area. The BCBS and other fora should help promote a level playing field at the global level by
mitigating - rather than exacerbating - the differences between jurisdictions.
National Systemic Risk Boards: while welcoming the establishment of National Systemic Risk Boards, Members stressed that the
establishment of the Banking Union reinforces the need to strengthen macro-prudential policy at the European level in order to properly
address potential cross-border spill-over of systemic risk. The Commission is urged to propose a coherent and effective macro-prudential
supervision in its overall review of the macro-prudential framework in 2017. Members highlighted the need to reduce the institutional
complexity and lengthy process in the interaction between ESRB, ECB/ Single Supervisory Mechanism ( SSM) and national authorities, and
between competent and designated national authorities, in the field of macro-prudential supervision.
Parliament also highlighted that the outcome of the referendum on the UKs membership of the EU requires an assessment of the whole
European System of Financial Supervision (ESFS), including the voting modalities inside the ESAs, in particular of the double majority
mechanism provided under the EBA regulation. It stressed that possible negotiations following the referendum should not lead to an unlevelled
playing field between EU and non-EU financial institutions, and should not be used to promote deregulation in the financial sector.
Resolution: Parliament recalls the need to adhere to state aid rules when dealing with future banking crises. The exception of extraordinary
public support must be both precautionary and temporary in nature and cannot be used to offset losses that an institution has incurred or is
likely to incur in the near future. It calls for the definition of efficient procedures between the SRB and the Commission for decision-making in
the event of a resolution.
Furthermore, the Commission needs to assess whether the SRB and the national resolution authorities are equipped with sufficient early

intervention powers and sufficient early intervention instruments to prevent disruptive outflows of banks capital and loss-absorbing capacity
during a crisis.
Minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL): Parliament notes the Commission proposals introducing into Pillar 1 a
minimum total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) for global systemically important banks, in line with international standards.
Members stressed that proper attention should be paid, in calibrating and/or phasing in new MREL requirements, to the need to create a
market for MREL-eligible liabilities. They recalled the importance of maintaining discretion for the resolution authority when setting MREL, and
of making sure that banks hold sufficient subordinated and bail-inable debt.
Deposit insurance: Parliament reiterated its call for a third pillar in order to complete the Banking Union. It stated that the protection of deposits
is a common concern for all EU citizens. The role of the Commission is to guarantee a level playing field in this area across the EU and that it
should avoid any fragmentation within the internal market.

