Procedure file
Basic information
2016/0338(CNS)

CNS - Consultation procedure
Directive

Procedure completed

Tax dispute resolution mechanisms in the European Union

Subject
3.45.04 Company taxation

Key players
Committee responsible

European Parliament

ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
24/11/2016

THEURER Michael
Shadow rapporteur

SCHWAB Andreas

GILL Neena

RUOHONEN-LERNER
Pirkko

URBÁN CRESPO
Miguel

URTASUN Ernest
KAPPEL Barbara
Committee for opinion
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union

Key events
25/10/2016

Legislative proposal published

01/03/2017

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

08/06/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

14/06/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

05/07/2017

Debate in Parliament

06/07/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

06/07/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading
Act adopted by Council after consultation

COM(2016)0686

Summary

A8-0225/2017

Summary

T8-0314/2017

Summary

10/10/2017

of Parliament

10/10/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

14/10/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0338(CNS)

Procedure type

CNS - Consultation procedure

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Directive

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 115

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/08350

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0686

25/10/2016

EC

Document attached to the
procedure

SWD(2016)0343

26/10/2016

EC

Document attached to the
procedure

SWD(2016)0344

26/10/2016

EC

PE599.832

28/02/2017

NP

Committee draft report

PE599.632

02/03/2017

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE602.778

30/03/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for
plenary, 1st reading/single
reading

A8-0225/2017

14/06/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0314/2017

06/07/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text
adopted in plenary

SP(2017)538

06/09/2017

Reasoned opinion

SE_PARLIAMENT

Summary

Final act
Directive 2017/1852
OJ L 265 14.10.2017, p. 0001 Summary

2016/0338(CNS) - 25/10/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish an effective dispute resolution mechanism regarding double taxation for the proper functioning of the internal market.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Directive.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the Council adopts the act after consulting Parliament but without being obliged to follow the
latters opinion.
BACKGROUND: one of the main problems encountered by businesses operating across borders is double taxation. There are already
mechanisms in place that deal with the resolution of double taxation disputes. These are the mutual agreement procedures that are provided
in double taxation conventions (DTCs) entered into by Member States as well as in the Union Arbitration Convention on the elimination of

double taxation in connection with the adjustment of profits of associated enterprises. The Commission considers that these mechanisms
should be improved with respect to access for taxpayers to those mechanisms, coverage, timeliness and conclusiveness. Moreover, the
traditional methods of resolving disputes no longer fully fit with the complexity and risks of the current global tax environment.
In its communication of June 2015 on an action plan for a fair and efficient corporate tax system in the EU, the Commission indicated that its
proposal for a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base (CCCTB), which will be adopted on the same day as this proposal, is a major step
towards a better tax environment for business.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the preferred option is to set up a mandatory binding effective dispute resolution mechanism, i.e. a mutual
agreement procedure combined with an arbitration phase, with a clear time limit and an obligation of result for all Member States.
In terms of economic impact, the proposal will reduce the compliance and litigation burden for companies operating in the EU as regards their
cross-border activities.
CONTENT: the draft directive aims to improve existing double taxation dispute resolution mechanisms in the EU in order to establish a fair and
efficient tax system that increases legal certainty. It focuses on business and companies, the main stakeholders affected by double taxation
situations. It builds on the existing Union Arbitration Convention, which already provides for a mandatory binding arbitration mechanism, but
broadens its scope to all cross-border situations subject to double income tax imposed on business profits. However, it adds an explicit
obligation regarding results for Member States as well as a clearly defined time limit. On the other hand, situations that involve double
non-taxation or cases of fraud, wilful default or gross-negligence are excluded.
In line with the Union Arbitration Convention, the draft Directive allows for a Mutual Agreement Procedure, initiated by the complaint of the
taxpayer, under which the Member States shall freely cooperate and reach an agreement on the double taxation dispute within 2 years. If the
Mutual Agreement Procedure fails, it automatically leads to a dispute resolution procedure with the issuance of a final mandatory binding
decision by the competent authorities of the Member States involved.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the estimated impact of the proposal on the Union budget is EUR 0.097 million (human resources and
administrative expenditure). This will be met within available resources.

2016/0338(CNS) - 14/06/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted, following a special legislative procedure (Parliaments consultation), the report by
Michael THEURER (ALDE, DE) on the proposal for a Council directive on double taxation dispute resolution mechanisms in the European
Union.
The committee called on the European Parliament to approve the Commission proposal as amended.
Double taxation represents one of the biggest obstacles to the Single Market as it creates barriers for cross-border investments.
The report noted that attempts to eliminate double taxation have often led to "double non-taxation", where, through the practice of base
erosion and profit shifting, companies have managed to have their profits taxed in those Member States which have corporate taxes of close to
zero. That ongoing practice distorts competition.
Furthermore, current dispute resolution procedures are too long, costly and often do not result in an agreement, with some cases receiving no
acknowledgement at all.
For this reason, it is essential that mechanisms available in the Union ensure an effective, rapid and enforceable resolution of double taxation
disputes and the effective and timely elimination of the double taxation at stake, with regular and effective communication to the taxpayer.
The main amendments are as follows:
CCCTB: in order to shape a fair, clear and stable tax environment and to reduce taxation disputes within the internal market, at least some
minimum convergence in corporate tax policies is required. Members considered that the introduction of a common consolidated corporate tax
base (CCCTB) as proposed by the Commission is the most effective way of eliminating the risk of double corporate taxation.
Stricter deadlines: the report stated that the competent authorities of the Member States concerned shall take a decision on the acceptance
and admissibility of the complaint of a taxpayer within three months (as opposed to six) of the receipt of the complaint and inform that taxpayer
and the competent authorities of the other Member States in writing of their decision within two weeks. In this regard, Member States should
dedicate an adequate level of human, technical and financial resources.
Sanctions: when a taxpayer submits a complaint requesting the resolution of the double taxation, Members considered that it is vital not to
impose sanctions on the taxpayer in relation to the same matters until a binding decision is taken.
Central contact point: in order to create a harmonised and transparent framework of the double taxation dispute resolution mechanisms,
Members proposed that the Commission shall host a central contact point in all official languages of the Union, which is easily accessible to
the public with up-to-date contact information for each competent authority and a full overview of applicable Union legislation and tax treaties.
Review: the Commission shall review the application of this Directive after five years with regard to the possible extension of its scope to cover
all cross-border double taxation situations and double non-taxation, and if appropriate, an amending legislative proposal.

2016/0338(CNS) - 06/07/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 535 votes to 73, with 25 abstentions, following the consultation procedure, a legislative resolution on the
proposal for a Council directive on double taxation dispute resolution mechanisms in the European Union.
Double taxation represents one of the biggest obstacles to the Single Market as it creates barriers for cross-border investments.
Members noted that attempts to eliminate double taxation have often led to "double non-taxation", where, through the practice of base erosion

and profit shifting, companies have managed to have their profits taxed in those Member States which have corporate taxes of close to zero.
That ongoing practice distorts competition.
Furthermore, current dispute resolution procedures are too long, costly and often do not result in an agreement, with some cases receiving no
acknowledgement at all.
For this reason, Parliament considered it essential that mechanisms available in the Union ensure an effective, rapid and enforceable
resolution of double taxation disputes and the effective and timely elimination of the double taxation at stake, with regular and effective
communication to the taxpayer.
Parliament approved the Commission proposal subject to the following amendments:
Complaints (time delays and procedure): any taxpayer subject to double taxation shall be entitled to submit a complaint to each of the
competent authorities of the Member States concerned:
each competent authority shall acknowledge receipt of the complaint in writing and notify the competent authorities of the other
Member States concerned within two weeks of receipt of the complaint;
the competent authorities of the Member States concerned shall take a decision on the acceptance and admissibility of the complaint
of a taxpayer within three months of the receipt of the complaint (compared to six months) and inform that taxpayer and the competent
authorities of the other Member States in writing of their decision within two weeks;
where the competent authorities of the Member States concerned decide to accept the complaint, they shall endeavour to eliminate
the double taxation by mutual agreement procedure within one year starting from the last notification of one of the Member States
decision on the acceptance of the complaint. The period of one year may be extended by up to three months.
The competent authorities shall inform the taxpayer of the reasons for the rejection of the complaint. In the event of rejection of the complaint,
the taxpayer shall be entitled to make an appeal to either competent authority.
Central contact point: in order to create a harmonised and transparent framework of the double taxation dispute resolution mechanisms,
Parliament proposed that the Commission shall host a central contact point in all official languages of the Union, which is easily accessible to
the public with up-to-date contact information for each competent authority and a full overview of applicable Union legislation and tax treaties.
Advisory committee: the Advisory Committee shall consist of a chairman, two representatives from each competent authority concerned and
one or two independent persons appointed by each competent authority.
Members suggested that the Commission check the information concerning the independent persons of standing nominated by Member
States. Where the Commission has doubts as to the independence of the nominated persons, it can request a Member State to provide
additional information and, if doubts remain, it may ask the Member State to remove that person from the list and appoint someone else.
Review: the Commission shall review the application of this Directive after five years with regard to the possible extension of its scope to cover
all cross-border double taxation situations and double non-taxation, and if appropriate, an amending legislative proposal.
Lastly, Parliament stated that the introduction of a common consolidated corporate tax base (CCCTB) as proposed by the Commission is the
most effective way of eliminating the risk of double corporate taxation.

2016/0338(CNS) - 10/10/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish an effective dispute resolution mechanism regarding double taxation in the EU.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Directive (EU) 2017/1852 on tax dispute resolution mechanisms in the European Union.
CONTENT: the Directive strengthens the mechanisms used to resolve disputes arising from the interpretation of agreements on the
elimination of double taxation. The mechanisms currently provided for in bilateral tax treaties and in the Union Arbitration Convention might not
achieve the effective resolution of such disputes in all cases in a timely manner. The aim is to encourage investment by putting in place a more
favourable tax environment and reducing costs for businesses.
Scope: while the scope of the Union Arbitration Convention is limited to disputes over transfer pricing and the allocation of profits to permanent
establishments, the Directive shall apply to all tax payers that are subject to taxes on income and capital covered by bilateral tax treaties and
the Union Arbitration Convention.
Tax dispute settlement mechanisms: the purpose of the Directive is to establish a procedure under which, as a first step, the case is submitted
to the tax authorities of the Member States concerned, with a view to settling the dispute by using a mutual agreement procedure. In the
absence of an agreement within a certain time frame, the case should be submitted to a dispute resolution procedure.
Any affected person shall be entitled to submit a complaint on a question in dispute to each of the competent authorities of each of the
Member States concerned, requesting the resolution thereof. Each competent authority shall acknowledge receipt of the complaint within 2
months from the receipt of the complaint and shall inform the competent authorities of the other Member States.
Where the competent authorities of the Member States concerned accept a complaint, they shall endeavour to resolve the question in dispute
by mutual agreement within 2 years, starting from the last notification of a decision of one of the Member States on the acceptance of the
complaint. The period of 2 years may be extended by up to 1 year at the request of a competent authority.
In case of rejection of the complaint by at least one Member State or in the absence of an amicable agreement, the person may request the
establishment of an Advisory Commission composed of representatives of the tax authorities concerned and independent persons.
The competent authorities of the Member States concerned may agree to set up an alternative dispute resolution commission instead of an
Advisory Commission to deliver an opinion on how to resolve the question. The competent authorities of the Member States may also agree to
set up an Alternative Dispute Resolution Commission in the form of a committee that is of a permanent nature.
An Advisory Commission or Alternative Dispute Resolution Commission shall deliver its opinion to the competent authorities of the Member
States concerned no later than 6 months after the date on which it was set up.

The competent authorities of each of the Member States concerned shall take a decision on the acceptance or rejection of the complaint within
6 months of the receipt. The competent authorities shall inform the affected person and the competent authorities of the other Member States
of their decision without delay. The competent authority may decide to resolve the question in dispute on a unilateral basis, without involving
the other competent authorities of the Member States concerned. In such case, the relevant competent authority shall notify the affected
person and the other competent authorities of the Member States concerned without delay, following which the proceedings under this
Directive shall be terminated.
Each Member State shall provide that its competent authority shall notify the final decision on the resolution of the question in dispute to the
affected person without delay. The final decision shall be binding on the Member States concerned.
By 30 June 2024 at the latest, the Commission shall assess the implementation of the Directive and report to the Council.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 3.11.2017. The Directive shall apply to any complaint submitted from 1 July 2019 onwards relating to questions of
dispute relating to income or capital earned in a tax year commencing on or after 1 January 2018. Competent authorities of Member States
concerned may however agree to apply this Directive with regard to any complaint that was submitted prior to that day or to earlier tax years.
TRANSPOSITION: no later than 30.6.2019.

