Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Directive

2016/0050(COD)

Procedure completed, awaiting publication in Official Journal

Recognition of professional qualifications in inland navigation
Repealing Directive 91/672/EEC
Repealing Directive 96/50/EC 1994/0196(SYN)
Subject
3.20.04 Inland waterway transport
4.15.06 Professional qualifications, recognition of qualifications

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
TRAN Transport and Tourism
(Associated committee)

Rapporteur

Appointed
02/05/2016

MEISSNER Gesine
Shadow rapporteur

MUSELIER Renaud

APARDEL Claudia

VAN DALEN Peter

KYLLÖNEN Merja

TAYLOR Keith

AIUTO Daniela
ARNAUTU
Marie-Christine
Committee for opinion
EMPL Employment and Social Affairs
(Associated committee)
IMCO

JURI

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Rapporteur for opinion

24/05/2016
BOYLAN Lynn
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Legal Affairs

15/03/2016
BERGERON Joëlle

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Mobility and Transport

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the
Regions

Key events

Appointed

Commissioner
BULC Violeta

18/02/2016

Legislative proposal published

COM(2016)0082

Summary

11/04/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

06/06/2016

Debate in Council

15/09/2016

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

10/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

10/11/2016

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

28/11/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0338/2016

Summary

11/07/2017

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE609.546
GEDA/A/(2017)007961

13/11/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/11/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

04/12/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

05/12/2017

Final act signed

12/12/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0425/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0050(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Directive
Repealing Directive 91/672/EEC
Repealing Directive 96/50/EC 1994/0196(SYN)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 091-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed, awaiting publication in Official Journal

Committee dossier

TRAN/8/05827

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0082

18/02/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0035

18/02/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0036

18/02/2016

EC

PE582.398

13/07/2016

EP

Committee opinion

JURI

Summary

Committee draft report
Committee opinion

PE585.776

13/09/2016

EP

PE585.569

13/10/2016

EP

PE592.172

17/10/2016

EP

A8-0338/2016

28/11/2016

EP

GEDA/A/(2017)007961

30/06/2017

CSL

T8-0425/2017

14/11/2017

EP

EMPL

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Coreper letter confirming interinstitutional
agreement
Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

Summary

Summary

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

Research document

Briefing

2016/0050(COD) - 18/02/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to facilitate labour mobility in the inland waterway transport sector by ensuring that skilled workers qualifications are recognised
throughout the Union.
PROPOSED ACT: Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: inland waterway transport (IWT) is a cost-saving and energy-efficient transport mode that could be used more efficiently to
support the European Unions energy efficiency, growth and industrial development goals. However, its contribution is hampered by difficulties
in terms of labour mobility, persistent vacancies and skills mismatches, which continue in spite of attempts by the sector to tackle the problems
at bilateral and multilateral level.
Varying minimum requirements for professional qualifications across the Member States do not provide sufficient assurance for individual
countries as regards the recognition of professional qualifications of crew from other Member States, in particular as this also affects the safety
of navigation.
Based on over 19 years of experience with the implementation of Directives 96/50/EC and 91/672/EEC, the Commission considered it
necessary to propose to extend the scope of recognition of professional qualifications beyond the level of boat masters to all crew involved in
the operation of vessels, including on the Rhine river.
The initiative responds to long-standing calls from the sector and Member States to revise the existing outdated legal framework and replace it
with a modern, competence-based framework. It has been prepared under the Commissions policy framework for promoting inland waterway
transport, NAIADES II.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the policy option introducing minimum competence requirements for boatmen and boat masters , including
examination standards for training institutes, has been chosen. This option is preferred as it offers a more effective way to improve labour
mobility than the do nothing and the voluntary measures options.
CONTENT: the proposal repeals Directive 91/672/EEC and Directive 96/50/EC and provides for gradual phasing-in with transitional measures
and extends the requirements to cover all crew in inland navigation in the EU, including on the Rhine river .
This Directive lays down the conditions and procedures for the certification of the qualifications of persons involved in the operation of a vessel
for the carriage of goods and passengers by inland waterways in the Union, as well as the recognition of such qualifications in the Member
States.
Union certificate of qualification: the proposal lays down:
the obligation for deck crew members, persons in charge of emergency situations on board passenger vessels and persons involved
in the bunkering of liquefied natural gas-fuelled vessels to hold certificates of qualification proving their qualifications;
that boat masters sailing in circumstances presenting a particular safety hazard should hold a specific authorisation, in particular, for
sailing large convoys, sailing liquefied natural gas-fuelled vessels, sailing in conditions of reduced visibility, sailing on waterways with a
maritime character or sailing on waterways with specific risks for navigation. In order to obtain such authorisation, boat masters should
be required to demonstrate additional competences.
For ensuring safety of navigation, Member States should identify waterways with a maritime character, in accordance with harmonised criteria.
They should also have the possibility to identify the waterways entailing specific risks for navigation.
Member States should issue certificates of qualification only to persons that have the minimum levels of competence, the minimum age, the
minimum medical fitness and the navigation time required for obtaining a specific qualification.
Recognition: certificates of qualification, service record books and logbooks, issued in accordance with the Rhine Navigation Personnel

Regulation under the Revised Convention for Rhine Navigation which lay down requirements that are identical to those of this Directive should
be valid on all Union inland waterways.
To instil the necessary confidence among the Member States in the mechanism for mutual recognition, the requirements in terms of quality
standards with respect to assessment of competences and skills, recognition of training programmes.
The proposal includes information on certified qualifications in a database kept by the Commission or a designated body is necessary to
streamline the exchange of information between the Member States and to ensure efficient implementation of the initiative.
DELEGATED ACT: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2016/0050(COD) - 28/11/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Transport and Tourism adopted the report by Gesine MEISSNER (ADLE, DE) on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the recognition of professional qualifications in inland navigation and repealing Council Directive
96/50/EC and Council Directive 91/672/EEC.
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, exercising its prerogative as an associated committee in accordance with Rule 54 of the
Rules of Procedure, also gave its opinion on the report.
The committee recommended that Parliaments position adopted in first reading should amend the Commission as follows:
Scope: Members excluded from the scope of the Directive:
crafts used by armed forces, forces maintaining public order, civil defence services, waterway administrations, fire services and other
emergency services;
crafts navigating seasonally within a Member State on isolated lakes not connected to a navigable inland waterway of another
Member State.
Deck crew members: the text states that this means persons involved in the operation of a vessel carrying out tasks related to controlling the
operation of the vessel, marine engineering, communication, safety, health and environmental protection, cargo and passenger handling.
Exemptions: holding Union certificates of qualification should not be made compulsory on national inland waterways that are not linked to a
navigable inland waterway of another Member State.
Inland waterway stretches presenting specific risks: a high frequency of accidents at a specific location on the river should form part of the
criteria for determining whether a particular stretch of water involves a specific risk. For stretches with specific risks, it shall be compulsory for
a limited number of journeys to be carried out on the stretch concerned.
Recognition of certificates issued by a third country: Members suggested confining such recognition to third countries that are linked to a
navigable inland waterway of a Member State. When a Member State considers that a third country no longer complies with the requirements
of this Article, it shall notify the Commission immediately, giving substantiated reasons for its contention.
Assessment of competences: the demonstration of compliance with the standards of competence shall include a practical examination for
obtaining, inter alia, a certificate of qualification for navigational safety experts on passenger vessels. Member States shall issue a practical
examination certificate to applicants who have passed the practical examination. They shall recognise, without further requirements or
assessments, practical examination certificates issued by competent authorities in other Member States.
Practical examinations may take place on board a vessel or on a simulator. As far as possible, nationals of other Member States must be
guaranteed access to simulators.
Examiners must be qualified to assess the competences and the corresponding knowledge and skills and must not have a conflict of interest.
Training programmes: Member States may approve training programmes at national level on condition that such programmes meet the
common criteria defined by CESNI (Comité Européen pour lÉlaboration de Standards dans le Domaine de Navigation Intérieure) . Where the
conditions laid down in the Directive are met, the Commission should refer to CESNI standards when adopting implementing and
delegated acts in accordance with this Directive.
The competence acquisition and assessment activities, and the administration of Union certificates of qualifications, services record books and
logbooks, should be evaluated at intervals of no more than six years by independent bodies.
Essential competence requirements: Members also added other competences which they considered essential for obtaining the qualification of
boatmaster:
assist the vessels management in providing services to passengers, know and initiate the application of relevant passenger rights,
including special measures for persons with reduced mobility;
know traffic regulations and basic knowledge of the carriage of dangerous goods;
give instructions and monitor all tasks undertaken by other members of the deck crew;
ensure good communication at all times with other ships and ground authorities and be able to communicate in elementary English.
Member States must apply the Directive within 4 years of entry into force.

2016/0050(COD) - 14/11/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 609 votes to 32, with 44 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the recognition of professional qualifications in inland navigation and repealing Council Directive

96/50/EC and Council Directive 91/672/EEC.
Scope: Parliament excluded from the scope of the Directive:
persons sailing for sporting or recreational purposes or involved in the operation of bins that do not move independently, and in navigation by
the armed forces or emergency services;
persons navigating in Member States which do not have inland waterways connected to the waterway network of another Member State and
who: (i) make only limited journeys in a small geographical area; or ii) operate only on a seasonal basis.
Members of the deck crew: the amended text specified that these persons should also be able to carry out tasks related to the control of the
operation of the vessel, the transport of passengers, the naval machinery, the communication, the health and safety, and the protection of the
environment.
Exemptions: Member States shall have the possibility of not making Union certificates of qualification compulsory on national inland waterways
that are not linked to a navigable inland waterway of another Member State
A Member State that grants exemptions may issue certificates of qualification to persons under conditions that differ from the general
conditions set out in this Directive, provided that such certificates ensure an adequate level of safety. The recognition of those certificates in
other Member States shall be governed by Directive 2005/36/EC or Directive 2005/45/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, as
applicable.
Member States shall inform the Commission of the exemptions granted in accordance with paragraph 1. The Commission shall make
information on those granted exemptions publicly available.
Special risk stretches: Member States that identify stretches of inland waterways with specific risks in their territories shall specify the
additional competence required from boatmasters navigating on those stretches of inland waterways, and shall specify the means necessary
to prove that such requirements are met. Member States should, subject to the consent of the Member State in which a stretch of inland
waterway with specific risks is located, be allowed to assess the competences necessary for navigating on that specific stretch of inland
waterway.
Recognition of certificates issued by a third country: the text provides that any third country may submit to the Commission a request for
recognition of certificates, service record books or logbooks that have been issued by its authorities. When a Member State considers that a
third country no longer complies with the requirements of this Article, it shall notify the Commission immediately, giving substantiated reasons
for its contention.
Every eight years, the Commission shall assess the compliance of the certification system in the third country with the requirements laid down
in this Directive.
Competence assessment: a practical examination certificate shall be issued to applicants who have passed the practical test where that
examination took place on a simulator approved by another Member State. Certificates issued by the competent authorities of other Member
States shall be recognised without further requirements or assessments. Examiners and qualified supervisors shall be free from conflicts of
interest.
Any Member State may temporarily suspend a Union certificate of qualification where it considers that such suspension is necessary for
reasons of safety or public order.
Approval of training programmes: Member States may establish training programmes leading to diplomas or certificates that demonstrate
compliance with the standards of competence are approved by the competent authorities of the Member States in whose territory the relevant
education or training institute conducts its training programmes.
The quality assessment and assurance of the training programmes shall be ensured by the application of a national or international quality
standard.
Member States shall recognise any diplomas or certificates awarded after the completion of training programmes approved by other Member
States.
Member States shall issue certificates of qualification only to persons who have the minimum levels of competence, the minimum age, the
medical fitness and the navigation time required for obtaining a specific qualification.
Where the conditions laid down in the Directive are met, the Commission shall refer to CESNI (Comité Européen pour lÉlaboration de
Standards dans le Domaine de Navigation Intérieure) standards when adopting implementing and delegated acts in accordance with this
Directive.
Radio operating skills: the amended text stressed the importance of skills to operate the on-board radio to ensure the safety of inland
navigation. It is important that Member States encourage any deck crew member who might need to navigate the craft to have training and
certification regarding the operation of such radios. For boatmasters and helmsmen, such training and certification is compulsory
Essential competence requirements: Parliament also added other competences which they considered essential for obtaining the qualification
of boatmaster:
give instructions to other deck crew members and supervise the tasks they exercise;
apply knowledge of the applicable rules on the manning of craft, including knowledge on resting time and on deck crew members
composition;
sail and manoeuvre, ensuring the safe operation of the craft in all conditions on inland waterways, including in situations that involve
high traffic density or where other craft carry dangerous goods;
plan and ensure the safe transport of and care for passengers during the voyage, including providing direct assistance to disabled
persons and persons with reduced mobility.
Passenger navigation expert: every applicant shall be able to communicate in elementary English.
Member States must apply the Directive within 4 years of entry into force.

