Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2077(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Minimum standards for the protection of farm rabbits

Subject
3.10.04.02 Animal protection

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AGRI

Rapporteur

Agriculture and Rural Development

Appointed
23/02/2016

ECK Stefan
Shadow rapporteur

POLČÁK Stanislav

KADENBACH Karin

KUŹMIUK Zbigniew

ROHDE Jens

HÄUSLING Martin

ZULLO Marco
LOISEAU Philippe

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Agriculture and Rural Development

ANDRIUKAITIS Vytenis Povilas

Key events
12/05/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

25/01/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/01/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/03/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/03/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

14/03/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/03/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information

A8-0011/2017

Summary

T8-0077/2017

Summary

Procedure reference

2016/2077(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AGRI/8/06481

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE587.419

18/07/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE589.149

19/09/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0011/2017

30/01/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0077/2017

14/03/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)390

22/08/2017

2016/2077(INI) - 30/01/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted the own-initiative report by Stefan ECK (GUE/NGL, DE) on minimum
standards for the protection of farm rabbits.
Members recalled that the majority of rabbits are farmed for meat production, with over 340 million rabbits slaughtered for meat ever year.
There are grave concerns regarding the poor welfare, high stress levels and high mortality and morbidity rates of farm rabbits in Europe.
The report suggested phasing out battery and barren wire cages in rabbit farming, and make the conversion to alternative methods of rabbit
farming such as park farming or hutch systems, with grass as the main feed, which improve the comfort and welfare of farmed rabbits.
Member States and the Commission are called upon to undertake further research for the purpose of finding the best possible housing
systems to improve animal welfare in different types of farming and to preserve the quality and safety of rabbit meat imports by undertaking
thorough controls and inspections when these imports enter the Union.
Rabbit rearing: Members expressed concern that rabbits reared and fattened for meat production in the EU are kept in old-fashioned cages
which do not conform to modern farming requirements. Rabbits are extremely sensitive animals and can suffer from a wide range of welfare
problems and diseases caused by inappropriate breeding conditions. Few therapeutic tools are available to rabbit farmers and veterinarians to
tackle the health problems that arise.
The report pointed out that rabbits weaned for fattening and does kept in alternative collective park systems, which typically provide 750
cm²/rabbit for growers and 800 cm²/rabbit for does, benefit from more space for movement. However, such systems will cause farms to incur
costs, which needs to be taken into account by providing financial assistance to farmers who opt for this system for raising rabbits.
Transport and slaughtering: given that transport is a stressful experience for rabbits, Members stressed that rabbits should be fed and watered
before long-distance transport and be provided with adequate food, water and space in transit, and that transport times should be as limited as
possible. Moreover, rabbits should be fully stunned before slaughter.
Antimicrobial resistance: due to species-specific diseases and the high mortality rate inherent to rabbit farming, widespread routine
administration of antibiotics has become a necessity, which can lead to an increase in antimicrobial resistance.
Members stressed that antibiotics must be used only for treatment purposes and should be followed by the appropriate withdrawal period
before slaughter. Member States should be encouraged to gradually phase out the use of conventional battery cages across the EU.
In conclusion, the report encouraged the Commission, in the light of the high number of rabbits being farmed and slaughtered in the EU and
the severe animal welfare implications of the systems currently used for keeping rabbits, to draw up a roadmap towards financially sustainable
minimum standards for the protection of farm rabbits. This roadmap should consist, as a minimum, of:
the drafting of guidelines containing good practices and establishing animal welfare rules for rabbits;
a Commission recommendation, taking into consideration existing national measures, containing, where appropriate, proposals for a
common EU approach, in particular with regard to rabbit health, welfare and housing.
Lastly, the report encouraged Member States and the Commission to give dedicated budgetary support in order to undertake scientific
research into health of farm rabbits, taking into account the request for a move towards other systems of production.

2016/2077(INI) - 14/03/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 410 votes to 205, with 59 abstentions, a resolution on minimum standards for the protection of farm

rabbits.
An alternative motion for a resolution, tabled by the EPP group, was rejected in plenary by 235 votes to 388, with 62 abstentions.
Parliament recalled that the majority of rabbits are farmed for meat production, with over 340 million rabbits slaughtered for meat ever year.
There are grave concerns regarding the poor welfare, high stress levels and high mortality and morbidity rates of farm rabbits in Europe.
The resolution suggested:
phasing out battery and barren wire cages in rabbit farming, and make the conversion to alternative methods of rabbit farming such as
park farming or hutch systems, with grass as the main feed, which improve the comfort and welfare of farmed rabbits;
undertaking further research for the purpose of finding the best possible housing systems to improve animal welfare;
preserving the quality and safety of rabbit meat imports by undertaking thorough controls and inspections when these imports enter
the Union.
Rabbit rearing: given that rabbits are extremely sensitive animals and can suffer from a wide range of welfare problems and diseases caused
by inappropriate breeding conditions, it is necessary to increase efforts tackle the lack of research and investment in medicines.
Members pointed out that rabbits weaned for fattening and does kept in alternative collective park systems, which typically provide 750
cm²/rabbit for growers and 800 cm²/rabbit for does, benefit from more space for movement. However, such systems will cause farms to incur
costs, which needs to be taken into account by providing financial assistance to farmers who opt for this system for raising rabbits.
The resolution stated that any compulsory measure initiated will have to be backed up by the budget necessary to support rabbit breeders. A
specific heading should be included for the purpose of promoting the consumption of rabbit meat.
Moreover, the Commission is invited to use scientific evidence and findings as the basis when proposing measures for housing requirements
for breeding does and for rabbits reared for meat production.
Transport and slaughtering: Parliament stressed that rabbits should be fed and watered before long-distance transport and be provided with
adequate food, water and space in transit, and that transport times should be as limited as possible. Moreover, rabbits should be fully stunned
before slaughter.
Antimicrobial resistance: due to species-specific diseases and the high mortality rate inherent to rabbit farming, widespread routine
administration of antibiotics has become a necessity, which can lead to an increase in antimicrobial resistance.
Parliament stressed that antibiotics must be used only for treatment purposes and should be followed by the appropriate withdrawal period
before slaughter. It emphasised that reducing the use of antibiotics, can only be achieved if stronger emphasis is placed on the management
and monitoring of rabbit farms.
In the light of the high number of rabbits being farmed and slaughtered in the EU and the severe animal welfare implications of the systems
currently used for keeping rabbits, Parliament suggested drawing up a roadmap towards financially sustainable minimum standards for the
protection of farm rabbits. This roadmap should consist, as a minimum, of:
the drafting of guidelines containing good practices and establishing animal welfare rules for rabbits;
a Commission recommendation, taking into consideration existing national measures, containing, where appropriate, proposals for a
common EU approach, in particular with regard to rabbit health, welfare and housing.
Lastly, the resolution encouraged Member States and the Commission to give dedicated budgetary support in order to undertake scientific
research into health of farm rabbits, taking into account the request for a move towards other systems of production.

