Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2181(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2015 discharge: European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA)

Subject
8.70.03.05 2015 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
CONT

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

Appointed
05/08/2016

AYALA SENDER Inés
Shadow rapporteur

ZDECHOVSKÝ Tomáš

FITTO Raffaele

ALI Nedzhmi

DE JONG Dennis

JÁVOR Benedek

VALLI Marco
KAPPEL Barbara
Committee for opinion
PECH

Rapporteur for opinion

Fisheries

Appointed
19/09/2016

ENGSTRÖM Linnéa

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
11/07/2016

Non-legislative basic document published

04/10/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

22/03/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

29/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

26/04/2017

Debate in Parliament

27/04/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

27/04/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st

COM(2016)0475

Summary

A8-0100/2017

Summary

reading/single reading
27/04/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

29/09/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2181(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/07492

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2016)0475

11/07/2016

EC

Summary

N8-0119/2016
OJ C 449 01.12.2016, p. 0093

13/09/2016

CofA

Summary

Committee draft report

PE593.855

31/01/2017

EP

Supplementary non-legislative basic
document

05873/2017

07/02/2017

CSL

PE592.433

28/02/2017

EP

PE599.884

06/03/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0100/2017

29/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0167/2017

27/04/2017

EP

Summary

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

Committee opinion

PECH

Amendments tabled in committee

Summary

Final act
Budget 2017/1666
OJ L 252 29.09.2017, p. 0220 Summary

2016/2181(DEC) - 11/07/2016 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2015, as part of
the 2015 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA).
CONTENT: the organisational governance of the EU consists of institutions, agencies and other EU bodies whose expenditure is included in
the general budget of the Union.
The EU's operational expenditure of these institutions takes different forms, depending on how the money is paid out and managed.
From 2014 onwards, the Commission classifies its expenditure as follows:
Direct management: the budget is implemented directly by the Commission services.
Indirect management: the Commission confers tasks of implementation of the budget to bodies of EU law or national law, such as the
EU agencies.
Shared management: under this method of budget implementation tasks are delegated to Member States. About 80 % of the
expenditure falls under this management mode covering such areas as agricultural spending and structural actions.
This Commission document concerns the EU's consolidated accounts for the year 2015 and details how spending by the EU institutions and
bodies was carried out. The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide financial information on the activities of the institutions, agencies
and other bodies of the EU from an accrual accounting and budgetary perspective.
It is the responsibility of the Commission's Accounting Officer to prepare the EU's consolidated annual accounts and ensure that they present
fairly, in all material aspects, the financial position, the result of the operations and the cash flows of the EU institutions and bodies, including
the European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA), with a view to granting discharge.

Discharge procedure: the final step of a budget lifecycle is the discharge of the budget for a given financial year. It represents the political
aspect of the external control of budget implementation and is the decision by which the European Parliament, acting on a Council
recommendation, "releases" the Commission (and other EU bodies) from its responsibility for management of a given budget by marking the
end of that budget's existence. The European Parliament is the discharge authority within the EU.
The discharge procedure may produce three outcomes: (i) the granting; (ii) postponement or; (iii) the refusal of the discharge.
The final discharge report including specific recommendations to the Commission for action is adopted in plenary by the European Parliament
and are subject to an annual follow up report in which the Commission outlines the concrete actions it has taken to implement the
recommendations made.
Each agency is subject to its own discharge procedure, including European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA).
The European Fisheries Control Agency: EFCA, which is located in Vigo (ES) was created by Council Regulation (EC) No 768/2005. Its main
task is to organise the operational coordination of fisheries control and inspection activities by the Member States in order to ensure effective
and uniform application of the rules of the common fisheries policy.
As regards the EFCAs accounts, these are presented in detail in the document on the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for
2015:
Commitment appropriations:
-

committed: EUR 9 million;

-

paid: EUR 9 million;

-

carried-over: 0.

Payment appropriations:
-

committed: EUR 10 million;

-

paid: EUR 9 million;

-

carried-over: EUR 1 million.

2016/2181(DEC) - 13/09/2016 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Court of Auditors report on the annual accounts of the European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA) for the
year 2015, together with the Agencys reply.
CONTENT: in accordance with the tasks conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the Court
presents to the European Parliament and to the Council, in the context of the discharge procedure, a Statement of Assurance as to the
reliability of the annual accounts of each institution, body or agency of the EU, and the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying
them, on the basis of an independent external audit.
This audit focused on the annual accounts of the European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA). The Agencys main task is to organise the
operational coordination of fisheries control and inspection activities by the Member States in order to ensure an effective and uniform
application of the rules of the common fisheries policy.
Statement of assurance: pursuant to the provisions of Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the Court
has audited:
the annual accounts of the Agency, which comprise the financial statements and the reports on the implementation of the budget for
the financial year ended 31 December 2015, and
the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying those accounts.
Opinion on the reliability of the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the Agencys annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects, its
financial position as at 31 December 2015 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the
provisions of its Financial Regulation and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer.
Opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the transactions underlying the annual
accounts for the year ended 31 December 2015 are legal and regular in all material respects.
The report made a series of observations on the budgetary and financial management of the Agency, accompanied by the latters response.
The main observations may be summarised as follows:
The Courts observations:
internal controls: the Court stated that the Agency is not yet fully complying with Internal Control Standards (e.g. on information and
communication).
The Agencys reply:
internal controls: the Agency noted that it assesses yearly the level of implementation of the internal control standards and reports the
result in its annual report. The main developments expected for each standard are also reported in the annual report.
Lastly, the Court of Auditors report also contained a summary of the Agencys key figures in 2015:
Budget: EUR 9.2 million (payment appropriations).
Staff: 64 including officials, temporary and contract staff and seconded national experts.

2016/2181(DEC) - 07/02/2017 Supplementary non-legislative basic document
Having examined the revenue and expenditure accounts for the financial year 2015 and the balance sheet as at 31 December 2015 of the
European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA), as well as the Court of Auditors' report on the annual accounts of the Agency for the financial
year 2015, accompanied by the Agency's replies to the Court's observations, the Council recommended the European Parliament to give a
discharge to the Executive Director of the Agency in respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2015.
The Council welcomed the Court's opinion that, in all material respects, the Agency's annual accounts present fairly its financial position as at
31 December 2015 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the provisions of the
Agency's Financial Regulation, and that the underlying transactions for 2015 are legal and regular in all material respects.
Nevertheless, it made the following remark:
internal control: the Council regretted that the Agency is not yet fully complying with certain Internal Control Standards and invited it to
take the appropriate measures to bring its controls in compliance with these standards.

2016/2181(DEC) - 29/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Inés AYALA SENDER (S&D, ES) on discharge in respect of the implementation of
the budget of the European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA) for the financial year 2015.
The committee called on the European Parliament to grant the Executive Director of the Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of
the agencys budget for the financial year 2015.
Noting that the Court of Auditors stated that it had obtained reasonable assurance that the annual accounts of the Agency for the financial year
2015 were reliable and that the underlying transactions were legal and regular, Members called on Parliament to approve the closure of the
Agencys accounts. They made, however, a number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is granted,
in addition to the general recommendations that appear in the draft resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU
agencies:
Agencys financial statements: Members noted the final budget of the Agency for the financial year 2015 was EUR 9 217 000
representing no change compared to the previous year. The entire budget of the Agency derives from the Union budget.
Budget and financial management: Members welcomed the implementation of the e-Prior modules for electronic tendering, ordering
and invoicing in cooperation with the Commissions Directorate-General for Informatics (DG DIGIT). They noted that the implemented
modules were to be progressively used in 2016, leading to an increase in electronic workflows, and subsequently greater efficiency,
reliability of the data and audit trail. Members also noted that the effective budget cuts imposed on the Agency impaired its ability to
fulfil its objective of organising operational coordination of control and inspection activities of the Member States in order to ensure the
effective and uniform application of the rules of the Common Fisheries Policy. They stressed the importance of the Agencys role in
implementing the reformed Common Fisheries Policy and in achieving the objectives thereof, particularly in the light of the landing
obligation and demands in terms of the monitoring, control and surveillance of fisheries activities. However, the reduction of the
Agencys resources and capacity may have as a consequence the weakening of fisheries controls and a concomitant increase in
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. Moreover, the new migration policy of the Union and, in particular, the creation of the
European Border and Coast Guard, as part of an overall improvement in coast guard functions, entail new tasks of inspection and
better cooperation for the Agency, which will require increased funding and technical and human resources.
Members also made a series of observations regarding commitments, carry-overs, transfers, procurement, recruitment procedures, the
prevention and management of conflicts of interests, internal audits and performance.
Lastly, Members acknowledged that the Agency commenced a process of cooperation with the European Maritime Safety Agency and the
European Border and Coast Guard Agency in the preparation and the implementation of the pilot project entitled Creation of a European
Coastguard function. They noted that the lessons learned from the pilot project will be used in the implementation of the new border package
aimed at establishing the task for the three maritime agencies to cooperate to support the national authorities carrying out coast guard
functions. Members considered it important to strengthen the Agencys mandate so as to put in place joint operational activities with other
Union agencies in the maritime sector in order to prevent disasters at sea.

2016/2181(DEC) - 27/04/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament decided to grant discharge to the Executive Directive of the European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA) in respect
of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2015.
The vote on the discharge decision covers the closure of the accounts (in accordance with Annex IV, Article 5(1)(a) to its Rules of Procedure).
Noting that the Court of Auditors issued a statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts and the legality and regularity of the
underlying transactions for the financial year 2015, Parliament adopted by 510 votes to 111, with 6 abstentions, a resolution containing a
number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is granted, in addition to the general recommendations
that appear in the resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies.
These recommendations may be summarised as follows:
Agencys financial statements: Parliament noted the final budget of the Agency for the financial year 2015 was EUR 9 217 000
representing no change compared to the previous year. The entire budget of the Agency derives from the Union budget.
Budget and financial management: Parliament welcomed the implementation of the e-Prior modules for electronic tendering, ordering
and invoicing in cooperation with the Commissions Directorate-General for Informatics (DG DIGIT). It noted that the implemented

modules were to be progressively used in 2016, leading to an increase in electronic workflows, and subsequently greater efficiency,
reliability of the data and audit trail. Members also noted that the effective budget cuts imposed on the Agency impaired its ability to
fulfil its objective of organising operational coordination of control and inspection activities of the Member States in order to ensure the
effective and uniform application of the rules of the Common Fisheries Policy. They stressed the importance of the Agencys role in
implementing the reformed Common Fisheries Policy and in achieving the objectives thereof, particularly in the light of the landing
obligation and demands in terms of the monitoring, control and surveillance of fisheries activities. However, the reduction of the
Agencys resources and capacity may have as a consequence the weakening of fisheries controls and a concomitant increase in
illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. Moreover, the new migration policy of the Union and, in particular, the creation of the
European Border and Coast Guard, as part of an overall improvement in coast guard functions, entail new tasks of inspection and
better cooperation for the Agency, which will require increased funding and technical and human resources.
Parliament also made a series of observations regarding commitments, carry-overs, transfers, procurement, recruitment procedures, the
prevention and management of conflicts of interests, internal audits and performance.
It acknowledged that the Agency commenced a process of cooperation with the European Maritime Safety Agency and the European Border
and Coast Guard Agency in the preparation and the implementation of the pilot project entitled Creation of a European Coastguard function. It
noted that the lessons learned from the pilot project will be used in the implementation of the new border package aimed at establishing the
task for the three maritime agencies to cooperate to support the national authorities carrying out coast guard functions. It considered it
important to strengthen the Agencys mandate so as to put in place joint operational activities with other Union agencies in the maritime sector
in order to prevent disasters at sea.
Lastly, Parliament pointed out that 2016 was a key year for the implementation of the new Common Fisheries Policy concerning the landing
obligation rules, and that the operational coordination of the activities of fisheries control inspections with the Member States entails
appropriate human and financial resources. It expressed concern about the practical difficulties involved in implementation of the landing
obligation for demersal fisheries, and considered that monitoring should take those difficulties into account.

2016/2181(DEC) - 27/04/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the European Fisheries Control Agency (EFCA) for the financial year 2015.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2017/1666 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of
the European Fisheries Control Agency for the financial year 2015.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the Executive Director of the European Fisheries Control
Agency for the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2015.
This decision is in line with the European Parliament's resolution adopted on 27 April 2017 and comprises a series of observations that form
an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 27 April 2017).
Amongst Parliaments main observations in the resolution accompanying the discharge decision, it called on the Agency to introduce regular
checks and updates on the accuracy of the declarations of interests and establish and implement rules on whistleblowers.
It also expressed concern about the practical difficulties involved in implementation of the landing obligation for demersal fisheries, and
considered that monitoring should take those difficulties into account.

