Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Decision

2016/0325(COD)

Procedure completed
05/04/2017 Decision to enter into interinstitutional negotiations confirmed
by plenary (Rule 69c)

Partnership for research and innovation in the Mediterranean area (PRIMA):
participation of the Union
See also 2017/0196(NLE)
See also 2017/0197(NLE)
See also 2017/0199(NLE)
See also 2017/0200(NLE)
Subject
3.50.02 Framework programme and research programmes
3.50.04 Innovation
Geographical area
Mediterranean Sea area

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Rapporteur

Industry, Research and Energy

Appointed
17/11/2016

SAKORAFA Sofia
Shadow rapporteur

AYUSO Pilar

TOIA Patrizia

MARIAS Notis

TELIČKA Pavel

RIVASI Michèle

BORRELLI David
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

AFET

Foreign Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

DEVE

Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

BUDG

Budgets

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

21/11/2016
GAMBÚS Francesc

LIBE

Council of the European Union
European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Regions

Key events
18/10/2016

Legislative proposal published

COM(2016)0662

Summary

27/10/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

22/03/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

22/03/2017

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

29/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0112/2017

Summary

30/05/2017

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE603.049 GEDA/A/(2017)004551

12/06/2017

Debate in Parliament

13/06/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

13/06/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

26/06/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

04/07/2017

Final act signed

05/07/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

18/07/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0249/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0325(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Decision
See also 2017/0196(NLE)
See also 2017/0197(NLE)
See also 2017/0199(NLE)
See also 2017/0200(NLE)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 188-p2; Treaty on the Functioning
of the EU TFEU 185

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ITRE/8/08189

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0662

18/10/2016

EC

Summary

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0331

18/10/2016

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0332

18/10/2016

EC

PE595.480

17/01/2017

EP

CES0045/2017

25/01/2017

ESC

PE597.709

10/02/2017

EP

PE597.388

10/03/2017

EP

A8-0112/2017

29/03/2017

EP

GEDA/A/(2017)004551

27/04/2017

CSL

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0249/2017

13/06/2017

EP

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)477

12/07/2017

Committee draft report
Economic and Social Committee: opinion,
report
Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

ENVI

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Coreper letter confirming interinstitutional
agreement

Summary

Summary

Final act
Decision 2017/1324
OJ L 185 18.07.2017, p. 0001 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2016/0325(COD) - 18/10/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to enable the EU to participate in the Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area (PRIMA) jointly
undertaken by several Member States.
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the process leading to the PRIMA Joint Programme started with the Euro-Mediterranean Conference on Science,
Technology and Innovation in Barcelona in 2012. The aim is to strengthen Euro-Mediterranean cooperation in R&I as part of the broader
objectives of the Unions external policy with regard to the Southern Neighbourhood.
On 23 December 2014, a group of 19 countries of the Mediterranean Area submitted to the Commission a proposal for a Joint Programme
initiative 'Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area' (PRIMA). Among these countries, 14 countries have agreed to
jointly undertake the PRIMA initiative by committing financial contributions: Cyprus, Czech Republic, France, Greece, Italy, Luxembourg,
Malta, Portugal and Spain, Member States of the Union; Israel and Tunisia, third countries associated to Horizon 2020; Egypt, Lebanon and
Morocco (third countries not associated to Horizon 2020).
With 180 million people who are considered 'water poor', the Mediterranean area is generally characterised by high levels of hydric stress.
Climate change is increasingly causing severe water shortages in the area, with major impacts on agriculture. Such shortages result in
decreasing and irregular crop yields, putting additional pressure on natural resources and on the capacity to provide clean water and
affordable food for the regions inhabitants. The programmes strategic objective is to develop the common innovative solutions for water
provision and food systems that the Mediterranean region urgently needs. The programme is in line with the Communication from the
Commission on establishing a new Partnership Framework with third countries under the European Agenda on Migration.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the option withheld is Option 2: PRIMA Joint Programme based on Article 185 TFEU which enables the EU to make
provisions for its participation in research and development programmes run by several Member States, including its participation in the
structures created for the implementation of those programmes.
Previous and ongoing Article 185 TFEU initiatives show that such an initiative is likely to have a high leverage effect on national public funds in
a stable, long-term and integrated manner.
CONTENT: the draft decision provides for the participation of the EU in the Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area
('PRIMA') jointly undertaken by Cyprus, Czech Republic, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal, Spain and Tunisia.
Egypt, Lebanon and Morocco shall become Participating States subject to the conclusion of international agreements with the Union setting
out the terms and conditions of their participation in PRIMA. Any Member State and any country associated to Horizon 2020 may participate in
PRIMA provided they contribute to its financing.

Objectives: the general objective of PRIMA is to develop the fully piloted and demonstrated common innovative solutions for water provision
and food systems in the Mediterranean region, to make them more climate resilient, efficient, cost-effective and sustainable, and to contribute
to solving nutrition, health, well-being and migration problems upstream.
In order to contribute to the general objective, PRIMA shall fulfil the following specific objectives:
the formulation of a stable, long-term, common strategic agenda in the area of water provision and food systems;
the orientation of all national R&I programmes towards the implementation of the strategic agenda;
the structural involvement of all relevant public and private sector actors in implementing the strategic agenda by pooling knowledge
and financial resources to achieve the necessary critical mass;
the strengthening of funding and of the implementation capabilities of all actors involved.
Implementation: in order to ensure the joint implementation of PRIMA, an implementation structure should be set up ('PRIMA-IS'). The
PRIMA-IS should be the recipient of the Unions financial contribution and it should ensure the efficient implementation of PRIMA.
PRIMA activities should be in line with the objectives and research and innovation priorities of Horizon 2020 and with the general principles
and conditions laid down in the Regulation establishing the 2020 Horizon framework programme.
In order to achieve the objectives of PRIMA, the PRIMA-IS should provide financial support mainly in the form of grants to participants in
actions funded by the PRIMAIS. Those actions should be selected following open and competitive calls for proposals under the responsibility
of the PRIMA-IS.
The PRIMA Annual Work Plans (AWP), which is subject to the approval of the Commission, will ensure consistency and coordination between
all activities and their orientation towards the achievement of the operational, specific and general objectives of PRIMA. The proposal contains
provisions on the monitoring, evaluation and reporting arrangements of the initiative.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the EU contribution shall be up to EUR 200 million (in current prices) including the EFTA contribution. The EU
contribution shall be made as part of the implementation of Horizon 2020.
The Participating States shall make or arrange for their national funding bodies to make financial or in kind contributions of at least EUR 200
000 000 during the period from the date of entry into force of this Decision until 31 December 2028.

2016/0325(COD) - 29/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted the report by Sofia SAKORAFA (GUE/NGL, EL) on the proposal for a decision of
the European Parliament and of the Council on the participation of the Union in the Partnership for Research and Innovation in the
Mediterranean Area (PRIMA) jointly undertaken by several Member States.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position, adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure,
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Participation in PRIMA: the Union shall participate in the Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area (PRIMA) jointly
undertaken by Cyprus, France, Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal, Spain and Tunisia. Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and
Morocco shall become Participating States subject to the conclusion of Science and Technology international agreements with the Union.
Objectives of PRIMA: in line with the priorities of Horizon 2020, the general objective of PRIMA is to build research and innovation capacities
and to develop knowledge and common innovative solutions for sustainable agri-food systems and integrated water management in the
Mediterranean region, in order to:
make them more climate resilient, efficient, cost-effective and environmentally and socially sustainable;
contribute to solving water scarcity, food security, nutrition, health, well-being and migration problems upstream.
Unions financial contribution to PRIMA: this amounts to EUR 200 million and shall equal the contributions of the Participating States. It shall
cover the PRIMA-IS administrative costs up to a maximum of 6% of the Union's financial contribution.
Where the financial guarantees are provided by the Participating States, each State shall be liable for a maximum amount less than or equal to
its financial commitment to the PRIMA programme. The total recovery shall be limited to the maximum amount of EUR 200 million.
Activities and implementation of PRIMA: Members stated that PRIMA shall support a wide range of research and innovation activities and
actions as established in the PRIMA annual work plan, addressing a wide range of Technology Readiness Levels and ensuring an appropriate
balance between small and large projects.
PRIMA shall be implemented on the basis of annual work plans, covering activities to be launched in the period from 1 January to 31
December of a given year. The annual work plans shall be made available to the relevant programme committees for the specific programme
implementing Horizon 2020. All activities supported by PRIMA shall be implemented under an authority recognised by the Union as competent
for that purpose.
Amended annual work plans of a given year and annual work plans of subsequent years shall take into account the results of previous calls for
proposals. Coordination shall be sought between PRIMA and other research and innovation projects under Horizon 2020. All calls, proposals
and projects shall be immediately made available on the Horizon 2020 database eCORDA. Members considered that it shall be possible to
finance, under PRIMA, international organisations and entities established in a non-participating State that are not eligible for PRIMA funding,
provided that certain conditions are fulfilled.
Governance of PRIMA: the bodies of the PRIMA-IS shall include:
the Board of Trustees, which will have a Chair and a Co-chair;
the Steering Committee;
the Secretariat, headed by the Director;
the Scientific Advisory Committee.

The PRIMA-IS shall be governed by the Board of Trustees, in which all Participating States are represented. The Board of Trustees shall
ensure that the European Parliament is regularly informed and updated on the PRIMA Programme.
The Board of Trustees shall be the decision-making body of PRIMA-IS. It shall manage the Union's financial contribution and financial
contributions from the Participating States and ensure the transparency of PRIMA activities.

2016/0325(COD) - 13/06/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 607 votes to 39, with 3 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the participation of the Union in the Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean
Area (PRIMA) jointly undertaken by several Member States.
The European Parliaments position, adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal
as follows:
Participation in PRIMA: the Union shall participate in the Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area (PRIMA) jointly
undertaken Croatia, Cyprus, France, Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Tunisia and Turkey.
Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Morocco shall become Participating States subject to the conclusion of international agreements for
scientific and technological cooperation with the Union.
Objectives of PRIMA: in line with the priorities of Horizon 2020, the general objectives of PRIMA are to build research and innovation
capacities and to develop knowledge and common innovative solutions for agro-food systems, to make them sustainable, and for integrated
water provision and management in the Mediterranean area.
PRIMA shall also contribute to solving water scarcity, food security, nutrition, health, well-being and migration problems upstream.
Unions financial contribution to PRIMA: this amounts to EUR 220 million and shall equal the contributions of the Participating States. It shall
cover the PRIMA-IS administrative costs up to a maximum of 6% of the Union's financial contribution.
The Union financial contribution shall be conditional upon the commitment by each Participating State to contribute to the financing of PRIMA
with an adequate contribution from national resources relevant to the objectives of PRIMA.
Activities and implementation of PRIMA: PRIMA shall support a wide range of research and innovation activities, including research,
development and innovation projects, innovative demonstrators and pilot plants, capacity building, training, awareness-raising and
dissemination actions, and researcher mobility, covering a wide range of technological maturity levels and respecting a balance between small
and large projects.
Implementation: in order to ensure the joint implementation of PRIMA, an implementation structure ('PRIMA-IS') shall be set up. PRIMA-IS
shall be the recipient of the Union financial contribution and it shall ensure the efficient and transparent implementation of PRIMA.
PRIMA shall be implemented on the basis of annual work plans setting out the activities to be undertaken in a given year. PRIMA-IS shall
adopt the annual work plans by 31 March of the reference year, after obtaining approval from the Commission.
PRIMA-IS shall monitor regularly the actions it funds and if necessary to undertake corrective actions by amending the annual work plan.
Rules for participation: PRIMA-IS shall aim to provide approximately 25 % of the Union financial contribution to legal entities established in
targeted third countries considered to be Participating States. PRIMA-IS shall also be able to fund beneficiaries established in a country that is
not a Participating State, provided that such participation is deemed to be essential by PRIMA?IS or if funding is provided for under an
international agreement or arrangement.
It shall make information on the implementation of the actions funded publicly available.
Governance of PRIMA: the bodies of the PRIMA-IS shall include:
a Board of Trustees, which shall have a Chair and a Co-Chair;
a Steering Committee;
a Secretariat, headed by a Director;
a Scientific Advisory Committee.
PRIMA-IS shall be governed by the Board of Trustees, in which all Participating States are represented.
The Board of Trustees shall, inter alia, manage the Union's financial contribution and financial contributions from the Participating States and
ensure the transparency of PRIMA activities.

2016/0325(COD) - 04/07/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to approve the EUs participation in the Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area (PRIMA) jointly
undertaken by several Member States.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2017/1324 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the participation of the Union in the
Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area (PRIMA) jointly undertaken by several Member States.
CONTENT: under this Decision, the Union shall participate in the Partnership for Research and Innovation in the Mediterranean Area (PRIMA)
, jointly undertaken by Croatia, Cyprus, France, Germany, Greece, Israel, Italy, Luxembourg, Malta, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Tunisia and
Turkey.
Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Morocco shall become Participating States subject to the conclusion of international agreements for

scientific and technological cooperation with the Union.
Participation in the PRIMA shall remain open to any other EU Member State, as well as to third countries, provided that they fulfil the requisite
conditions.
Objectives of PRIMA: PRIMA shall pool the EU and participating States knowledge and financial resources to build research and innovation
capacities and to develop knowledge and common innovative solutions for agro-food systems in the Mediterranean area.
The main objectives are:
to make the agro-food systems more climate resilient, efficient, cost-effective and environmentally and socially sustainable;
to contribute to solving water scarcity, food security, nutrition, health, well-being and migration problems upstream.
Financial contribution: as part of its contribution, the EU shall provide a contribution of EUR 220 million from its Horizon 2020 Research and
Innovation Framework Programme. The participating States shall provide a financial or in-kind contribution of at least EUR 220 million during
the period from 7 August 2017 to 31 December 2028.
Implementation: in order to ensure the joint implementation of PRIMA, the Decision provides for the setting up of an implementation structure,
known as 'PRIMA-IS', which should be the beneficiary of the Union's financial contribution and ensure the effective implementation of PRIMA.
PRIMA shall be implemented on the basis of annual work plans covering activities to be undertaken for a given year. PRIMA-IS shall adopt the
annual work plans by 31 March of the reference year, after obtaining approval from the Commission. In adopting the annual work plans, both
PRIMA-IS and the Commission shall act without undue delay. PRIMA-IS shall make the annual work plan publicly available.
PRIMA-IS shall aim to provide, through the annual work plan, an appropriate share of its funding, approximately 25 % of the Union financial
contribution, reflecting the commitments of Mediterranean Partner Countries to PRIMA, to legal entities established in targeted third countries
considered to be Participating States. It shall make information on the implementation of the actions funded publicly available.
By 31 December 2028, the Commission shall carry out a final evaluation of PRIMA, with the assistance of independent experts.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 7.8.2017.

