Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2016/0345(COD)

Procedure completed

European Union trade mark. Codification
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 2006/0267(CNS)
Subject
2.10.03 Standardisation, EC/EU standards and trade mark, certification,
compliance
3.50.15 Intellectual property, copyright

Key players
Committee responsible

European Parliament

JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
08/02/2017

ZWIEFKA Tadeusz

Council of the European Union

Key events
31/10/2016

Legislative proposal published

21/11/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/02/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

06/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

27/04/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

27/04/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

23/05/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

14/06/2017

Final act signed

14/06/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

16/06/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

COM(2016)0702

Summary

A8-0054/2017

Summary

T8-0133/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/0345(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Codification

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 2006/0267(CNS)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 118-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/08341

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2016)0702

31/10/2016

EC

PE599.671

08/02/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0054/2017

06/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0133/2017

27/04/2017

EP

Summary

Committee draft report

Summary

Final act
Regulation 2017/1001
OJ L 154 16.06.2017, p. 0001 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2016/0345(COD) - 31/10/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to codify Council Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 on the European Union trade mark.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: Council Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 has been substantially amended several times.
On 1 April 1987 the Commission decided to instruct its staff that all acts should be codified after no more than ten amendments, stressing that
this is a minimum requirement. The Edinburgh European Council in December 1992 confirmed this, stressing the importance of codification.
The European Parliament, the Council and the Commission have agreed, by an interinstitutional agreement dated 20 December 1994, that an
accelerated procedure may be used for the fast-track adoption of codification instruments.
CONTENT: in the interests of clarity and transparency, the aim of the proposal is to proceed with the codification of Council Regulation (EC)
No 207/2000 on the European Union trade mark. The new Regulation will supersede the various acts incorporated in it; the proposal fully
preserves the content of the acts being codified and hence does no more than bring them together with only such formal amendments as are
required by the codification exercise itself.
EU trade mark: the draft regulation establishes, at Union level, the modalities and the conditions for the grant of an EU trade mark. An EU
trade mark shall have a unitary character. It shall have equal effect throughout the Union. The proposal also sets up a European Union
Intellectual Property Office.
The rights in an EU trade mark should not be obtained otherwise than by registration, and registration should be refused in particular if the
trade mark is not distinctive, if it is unlawful or if it conflicts with earlier rights.
An EU trade mark may consist of any signs, in particular words, including personal names, or designs, letters, numerals, colours, the shape of
goods or of the packaging of goods, or sounds provided that such signs are capable of distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking
from those of other undertakings.
Rights conferred by an EU trade mark: the proprietor of that EU trade mark shall be entitled to prevent all third parties not having his consent
from using in the course of trade, in relation to goods or services, any sign where:
the sign is identical with the EU trade mark and is used in relation to goods or services which are identical with those for which the EU
trade mark is registered;
the use of the sign means that there is likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, including the likelihood of association between
the sign and the trade mark.
The exclusive rights conferred by an EU trade mark should not entitle the proprietor to prohibit the use of signs or indications by third parties
which are used fairly and thus in accordance with honest practices in industrial and commercial matters.
Application: an application for an EU trade mark shall be filed at the Office. It shall contain:
a request for the registration of an Î1 EU trade mark ;

information identifying the applicant;
a list of the goods or services in respect of which the registration is requested;
a representation of the mark.
The application for an EU trade mark shall be subject to the payment of the application fee.
Where an application meets the requirements set out in the Regulation and where no notice of opposition has been given, the trade mark and
the particulars shall be recorded in the Register. The registration shall be published, and the Office shall issue a certificate of registration.
Duration and renewal: EU trade marks shall be registered for a period of 10 years from the date of filing of the application. Registration may be
renewed for further periods of 10 years at the request of the proprietor, provided that the fees have been paid. The request for renewal shall
be submitted in the six-month period prior to the expiry of the registration.
Surrender, revocation and invalidity: an EU trade mark may be surrendered in respect of some or all of the goods or services for which it is
registered.
The rights of the proprietor of the EU trade mark shall be declared to be revoked on application to the Office or on the basis of a counterclaim:
if, within a continuous period of five years, the trade mark has not been put to genuine use in the Union ç in connection with the goods
or services in respect of which it is registered;
if, in consequence of acts or inactivity of the proprietor, the trade mark has become the common name in the trade for a product or
service;
if, in consequence of the use made of it by the proprietor, the trade mark is liable to mislead the public.
An EU trade mark shall be declared invalid on application to the Office or on the basis of a counterclaim in infringement proceedings where
there is an earlier trade mark in accordance with EU or national law.
The decisions of the Office will be subject to appeal.
EU certification marks: the Regulation states that such a mark shall be an EU trade mark which is described as such when the mark is applied
for and is capable of distinguishing goods or services which are certified by the proprietor of the mark in respect of material, mode of
manufacture of goods or performance of services, quality, accuracy or other characteristics, with the exception of geographical origin, from
goods and services which are not so certified.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty of the Functioning of the EU.

2016/0345(COD) - 06/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the report by Tadeusz ZWIEFKA (EPP, PL) on the proposal for a regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the European Union trade mark (codified text).
The committee recommended the European Parliament to adopt its position at first reading taking over the Commission proposal as adapted
to the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission.
According to the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission, the proposal
in question contains a straightforward codification of the existing texts without any change in their substance.

2016/0345(COD) - 27/04/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 596 votes to 28, with 6 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the European Union trade mark (codified text).
Parliament adopted its position at first reading taking over the Commission proposal which contains a straightforward codification of the
existing texts without any change in their substance.
In the interests of clarity and rationality, the aim of the proposal is to proceed with the codification of Council Regulation (EC) No 207/2000 on
the European Union trade mark which has been substantially amended several times.
The Regulation establishes, at Union level, the modalities and the conditions for the grant of an EU trade mark . It provides for a system of EU
trade marks whereby undertakings can by means of one procedural system obtain EU trade marks to which uniform protection is given and
which produce their effects throughout the entire area of the Union.
The proposal also sets up a European Union Intellectual Property Office where applicants must submit their applications for EU trade marks.
An EU trade mark may consist of any signs, in particular words, including personal names, or designs, letters, numerals, colours, the shape of
goods or of the packaging of goods, or sounds, provided that such signs are capable of:
distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings; and
being represented on the Register of European Union trademarks, in a manner which enables the competent authorities and the
public to determine the clear and precise subject matter of the protection afforded to its proprietor.
The Regulation provides that any natural or legal person, including authorities established under public law, may be the proprietor of an EU
trade mark by registration. It governs, in particular:
filing of applications;
rights of priority;
grounds for refusal ;

limitation of the effects of an EU trade mark;
exhaustion of the rights conferred by an EU trade mark;
time limit and renewal of trademarks;
grounds for revocation, invalidity;
EU collective marks;
EU certification marks.

2016/0345(COD) - 14/06/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to adopt a codified version of Council Regulation (EC) No 207/2009 on the European Union trade mark.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2017/1001 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Union trade mark
(codification).
CONTENT: this Regulation codifies and replaces Council Regulation (EC) on the European Union trade mark. The codification was carried out
in the interests of clarity and transparency, given that the Regulation was substantially amended several times. The new Regulation will
supersede the various acts incorporated in it, and fully preserves the content of the acts codified.
EU trade mark: the Regulation establishes the modalities and the conditions for the grant of an EU trade mark . An EU trade mark shall have a
unitary character. It shall have equal effect throughout the Union. The Regulation also sets up a European Union Intellectual Property Office.
The rights in an EU trade mark should not be obtained otherwise than by registration, and registration should be refused in particular if the
trade mark is not distinctive, if it is unlawful, if it is of such a nature as to deceive the public, for instance as to the nature, quality or
geographical origin of the goods or service, or if it conflicts with earlier rights.
Signs of which a EU trade mark may consist: an EU trade mark may consist of any signs, in particular words, including personal names, or
designs, letters, numerals, colours, the shape of goods or of the packaging of goods, or sounds provided that such signs are capable of
distinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings.
Rights conferred by an EU trade mark: the registration of an EU trade mark shall confer on the proprietor exclusive rights therein. The
proprietor of that EU trade mark shall be entitled to prevent all third parties not having his consent from using in the course of trade, in relation
to goods or services, any sign where:
·

the sign is identical to the EU trade mark and is used in relation to goods or services which are identical with those for which the EU
trade mark is registered;

·

the use of the sign means that there is likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, including the likelihood of association
between the sign and the trade mark.

The exclusive rights conferred by an EU trade mark should not entitle the proprietor to prohibit the use of signs or indications by third parties
which are used fairly and thus in accordance with honest practices in industrial and commercial matters.
Application: an application for an EU trade mark shall be filed at the Office. It shall be subject to the payment of the application fee. The basic
fee for the application for an individual EU trade mark shall be EUR 1 000.
Where an application meets the requirements set out in the Regulation and where no notice of opposition has been given, the trade mark and
the particulars shall be recorded in the Register. The registration shall be published, and the Office shall issue a certificate of registration.
Duration and renewal: EU trade marks shall be registered for a period of 10 years from the date of filing of the application. Registration may be
renewed for further periods of 10 years and request for renewal shall be submitted in the six-month period prior to the expiry of the registration.
Surrender, revocation and invalidity: an EU trade mark may be surrendered in respect of some or all of the goods or services for which it is
registered.
The rights of the proprietor of the EU trade mark shall be declared to be revoked on application to the Office or on the basis of a counterclaim:
·

if, within a continuous period of five years, the trade mark has not been put to genuine use in the Union in connection with the goods
or services in respect of which it is registered;

·

if, in consequence of acts or inactivity of the proprietor, the trade mark has become the common name in the trade for a product or
service;

·

if, in consequence of the use made of it by the proprietor, the trade mark is liable to mislead the public.

An EU trade mark shall be declared invalid on application to the Office or on the basis of a counterclaim in infringement proceedings where
there is an earlier trade mark in accordance with EU or national law. Decisions regarding the validity and infringement of EU trade marks shall
have effect and cover the entire area of the Union.
The decisions of the Office will be subject to appeal.
EU certification marks: the Regulation states that such a mark shall be an EU trade mark which is described as such when the mark is applied
for and is capable of distinguishing goods or services which are certified by the proprietor of the mark in respect of material, mode of
manufacture of goods or performance of services, quality, accuracy or other characteristics, with the exception of geographical origin, from
goods and services which are not so certified.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 6.7.2017.
APPLICATION: from 1.10.2017.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission may adopt delegated acts, for example, in order to specify the details of the procedure for filing and
examining an opposition and of the procedure governing the amendment of the application, or the details of the procedures governing the

revocation and declaration of invalidity. The power to adopt such acts is conferred on the Commission for an indeterminate period from 23
March 2016. The European Parliament or the Council have the right to object to a delegated act within two months (which may be extended by
two months) from the date of notification of the act.

