Procedure file
Basic information
2016/2094(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Revision of the European consensus on development

Subject
6.30 Development cooperation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
DEVE

Rapporteur

Development

Appointed
16/03/2016

WENTA Bogdan
Brunon

16/03/2016

NEUSER Norbert
Shadow rapporteur

THEOCHAROUS Eleni

GOERENS Charles

SÁNCHEZ
CALDENTEY Lola

HEUBUCH Maria

CORRAO Ignazio

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

International Cooperation and Development

MIMICA Neven

Key events
09/06/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/11/2016

Debate in Council

25/01/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/02/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

14/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0020/2017

Summary

T8-0026/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2016/2094(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

DEVE/8/06681

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE594.010

11/11/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE595.561

09/12/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0020/2017

02/02/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0026/2017

14/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)358

31/08/2017

2016/2094(INI) - 02/02/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Development adopted the own-initiative report by Bogdan BRUNON WENTA (EPP, PL) and Norbert NEUSER (S&D, DE)
on the revision of the European Consensus on Development.
Members stressed the importance of the European Consensus on Development in providing a joint and coherent position at both EU and
Member State level on the objectives, values, principles and main aspects of development policy.
They recognised the importance of a clear European external strategy, which requires policy coherence, notably on peace and security,
migration, trade, the environment and climate change, humanitarian assistance and development cooperation.
They considered that the Consensus acquis must be safeguarded in particular the holistic vision of the fighting poverty and that tackling
inequalities, as recognised in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), must also be a target.
In this regard, they proposed a series of recommendations which may be summarised as follows:
EU development objectives, values and principles: Members called for the fight against, and in the long term eradication of, poverty to remain
the overarching and primary goal of EU development policy. Further objectives include combatting inequalities in and between countries,
discrimination, injustice and strife, promoting peace, participatory democracy, good governance and sustainable growth. They also called for
EU development cooperation to encourage partner countries to glocalise the SDGs, in consultation with national and local civil society.
Specific EU development strategies should better target, protect and support vulnerable and marginalised groups such as women and
children, LGTBI people.
Differentiation: Members underlined that, for an EU development strategy to be effective, the EU must promote a fair redistribution by
developing countries of wealth through national budgets, i.e. within as well as between countries.
The considered, in this respect, that European development aid should first and foremost differentiate between individual countries' situations
and development needs, and not on the basis of microeconomic indicators solely or political considerations.
Members proposed a series of measures, inter alia, concerning middle income countries (MICs).
Development effectiveness: Members called for the EU and its Member States to recommit to the full implementation of the principles of
effective development cooperation, namely country ownership of development priorities. They stressed the need to avoid overlaps and aid
fragmentation and that simplifying funding and bureaucratic procedures can help in improving effectiveness. Effective measures are called for
to improve local governance.
Financing for development: Members recalled the EUs commitment to achieving the ODA target of 0.7 % of GNI by 2030. They stressed the
importance of other countries, developed and emerging, also scaling up their ODA provision. They recognised that general budget support
promotes national ownership, but underlined that it should only be considered when and where the conditions are right and effective control
systems are in place.
Members also called on the EU and its Member States to support low- and middle-income countries in creating fair, progressive, transparent
and efficient tax systems. The Union is invited to promote investments that generate decent employment.
Policy coherence for development: Members highlighted the importance of applying policy coherence for development (PCD) principles in all
EU policies and that PCD should be a major element of the EU's strategy to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).

Members proposed that an arbitration system should be established, under the authority of the President of the Commission, to bring about
PCD and that in the event of divergences between the various policies of the Union, the President of the Commission should fully shoulder his
political responsibility for the overall approach and have the task of deciding between them on the basis of the Unions PCD commitments.
The reiterated their call for the development of governance processes to promote PCD at the global level.
Trade and development: Members underlined the importance of properly regulated trade in promoting regional integration, contributing to
sustainable growth and combating poverty. In this regard, they reiterated that a healthy environment, including a stable climate, is
indispensable to poverty eradication.
They made another series of recommendations that strengthen the relationship between:
security and development;
humanitarian assistance.
Migration and development: Members stressed the central role of development cooperation in addressing the root causes of forced migration
and displacement, such as state fragility, conflicts, insecurity and marginalisation, poverty, inequality and discrimination and human rights
violations. They underlined that countries of origin and transit for migrants need tailor-made solutions for development that fit their respective
political and socio-economic situations.
EU development policy: lastly, Members recalled the comparative advantages offered by EU development action, including its global
presence, the flexibility offered by its range of instruments and delivery methods. They stressed the need for EU comparative advantages to be
translated into focused action on a certain number of policy areas outlined in the report.

2016/2094(INI) - 14/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 539 votes to 71, with 83 abstentions, a resolution on the revision of the European Consensus on
Development.
Parliament recalled the importance of the European Consensus on Development in providing a joint and coherent position at both EU and
Member State level on the objectives, values, principles and main aspects of development policy. It recognised the importance of a clear
European external strategy, which requires policy coherence, notably on peace and security, migration, trade, the environment and climate
change, humanitarian assistance and development cooperation.
Members considered that the Consensus acquis must be safeguarded in particular the holistic vision of the fighting poverty and that tackling
inequalities, as recognised in the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), must also be a target.
In this regard, they proposed a series of recommendations which may be summarised as follows:
EU development objectives, values and principles: Parliament called for the SDGs, the 2030 Agenda and the economic, social and
environmental dimensions of sustainable development to cut across all internal as well as external EU policies and to be put at the heart of the
Consensus, recognising the important inter-linkages between its goals and targets. It called for the fight against, and in the long term
eradication of, poverty to remain the overarching and primary goal of EU development policy , with a particular focus on the most marginalised
groups.
Parliament stressed the importance of defining poverty in line with the definition of the Consensus and the Agenda for Change and within the
framework of the Lisbon Treaty.
The resolution also called for specific EU development strategies to better target, protect and support vulnerable and marginalised groups
such as women and children, LGTBI people.
Differentiation: Parliament underlined that, for an EU development strategy to be effective, the EU must promote a fair redistribution by
developing countries of wealth through national budgets, i.e. within as well as between countries.
It considered, in this respect, that European development aid should first and foremost differentiate between individual countries' situations
and development needs, and not on the basis of microeconomic indicators solely or political considerations.
It proposed a series of measures, inter alia, concerning middle income countries (MICs).
Development effectiveness: Parliament called for the EU and its Member States to recommit to the full implementation of the principles of
effective development cooperation, namely country ownership of development priorities. It stressed the need to avoid overlaps and aid
fragmentation and that simplifying funding and bureaucratic procedures can help in improving effectiveness. Effective measures are called for
to improve local governance.
Womens rights: Parliament stressed that upholding the rights of women and girls, as well as sexual and reproductive health and rights, and
eliminating all forms of sexual and gender-based violence and discrimination, including harmful practices against children, early and forced
marriage and female genital mutilation, are essential to realising human rights. It insisted on the need to guarantee universal access to
affordable, comprehensive, high-quality information and education on sexual and reproductive health and family planning services.
It called for further actions in order to accelerate efforts to achieve gender equality and empowerment of women by deepening
multi-stakeholder partnerships, strengthening capacity for gender-responsive budgeting and planning and ensuring the participation of
womens organisations.
Financing for development: Parliament recalled the EUs commitment to achieving the ODA target of 0.7 % of GNI by 2030. It stressed the
importance of other countries, developed and emerging, also scaling up their ODA provision. It recognised that general budget support
promotes national ownership, but underlined that it should only be considered when and where the conditions are right and effective control
systems are in place.
Members also called on the EU and its Member States to support low- and middle-income countries in creating fair, progressive, transparent
and efficient tax systems. The Union is invited to promote investments that generate decent employment.

Policy coherence for development: Parliament highlighted the importance of applying policy coherence for development (PCD) principles in all
EU policies and that PCD should be a major element of the EU's strategy to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Members proposed that an arbitration system should be established, under the authority of the President of the Commission, to bring about
PCD and that in the event of divergences between the various policies of the Union, the President of the Commission should fully shoulder his
political responsibility for the overall approach and have the task of deciding between them on the basis of the Unions PCD commitments.
They reiterated their call for the development of governance processes to promote PCD at the global level.
Trade and development: Parliament underlined the importance of properly regulated trade in promoting regional integration, contributing to
sustainable growth and combating poverty. In this regard, it reiterated that a healthy environment, including a stable climate, is indispensable
to poverty eradication.
It made another series of recommendations that strengthen the relationship between:
security and development;
humanitarian assistance.
Migration and development: Parliament stressed the central role of development cooperation in addressing the root causes of forced migration
and displacement, such as state fragility, conflicts, insecurity and marginalisation, poverty, inequality and discrimination and human rights
violations. It underlined that countries of origin and transit for migrants need tailor-made solutions for development that fit their respective
political and socio-economic situations.
Humanitarian assistance: Parliament stressed the need for closer links between humanitarian assistance and development cooperation in
order to address financing gaps, avoid overlaps and the creation of parallel systems. It called for the EU to fulfil its commitment to devote by
2020 at least 25 % of its humanitarian aid to local and national actors as directly as possible , as agreed in the Grand Bargain.
It recalled the fundamental principles of humanitarian aid:
humanity,
neutrality,
independence and impartiality.
Members welcomed the Commissions tenacity in not merging the European Consensus on Development and the European Consensus on
Humanitarian Aid.
EU development policy: lastly, Parliament recalled the comparative advantages offered by EU development action, including its global
presence, the flexibility offered by its range of instruments and delivery methods. It stressed the need for EU comparative advantages to be
translated into focused action on a certain number of policy areas outlined in the resolution.

