Procedure file
Basic information
2015/0193(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure completed

EU/Palau Agreement: short-stay visa waiver

Subject
6.40.09 Relations with Oceanian countries
7.10.04 External borders crossing and controls, visas
Geographical area
Palau

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
26/10/2015

GABRIEL Mariya
Shadow rapporteur

GUILLAUME Sylvie

STEVENS Helga

HYUSMENOVA Filiz

MICHEL Louis

VERGIAT
Marie-Christine

VALERO Bodil
Committee for opinion
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Migration and Home Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
AVRAMOPOULOS Dimitris

Key events
14/09/2015

Initial legislative proposal published

21/10/2015

Legislative proposal published

17/12/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

09/05/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

18/05/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

COM(2015)0430

Summary

12080/2015

Summary

A8-0177/2016

Summary

08/06/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

08/06/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

20/09/2016

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

20/09/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

30/09/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0254/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0193(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 218-p6a; Treaty on the
Functioning of the EU TFEU 077-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/04511

Documentation gateway
Initial legislative proposal

COM(2015)0430

14/09/2015

EC

Summary

Document attached to the procedure

COM(2015)0431

14/09/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

12077/2015

20/10/2015

CSL

Legislative proposal

12080/2015

21/10/2015

CSL

Committee draft report

PE573.185

29/02/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0177/2016

18/05/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0254/2016

08/06/2016

EP

Summary

Summary

Final act
Decision 2016/1741
OJ L 264 30.09.2016, p. 0021 Summary

2015/0193(NLE) - 14/09/2015 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Palau on the short-stay visa waiver.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: Regulation (EU) No 509/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council amended Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 listing
the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders of the Member States and those whose
nationals are exempt from that requirement. The Regulation was adopted on 20 May 2014 and entered into force on 9 June 2014.
In July 2014, the Commission presented a Recommendation to the Council to authorise it to start negotiations on visa waiver agreements with
each of the following 17 countries: Dominica, Grenada, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, the United Arab Emirates and Vanuatu. On 9
October 2014, the Council addressed negotiating directives to the Commission

The negotiations with Palau were opened on 17 December 2014 and conducted by exchange of letters. During further exchanges agreement
was reached on all aspects. The agreement was initialled by an exchange of letters between the chief negotiators on 27 May 2015 (Palau) and
10 June 2015 (Union).
The Commission considered that the objectives set by the Council in its negotiating directives were attained and that the draft visa waiver
agreement is acceptable to the Union.
CONTENT: the Commission proposes that the Council approve the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Palau on the
short-stay visa waiver.
The content of the agreement may be summarised as follows:
Purpose and duration of stay: the agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of Palau
when travelling to the territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period.
In order to safeguard equal treatment of all EU citizens, a provision has been included in the agreement stating that Palau may suspend or
terminate the agreement only in respect of all the Member States of the European Union and that the Union may also only suspend or
terminate the agreement in respect of all of its Member States.
The agreement takes into account the situation of the Member States that do not yet apply the Schengen acquis in full. As long as they are not
part of the Schengen area without internal borders, the visa waiver confers a right for the nationals of Palau to stay for 90 days in any 180-day
on the territory of each of those Member States (Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus and Romania), independently of the period calculated for the whole
Schengen area.
Scope: the visa waiver covers all categories of persons (ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all
kinds of purposes, except for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity. For this latter category, each Member State and also Palau remain
free to impose the visa requirement on the citizens of the other Party in accordance with the applicable Union or national law.
In order to ensure harmonised implementation, a joint declaration is attached to the agreement on the interpretation of the category of persons
travelling for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity.
Territorial application: in the case of France and the Netherlands, the visa waiver would entitle nationals of Palau to stay only in those Member
States? European territories.
The provisions of the Agreement do not apply to the United Kingdom and Ireland.
The Agreement establishes a Joint Committee for the management of the Agreement, which shall adopt its rules of procedure.

2015/0193(NLE) - 21/10/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude, on behalf of the European Union, of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Palau on the
short--stay visa waiver.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the Commission has negotiated on behalf of the European Union an agreement with the Republic of Palau on the short-stay
visa waiver.
The Agreement and the Protocol were signed in accordance with a Council Decision and apply on a provisional basis.
The Agreement and the Protocol should now be approved.
CONTENT: the draft Council decision aims to approve the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Palau on the
short-stay visa waiver on behalf of the Union.
The Agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of Palau when travelling to the territory
of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period.
Scope: the visa waiver covers all categories of persons (ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all
kinds of purposes, except for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity.
The provisions of the Agreement do not apply to the United Kingdom or to Ireland.
The Agreement sets up a Joint Committee of experts for the management of the Agreement. The Union is to be represented within that Joint
Committee by the Commission, which should be assisted by the representatives of the Member States.

2015/0193(NLE) - 18/05/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the report by Mariya GABRIEL (EPP, BG) on the draft Council decision on
the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Palau on the short-stay
visa waiver.
The committee recommended that the European Parliament should give its consent to the conclusion of the Agreement.
To recall, the Agreement signed on 7 December 2015 provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of
Palau when travelling to the territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period. The visa waiver
covers all categories of persons (ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all kinds of purposes, except

for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity.
The report is accompanied by a short justification stipulating that this Agreement on the waiver of short-stay visas constitutes simultaneously
represents a culmination of the deepening of relations between the European Union and Palau which is politically highly significant in the
context of the Cotonou Agreement and is an additional way of stepping up economic and cultural relations and intensifying political dialogue
on various issues, including human rights and fundamental freedoms.
On an economic level, the Agreement could have positive effects by simplifying travel for businesspeople, facilitating investment and boosting
tourism. Palaus economy is based primarily on the service sector, which accounts for 86 % of GDP, with a booming tourism sector, thanks
also to the increase of the number of flights serving the island. Palau has one of the highest standards of living of the Pacific.
As regards investment and trade relations, these are currently unstable and low in terms of value and value and in relative terms, they have
strong potential for development. The EU is currently negotiating Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreements with 14 Pacific countries,
including Palau. Fishing, shellfish farming and tourism represent key development sector.
On a political level, Palau is a democratic republic completely committed to human rights, which are guaranteed under the Constitution. It has
adopted legislation specifically relating to human trafficking and has become a member of the International Labour Organisation. The current
political dialogue between the EU and Palau is focused on human rights and gender equality, and both parties are discussing how to
collaborate more closely on these issues.
With regard to mobility, the information available indicates that confidence in visa applicants from Palau is high and that few visa applications
are rejected, the rate of refusal of visas being low. In 2014, no nationals of Palau were arrested in the EU for being illegally resident, refused
entry at the EU border or returned. No asylum applications were lodged by citizens of Palau. The country does not present any threat in terms
either of irregular migration or of security and public policy.
As regards the implementation and monitoring of the agreement: the rapporteur:
called on the Commission to observe any developments in relation to the criteria on clandestine immigration, public policy and
security, but also the Unions external relations with the third countries concerned including, in particular, considerations relating to
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
called on the Commission and the authorities of Palau to ensure full reciprocity of the visa waiver, which should permit equal treatment
of all citizens, particularly all citizens of the Union.
encouraged the Commission to review the composition of the joint management committees for future agreements in order for the
European Parliament to be involved in the work of the Joint Committee.
Lastly, the rapporteur queries the practice of signing visa waiver agreements and applying them provisionally before the European Parliament
has approved them. This practice is liable to reduce Parliaments room for manoeuvre.

2015/0193(NLE) - 08/06/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 587 votes to 50 with 20 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Palau on the short-stay visa
waiver.
In line with the recommendation made by the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, Parliament gave its consent to the
conclusion of the Agreement.
The Agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of Palau when travelling to the territory
of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period. The visa waiver covers all categories of persons
(ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all kinds of purposes, except for the purpose of carrying out a
paid activity.
The provisions of the Agreement shall not apply to the United Kingdom or Ireland.

2015/0193(NLE) - 20/09/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to conclude the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Palau on the short-stay visa waiver.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2016/1741 on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Agreement between
the European Union and the Republic of Palau on the short--stay visa waiver.
CONTENT: with this Decision, the Agreement between the European Union and Palau on the short-stay visa waiver is approved on behalf of
the Union.
To recall, the Commission negotiated on behalf of the European Union an Agreement with Palau on the short-stay visa waiver. This
Agreement was signed and is applied on a provisional basis since 8 December 2015.
The agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of Palau when travelling to the territory
of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period. A joint declaration on the interpretation of this period is
attached to the agreement.
The visa waiver covers all categories of persons (holders of ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passports) travelling for all kinds of
purposes, except for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity.
For this latter category, each Member State and Palau remain free to impose the visa requirement on the citizens of the other Party in
accordance with the applicable Union or national law. In order to ensure harmonised implementation, a joint declaration is attached to the
agreement on the interpretation of the category of persons travelling for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity.

The Member States and Palau reserve the right to refuse entry into and short stay in their territories if one or more of these conditions is not
met.
The Agreement sets up a Joint Committee of experts for the management of the Agreement. The Union is to be represented within that Joint
Committee by the Commission, which should be assisted by the representatives of the Member States.
This Decision constitutes a development of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in which the United Kingdom and Ireland do not take part.
Therefore, these two countries are not bound by it or subject to its application.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 20.9.2016.

