Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2015/0096(COD)

Procedure completed

Multiannual recovery plan for Bluefin tuna in the eastern Atlantic and the
Mediterranean
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 302/2009 2009/0029(CNS)
Subject
3.15.01 Fish stocks, conservation of fishery resources
3.15.04 Management of fisheries, fisheries, fishing grounds
3.15.05 Fish catches, import tariff quotas
3.15.07 Fisheries inspectorate, surveillance of fishing vessels and areas
3.15.15 Fisheries agreements and cooperation
Geographical area
Atlantic Ocean area
Mediterranean Sea area

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
PECH

Rapporteur

Fisheries

Appointed
06/05/2015

MATO Gabriel
Shadow rapporteur

BRIANO Renata

TOMAŠIĆ Ruža

BILBAO BARANDICA
Izaskun

HAZEKAMP Anja

AFFRONTE Marco
Committee for opinion
ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Maritime Affairs and Fisheries

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
VELLA Karmenu

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
24/04/2015

Legislative proposal published

30/04/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

10/12/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single

COM(2015)0180

Summary

reading
15/12/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

18/01/2016

Debate in Parliament

19/01/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

19/01/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

19/01/2016

Matter referred back to the committee
responsible

19/04/2016

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

23/06/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

18/07/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

14/09/2016

Final act signed

14/09/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

16/09/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0367/2015

Summary

T8-0003/2016

Summary

T8-0286/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0096(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 302/2009 2009/0029(CNS)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 043-p2; Rules of Procedure of the
European Parliament EP 059-p4

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

PECH/8/03356

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0180

24/04/2015

EC

CES2994/2015

01/07/2015

ESC

Committee draft report

PE567.746

15/10/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE569.853

17/11/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0367/2015

15/12/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0003/2016

19/01/2016

EP

Summary

Economic and Social Committee: opinion, report

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0286/2016

23/06/2016

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)487

14/07/2016

EP

Summary

Final act
Regulation 2016/1627
OJ L 252 16.09.2016, p. 0001 Summary

2015/0096(COD) - 24/04/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to transpose into Union law measures of the multiannual Bluefin Tuna (BFT) recovery plan in the Eastern Atlantic and the
Mediterranean adopted by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT).
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the objective of the Common Fisheries Policy, as set out in Regulation (EU) No 1380/2013 is to ensure exploitation of living
aquatic resources that provides sustainable economic, environmental and social conditions.
The Union is Party to the ICCAT, the Regional Fisheries Management Organisation (RFMO) responsible for the management of tuna and
tuna-like species in the Atlantic Ocean and adjoining seas to which the Union is a Contracting Party.
The ICCAT has the authority to adopt decisions (recommendations) for fisheries conservation and management in its area of competence;
these acts are binding.
Certain ICCAT BFT measures were transposed through Regulation (EU) No 544/2014 which amended Council Regulation (EC) No 302/2009.
The purpose of that amendment was to transpose the measures on fishing seasons adopted by ICCAT in 2012 and 2013.
With a view to ensure uniform and effective application throughout the European Union of all measures of the Recovery plan adopted between
2012 and 2014, the current proposal will incorporate them into a Regulation concerning a multiannual recovery plan for BFT in the eastern
Atlantic and the Mediterranean. This Regulation will repeal Council Regulation (EC) No 302/2009.
CONTENT: the objective of the proposed Regulation, in line with the Recovery plan, is to achieve a biomass corresponding to the maximum
sustainable yield by 2022 with at least 60% probability.
The proposal aims at transposing into Union law measures of the multiannual Bluefin Tuna (BFT) recovery plan in the Eastern Atlantic and the
Mediterranean adopted by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) at its annual meetings between 2012
and 2014. It contains technical measures such as those on transfer and caging operations of live BFT, including also measures on the use of
stereoscopic cameras to estimate the quantities of BFT and releases, catch reporting requirements, and the implementation of the ICCAT
Regional Observer Programme.
The new Regulation on the CFP introduced a landing obligation which applies as of 1 January 2015 to Bluefin tuna. Under that Regulation, the
Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts, for the purpose of implementing such international obligations into Union law, including, in
particular, derogations from the landing obligation.
Accordingly, the discard of bluefin tuna will be allowed in some situations laid down in Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) No 2015/98.
This Regulation does therefore not need to cover such discard obligations.
DELEGATED ACT: the proposal contains provisions to empower the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2015/0096(COD) - 15/12/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Fisheries adopted the report by Gabriel MATO (EPP, ES) on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and
of the Council on a multiannual recovery plan for Bluefin tuna in the eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean repealing Regulation (EC) No
302/2009.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Subject matter and scope: the amended text seeks to enhance the scope of the Regulation by giving support and particular attention to
long-established traditional and artisanal fishing gear such as traps (almadrabas) which have a low impact on marine ecosystems thanks to
their low energy consumption and high degree of selectivity. In addition, Member States shall ensure safeguards as regards the
socio-economic viability of its traps.
Fishing plans: in a new article, the committee proposed that the annual fishing plan submitted by each Member State shall provide for an even
breakdown of quotas among the gear groups in order to help ensure compliance with individual quotas and by-catch allowances. Member
States shall use transparent and objective criteria for the national allocation of the quotas, giving special consideration to the preservation and
prosperity of small-scale, artisanal and traditional fishermen using traps and other selective fishing methods, and to the encouragement of
such methods.

Minimum conservation reference size, incidental catch, by catch: the Common Fisheries Policy basic Regulation introduces a landing
obligation, in which the concept of minimum size, linked to the discard obligation applied up to the last reform, has no longer sense. Therefore,
the amended text replaces the concept of minimum size with that of minimum conservation reference size. To recall, the minimum
conservation reference size for Bluefin tuna caught in the eastern Atlantic and in the Mediterranean shall be 30 kg or 115 cm fork length.
Recreational and sport fishery: the committee report stipulated that any Bluefin tuna landed shall be whole, gilled and gutted. Each Member
State shall take the necessary measures to ensure, to the greatest extent possible, the release of Bluefin tuna caught alive, especially
juveniles, in the framework of recreational and sport fishing.
Fishing authorisations for vessels: the fishing authorisation for Bluefin tuna and shall require the vessel to proceed immediately to a port
designated by it when the individual quota is deemed to be exhausted.
The flag Member State shall withdraw the fishing authorisation for Bluefin tuna and may require the vessel to proceed immediately to a port
designated by it when the individual quota is deemed to be exhausted
Landings: the amended text specified that the estimated quantities of Bluefin tuna retained on board may be notified at the agreed time of
notification prior to arrival. If the fishing grounds are less than four hours from the port, the estimated quantities of Bluefin tuna retained on
board may be modified at any time prior to arrival.
ICCAT Regional Observer Programme: Member States shall also ensure that an ICCAT regional observer is present during all transfers from
one farm to another. ICCAT regional observers shall also be tasked to observe and monitor fishing and farming operations in compliance with
the relevant ICCAT conservation and management measures.
Entry into force: the committee proposed to change the entry into force to the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official
Journal of the European Union (as opposed to the third as proposed by the Commission).
Delegated acts: references to the exercise of the delegation for future amendments of the recovery plan have been deleted throughout the
text. Members stressed that the transposition of the Regional Fisheries Management Organisations (RFMO) Recommendations has to remain
a joint European Parliament and Council competence under the ordinary procedure (co-decision).

2015/0096(COD) - 19/01/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st reading/single
reading
The European Parliament adopted amendments to the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on a
multiannual recovery plan for Bluefin tuna in the eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean repealing Regulation (EC) No 302/2009.
The matter was sent back for revision to the committee responsible and the vote on the resolution was postponed until a subsequent plenary
sitting.
The main amendments adopted in plenary are as follows:
Subject matter and scope: Parliament sought to improve the scope of the Regulation by paying particular attention to non-industrial fishing
activities and to the most artisanal and sustainable gear types, such as traditional traps ("almadrabas", "tonnare"), which contribute very
positively to the rebuilding of tuna stocks, due to their high level of selectivity and low environmental impact in marine ecosystems, and which
are valuable in scientific terms.
Fishing plans: in a new article, Parliament proposed that the annual fishing plan submitted by each Member State shall provide for an even
breakdown of quotas among the gear groups in order to help ensure compliance with individual quotas and by-catch allowances. Member
States shall use transparent and objective criteria for the national allocation of the quotas, giving special consideration to the preservation and
prosperity of small-scale, artisanal and traditional fishermen using traps and other selective fishing methods, and to the encouragement of
such methods.
Fishing capacity management plans: Members introduced a reference to the " tonnage corresponding gross tonnage" and stipulated that by
way of derogation from the provisions in the Regulation, Member States shall review the Bluefin tuna fishing quota system, which penalises
small-scale fishermen, for the purpose of removing the monopoly currently exercised by large vessel owners and encouraging more
sustainable fishing systems such as those used for small-scale fishing.
Minimum conservation reference size, incidental catch, by catch: the Common Fisheries Policy basic Regulation introduces a landing
obligation, in which the concept of minimum size, linked to the discard obligation applied up to the last reform, has no longer sense. Therefore,
Members replaced the concept of minimum size with that of minimum conservation reference size. To recall, the minimum conservation
reference size for Bluefin tuna caught in the eastern Atlantic and in the Mediterranean shall be 30 kg or 115 cm fork length.
Recreational and sport fishery: Parliament stipulated that any Bluefin tuna landed shall be whole, gilled and gutted. Each Member State shall
take the necessary measures to ensure, to the greatest extent possible, the release of Bluefin tuna caught alive, especially juveniles, in the
framework of recreational and sport fishing.
Fishing authorisations for vessels: an amendment specified that the fishing authorisation for Bluefin tuna and may require the vessel to
proceed immediately to a port designated by it when the individual quota is deemed to be exhausted.
Landings: the proposal provides that the estimated quantities of Bluefin tuna retained on board may be notified at the agreed time of
notification prior to arrival. If the fishing grounds are less than four hours from the port, the estimated quantities of Bluefin tuna retained on
board may be modified at any time prior to arrival.
ICCAT Regional Observer Programme: Member States shall also ensure that an ICCAT regional observer is present during all transfers from
one farm to another. ICCAT regional observers shall also be tasked to observe and monitor fishing and farming operations in compliance with
the relevant ICCAT conservation and management measures.
Delegated acts: references to the exercise of the delegation for future amendments of the recovery plan have been deleted throughout the

text. Parliament stressed that the transposition of the Regional Fisheries Management Organisations (RFMO) Recommendations has to
remain a joint European Parliament and Council competence under the ordinary procedure (co-decision).
Entry into force: Parliament proposed to change the entry into force to the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of
the European Union (as opposed to the third as proposed by the Commission).

2015/0096(COD) - 23/06/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 524 votes to 25 with 37 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on a multiannual recovery plan for Bluefin tuna in the eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean
repealing Regulation (EC) No 302/2009.
The matter had been sent back to the competent committee for re-examination at the sitting of 19.1.2016.
Parliaments position adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Allocation of fishing opportunities: Parliament stipulated that the recovery plan must take into account the specificities of the different types of
gear and fishing techniques. When allocating the fishing opportunities available to them, Member States shall use transparent and objective
criteria, including those of an environmental, social and economic nature. They shall also endeavour to:
distribute national quotas fairly among the various fleet segments giving consideration to traditional and artisanal fisheries, and
provide incentives to Union fishing vessels deploying selective fishing gear or using fishing techniques with reduced environmental
impact.
Conditions associated with management measures: the proposal stated that each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure
that the fishing effort of its catching vessels and its traps are commensurate with the Bluefin tuna fishing opportunities available to that Member
State in the eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean. Members stressed that the carrying -over of any unused quota shall be prohibited.
Minimum conservation reference size and incidental catches: the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas: (ICCAT)
concept of minimum sizes should be transposed into Union law as minimum conservation reference sizes. Parliament replaced the concept of
minimum sizes of Bluefin tuna by references to minimum conservation reference sizes. To recall, the minimum conservation reference size for
Bluefin tuna caught in the eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean is 30 kg or 115 cm fork length.
Incidental catches of a maximum 5 % of Bluefin tuna weighing between 8 and 30 kg or with a fork length between 75 and 115 cm shall be
allowed for all catching vessels and traps fishing actively for Bluefin tuna.
By-catch: each Member State shall make provision for by-catch of Bluefin tuna within its quota and shall inform the Commission thereof when
transmitting its fishing plan. This provision shall ensure that all dead fish are deducted from the quota. Each Member State shall deduct all
dead fish within the by-catch from its quota. Members also stated that dead Bluefin tuna shall be landed whole and unprocessed.
Use of aerial means: the use of any aerial means, including aircraft, helicopters or any types of unmanned aerial vehicles for searching for
Bluefin tuna shall be prohibited.
Sport and recreational fisheries: the amended text stipulates that any Bluefin tuna landed shall be whole, gilled and/or gutted. Each Member
State shall take the necessary measures to ensure, to the greatest extent possible, the release of Bluefin tuna, especially juveniles, caught
alive in the framework of sport and recreational fishing.
Fishing authorisations for vessels: the flag Member State shall withdraw the fishing authorisation for Bluefin tuna and may require the vessel to
proceed immediately to a port designated by it when the individual quota is deemed to be exhausted.
Landings: where Member States are authorised under applicable Union legislation to apply a shorter notification period than that referred to in
the regulation, the estimated quantities of Bluefin tuna retained on board may be notified at the thus applicable time of notification prior to
arrival. If the fishing grounds are less than four hours from the port, the estimated quantities of Bluefin tuna retained on board may be modified
at any time prior to arrival.
Transhipment: transhipment at sea of Bluefin tuna in the Convention area shall be prohibited in all circumstances.
ICCAT regional observer programme: Member States shall ensure that an ICCAT regional observer is present during all transfers from one
farm to another. ICCAT regional observers shall also observe that fishing and farming operations are in compliance with the relevant ICCAT
conservation and management measures.
Entry into force: the Regulation shall enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European
Union.

2015/0096(COD) - 14/09/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to update the multiannual recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/1627 of the European Parliament and of the Council on a multiannual recovery plan for bluefin tuna
in the eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean, and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 302/2009
CONTENT: the new Regulation improves the multiannual recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the eastern Atlantic and the Mediterranean currently
in force.
The recovery plan applies from 2007 to 2022. It was recommended by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas
(ICCAT), an inter-governmental fishery organisation responsible for the conservation of tunas and tuna-like species in the Atlantic Ocean and
its adjacent seas. The EU is a contracting party to ICCAT.

The objective of the Regulation is to achieve a biomass of bluefin tuna corresponding to the maximum sustainable yield by 2022 with at least a
60 % probability of achieving that objective.
Implementation of the plan: the Regulation transposes into Union law measures adopted by ICCAT in 2012, 2013 and 2014, these being:
Recommendation 12-03 which sets up: (i) technical measures concerning the transfer and caging operations of live bluefin tuna; (ii)
new catch reporting requirements; (iii) the implementation of the ICCAT regional observer programme and (iv) changes of the fishing
seasons;
Recommendation 13-07 and 13-08 which (i) introduces small changes on fishing seasons which do not affect the Union fleet; (ii) sets
up a common procedure for the use of stereoscopical camera systems to estimate the quantities of bluefin tuna at the point of caging
and (iii) introduces a flexible starting date for the fishing season of baitboats and trolling boats in the eastern Atlantic;
Recommendation 14-04, which (i) rationalises some of the existing control provisions; (ii) specifies the procedures for the use of
stereoscopic camera at the point of caging; (iii) introduces measures specific to release operations and the treatment of dead fish in
the recovery plan.
Gear and fishing techniques: the recovery plan takes into account the specificities of the different types of gear and fishing techniques. When
implementing the recovery plan, the Union and Member States will endeavour to promote coastal fishing activities and the use of fishing gear
and techniques which are selective and have a reduced environmental impact, including gear and techniques used in traditional and artisanal
fisheries, thereby contributing to a fair standard of living for local economies.
Sport and recreational fishing: for these activities, no more than one bluefin tuna shall be caught per vessel per day.
Any bluefin tuna landed shall be whole, gilled and/or gutted. Each Member State shall take the necessary measures to ensure, to the greatest
extent possible, the release of bluefin tuna, especially juveniles, caught alive in the framework of sport and recreational fishing.
The marketing of bluefin tuna caught during sport and recreational fishing is prohibited.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 06.10.2016.

