Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2320(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

How best to harness the job creation potential of small and medium sized
enterprises (SMEs)?

Subject
3.45.02 Small and medium-sized enterprises (SME), craft industries
4.15 Employment policy, action to combat unemployment

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL

Rapporteur

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
03/11/2015

KRASNODĘBSKI
Zdzisław
Shadow rapporteur

CLUNE Deirdre

PAVEL Emilian

DLABAJOVÁ Martina

SYLIKIOTIS Neoklis

ŽDANOKA Tatjana

AGEA Laura
MARTIN Dominique
Committee for opinion
INTA

BUDG

International Trade

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Budgets

28/10/2015
NÍ RIADA Liadh

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
12/11/2015
NOVAKOV Andrey

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

BIEŃKOWSKA Elżbieta

Key events
26/11/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

13/07/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

25/07/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

14/09/2016

Debate in Parliament

15/09/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

15/09/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/09/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0248/2016

Summary

T8-0359/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2320(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/8/01434

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE575.159

01/03/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE582.164

13/05/2016

EP

Committee opinion

BUDG

PE580.580

24/05/2016

EP

Committee opinion

REGI

PE576.886

25/05/2016

EP

PE585.710

13/07/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0248/2016

25/07/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0359/2016

15/09/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)876

21/12/2016

Amendments tabled in committee

2015/2320(INI) - 25/07/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Zdzis?aw KRASNOD?BSKI (ECR, PL) on how best to
harness the job creation potential of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
Members recalled that almost 99 % of European companies are SMEs, and that they create more jobs than other private sector companies,
providing about two thirds of all private-sector employment in the EU.
Job creation potential and skilled labour force: the report stressed that for achieving a sound environment for business development and
boosting its job creation potential, national and European polices must in priority address the issues of skills (shortages, mismatches, brain
drains), regulatory uncertainty and administrative burdens, as well as the problem of undeclared work and the de facto privileged position of
multinational companies (MNC).
Favourable and stable regulatory environment: Members called for a favourable and stable regulatory environment, including intrinsic clarity of
rules are essential prerequisites for sustainable quality job creation in SMEs.
The Commission and the Member States should consider that if the impact of administrative requirements is felt disproportionately by SMEs.
Measures to minimise the burden and obstacles should be systematically considered while ensuring that employees receive adequate health
and safety protection.
The report called on the Member States to review the rules affecting SMEs and fully apply the Think Small First principle in order to remove
unjustified burdens confronting SMEs and achieve regulatory and fiscal certainty as a precondition for job stability and quality.
Moreover, SMEs should enjoy favourable tax treatment for two specific reasons: (i) to remedy the inherent inequalities between SMEs and

multinationals; (ii) to make it possible to use additional resources, together with public investment, to create jobs.
The report highlighted regional disparities and imbalances in SMEs access to funding from national promotional banks, EU-funded
programmes and other private and public funding institutions. It called for a level playing field for all SMEs with special focus on less
developed, poorer and more remote or isolated regions in accessing funding from EU-supported financial instruments while using
intermediaries.
Members would welcome smart simplification initiatives aimed at improving the efficacy of the assessment of projects needing microcredit.
Stressing the insolvency and bankruptcy risks for SMEs facing delays in payments, the Commission and the Member States to improve the
enforcement of the Late Payments Directive and to consider adequate financial mechanisms, such as bank guarantees.
The Commission is also called upon to:
create the European framework regulation to facilitate the creation of pan-European crowd-funding and crowd investing markets;
facilitate the securitisation of loans to micro-companies and SMEs to increase their available credit;
improve the regulatory framework for social businesses;
continue taking into account the specific nature and situation of SMEs and micro-enterprises when revising the strategic framework in
order to help these companies meet the objectives set out as regards health and safety in the workplace;
adopt, when appropriate and in the framework of the European Semesters country-specific recommendations, a differentiated
approach to improving the environment for SMEs, taking into account the country-specific circumstances and the EU regions specific
structural differences.
The report highlighted the need to facilitate access to the single market by removing the remaining unjustified administrative barriers and by
combating unfair competition, market distortions, bogus self-employment and letter box companies. It called on the Member States to adopt
favourable legislative frameworks for setting up businesses as one of the ways to tackle the shadow economy, which disadvantages SMEs.
Member States are urged to develop forms of cooperation that involve all governance levels, businesses (including businesses linked to the
social economy), trade unions, educational institutions and other stakeholders with a view to adapting their education and training systems to
address the disparity between skills/qualifications and the needs of the job market, particularly those of SMEs.
A level playing field: the report noted that in some cases EU competition policy could result in an advantage that mostly benefits big market
operators that are characterised by greater economies of scale than SMEs. In regions where economic development is focused on attracting
foreign direct investment (FDI), MNCs could be in some cases treated preferentially in legislative matters.
They stressed in this regard that EU competition rules must guarantee a level playing field for small, medium-sized and large enterprises to
overcome the lack of economies of scales of SMEs thus enabling their internationalisation and boosting their job creation potential, in
particular in the context of new international trade agreements.
Moreover, they called on Member States to adopt the principle of income taxation in the place where it is generated and other measures
against profits shifting practices of MNCs in order to ensure a level playing field for SMEs.
Lastly, the report encouraged SMEs to promote teleworking and smartworking, enabling workers to balance their professional and personal
lives better.

2015/2320(INI) - 15/09/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 553 votes to 69 with 24 abstentions a resolution on how best to harness the job creation potential of
small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
Members recalled that SMEs (22.3 million were active in the EU-28 in 2014) create more jobs than other private sector companies, providing
about two thirds of all private-sector employment in the EU. In 2014 SMEs contributed greatly to employment growth, up to 71 % in the
non-financial business economy. Despite the fact that 90 % of world growth occurs outside the EU, only 13 % of SMEs have conducted
international business outside the EU.
Job creation potential and skilled labour force: Parliament stressed that for achieving a sound environment for business development and
boosting its job creation potential, national and European polices must in priority address the issues of skills (shortages, mismatches, brain
drains), regulatory uncertainty and administrative burdens, as well as the problem of undeclared work and the de facto privileged position of
multinational companies (MNC).
Parliament considered that tackling these structural problems would result, inter alia, in fairer competition and the extension of the social
contribution and tax base to a higher number of economic operators, giving Member States the opportunity to finance employment-friendly
policies, particularly for SMEs.
Favourable and stable regulatory environment: Parliament called for a favourable and stable regulatory environment, including intrinsic clarity
of rules are essential prerequisites for sustainable quality job creation in SMEs. It stressed the need to:
envisage systematically measures to minimise the burden and obstacles while ensuring that employees receive adequate health and
safety protection;
review the rules affecting SMEs and fully apply the Think Small First principle in order to remove unjustified burdens confronting SMEs
and achieve regulatory and fiscal certainty as a precondition for job stability and quality.
give SMEs favourable tax treatment for two specific reasons: (i) to remedy the inherent inequalities between SMEs and multinationals;
(ii) to make it possible to use additional resources, together with public investment, to create jobs.
Given the regional disparities and imbalances in SMEs access to funding, Parliament called for a level playing field for all SMEs with special
focus on less developed, poorer and more remote or isolated regions in accessing funding from EU-supported financial instruments while
using intermediaries.
Members would welcome smart simplification initiatives aimed at improving the efficacy of the assessment of projects needing microcredit.
Stressing the insolvency and bankruptcy risks for SMEs facing delays in payments, Parliament called on the Commission and Member States

to improve the enforcement of the Late Payments Directive and to consider adequate financial mechanisms, such as bank guarantees.
The Commission was also called upon to:
create the European framework regulation to facilitate the creation of pan-European crowd-funding and crowd investing markets;
facilitate the securitisation of loans to micro-companies and SMEs to increase their available credit;
improve the regulatory framework for social businesses;
continue taking into account the specific nature and situation of SMEs and micro-enterprises when revising the strategic framework in
order to help these companies meet the objectives set out as regards health and safety in the workplace;
adopt, when appropriate and in the framework of the European Semesters country-specific recommendations, a differentiated
approach to improving the environment for SMEs, taking into account the country-specific circumstances and the EU regions specific
structural differences.
The resolution highlighted the need to facilitate access to the single market by removing the remaining unjustified administrative barriers and
by combating unfair competition, market distortions, bogus self-employment and letter box companies. It called on the Member States to:
adopt favourable legislative frameworks for setting up businesses as one of the ways to tackle the shadow economy, which
disadvantages SMEs;
develop forms of cooperation that involve all governance levels, businesses (including businesses linked to the social economy), trade
unions, educational institutions and other stakeholders with a view to adapting their education and training systems to address the
disparity between skills/qualifications and the needs of the job market, particularly those of SMEs.
Members were also firmly convinced that integrating refugees into the labour market would be impossible without active, solid support from
micro-enterprises and small and medium-sized enterprises in the EU.
A level playing field: parliament noted that in some cases EU competition policy could result in an advantage that mostly benefits big market
operators that are characterised by greater economies of scale than SMEs. In regions where economic development is focused on attracting
foreign direct investment (FDI), MNCs could be in some cases treated preferentially in legislative matters.
Parliament stressed in this regard that EU competition rules must guarantee a level playing field for small, medium-sized and large enterprises,
thus enabling their internationalisation, in particular in the context of new international trade agreements.
Moreover, it called on Member States to adopt the principle of income taxation in the place where it is generated and other measures against
profits shifting practices of MNCs in order to ensure a level playing field for SMEs.
Lastly, the resolution encouraged SMEs to promote teleworking and smart working, enabling workers to balance their professional and
personal lives better.

