Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2274(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU strategy towards Iran after the nuclear agreement

Subject
6.40.05.06 Relations with the countries of the Middle East
Geographical area
Iran

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
29/06/2015

HOWITT Richard
Shadow rapporteur

BROK Elmar

TANNOCK Charles

SCHAAKE Marietje

SAKORAFA Sofia

BUCHNER Klaus

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo
SCHAFFHAUSER
Jean-Luc
Committee for opinion
INTA

Rapporteur for opinion

International Trade

Appointed
01/12/2015

SCHAAKE Marietje

Key events
29/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

14/03/2016

Debate in Council

06/10/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

12/10/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

24/10/2016

Debate in Parliament

25/10/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

A8-0286/2016

Summary

25/10/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

25/10/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0402/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2274(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/04816

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE584.178

09/06/2016

EP

PE582.110

14/07/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE587.421

10/08/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE587.437

22/08/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0286/2016

12/10/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0402/2016

25/10/2016

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

INTA

2015/2274(INI) - 12/10/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Richard HOWITT (S&D, UK) on the EU strategy towards Iran after the
nuclear agreement.
The report noted that following the Iran Nuclear Deal and internal political developments in Iran, there is now an opportunity for reforms in the
country and for improvement of its relations with the European Union. Members stressed that all sides are now responsible for ensuring its
strict and full implementation.
Political dialogue: the report recalled that the Councils decision to lift all nuclear-related sanctions against Iran as a result of implementation of
its commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan Of Action (Iran nuclear deal) allows a reengagement with Iran and will create
opportunities and benefits for both sides, by providing the potential to reopen the Iranian market for European businesses.
It is pointed out that the development of EU-Iran relations should advance hand in hand with the implementation of the nuclear agreement.
Under the terms of the agreement a failure in its implementation by Iran can lead to the reintroduction of sanctions.
The report welcomed the institutional changes made within the European External Action Service (EEAS) to reflect the results of the nuclear
agreement, in particular the establishment of an Iran Task Force in the EEAS with the objective of coordinating the different strands of action
of all Iran-related issues and the establishment of an EU Delegation in Tehran.
Members called for an EU strategy for re-engagement with Iran to be based, initially, on confidence-building measures in technical areas that
would create positive precedents of EU-Iranian joint work and could pave the way for more meaningful long-term cooperation.
As regards the death penalty, they emphasised that the abolition of the death penalty is a key objective of EU human rights and foreign policy
and called for an immediate moratorium on the carrying out of death sentences in Iran.
The report also called for EU-Iran cooperation in the fight against the illegal drug trade as one way of addressing the issue of executions in the
country.
Trade and economic matters: the report noted Irans stated objective of achieving a yearly growth rate of 8 % and that European investments
are key to Irans achieving this goal. For Iran to realise its economic potential, it will have to take steps to create a transparent economic
environment conducive to international investment and take anti-corruption measures at all levels, particularly regarding compliance with the
recommendations of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) addressing questions such as the cessation of financial flows to terrorist
organisations.
The EU should fully support Irans efforts in this process.
The report highlighted that although many contracts have been signed with European firms, Iran is unable to honour its commitments because
of a lack of liquidity, meaning that the process of opening up Iran is caught in a vicious circle.

Members stressed that the lifting of the nuclear-related economic and financial sanctions by the EU and the international community is an
important element in demonstrating that the EU has implemented its commitments towards Iran.
Sectoral cooperation: noting that Iran has the second-largest gas reserves in the world and the fourth-largest oil reserves, Members stated that
energy cooperation can play a significant role in diversifying the sources of energy supply to the EU and reducing Member States' energy
dependency on single suppliers, thereby contributing to the EUs energy security. Lifting economic sanctions has the potential to unlock
significant spending on the oil and gas industry as well as other sectors of the economy, which would benefit from investment and access to
new technology.
European companies are called upon to invest in the Iranian energy sector.
The report noted that nuclear energy might not be competitive in Iran because of low reserves of uranium and the cost of extracting it.
Therefore, they called on the Commission to explore the potential for civilian nuclear cooperation with Iran and to encourage Iran to sign the
Convention on Nuclear Safety.
As regards conflicts in the Middle East, North Africa and the Gulf region, Members welcomed Irans engagement in the Syrian peace talks via
its participation in the International Syria Support Group (ISSG).
Members welcomed Irans contribution to the fight against ISIS/Daesh, including its early support for the Kurdish Regional Government in Erbil,
and recognises its decisive contribution in Iraq, which halted ISIS/Da'esh's advance and recovered territories that had been subject to jihadist
terrorism.
Socio-economic issues, rule of law, democracy and human rights: Iran is called upon to enlarge the space for political pluralism. It is also
called upon to release of all political prisoners and to free imprisoned EU citizens who have been detained or convicted under a judicial
process that did not meet international standards. The Iranian authorities are urged to ensure that the rights of religious and ethnic minorities
are fully respected and protected in law and that religious freedom is extended.
Lastly, the EEAS and the Commission are called upon to work together with the Iranian authorities in areas such as judicial reform and reform
of the prison system, including prison conditions, government accountability, respect for the rule of law, freedom of speech, citizens universal
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the fight against corruption.

2015/2274(INI) - 25/10/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 456 votes to 174, with 67 abstentions, a resolution on the EU strategy towards Iran after the nuclear
agreement.
The resolution noted that following the Iran Nuclear Deal and internal political developments in Iran, there is now an opportunity for reforms in
the country and for improvement of its relations with the European Union. Members stressed that all sides are now responsible for ensuring its
strict and full implementation.
Political dialogue: Parliament recalled that the Councils decision to lift all nuclear-related sanctions against Iran as a result of implementation of
its commitments under the Joint Comprehensive Plan Of Action (Iran nuclear deal) allows a reengagement with Iran and will create
opportunities and benefits for both sides, by providing the potential to reopen the Iranian market for European businesses.
It is pointed out that the development of EU-Iran relations should advance hand in hand with the implementation of the nuclear agreement .
Under the terms of the agreement a failure in its implementation by Iran can lead to the reintroduction of sanctions.
Parliament:
called for EU-Iran relations to be developed through multi-layered dialogue involving political, diplomatic, economic, academic,
technical, and people-to-people contacts that include civil society actors, NGOs and human rights defenders;
welcomed the institutional changes made within the European External Action Service (EEAS) to reflect the results of the nuclear
agreement, in particular the establishment of an Iran Task Force as well as the steps taken by the EEAS for the establishment of an
EU Delegation in Tehran;
called for an EU strategy for re-engagement with Iran to be based, initially, on confidence-building measures in technical areas that
would create positive precedents of EU-Iranian joint work;
insisted on the importance of developing the parliamentary dimension of EU-Iran relations as part of the strategy for re-establishing
mutual trust.
As regards the death penalty, Parliament emphasised that the abolition of the death penalty is a key objective of EU human rights and foreign
policy and called for an immediate moratorium on the carrying out of death sentences in Iran.
It also called for EU-Iran cooperation in the fight against the illegal drug trade as one way of addressing the issue of executions in the country.
Trade and economic matters: Parliament welcomed the Welcomes the positive results already achieved by the Joint Comprehensive Plan of
Action (JCPOA), such as the 43 % increase in trade between Iran and the EU during the first six months of 2016, compared with the same
period of 2015.
Members noted that Irans stated objective of achieving a yearly growth rate of 8 % and that European investments are key to Irans achieving
this goal. More than USD 1 trillion of investment in infrastructure is likely to be needed over the next 10 years, providing opportunities for
European businesses.
For Iran to realise its economic potential, it will have to take steps to create a transparent economic environment conducive to international
investment and take anti-corruption measures at all levels, particularly regarding compliance with the recommendations of the Financial Action
Task Force (FATF) addressing questions such as the cessation of financial flows to terrorist organisations. The EU should fully support Irans
efforts in this process.
Parliament supported Irans bid to join the WTO. It called on the Commission to explore options for strengthening trade and investment ties
with the aim of bringing Iran more closely into line with WTO rules and protecting European investment.

Members stressed that the lifting of the nuclear-related economic and financial sanctions by the EU and the international community is an
important element in demonstrating that the EU has implemented its commitments towards Iran.
The resolution recalled the legal uncertainty that US primary sanctions and the fact that transactions are conducted in dollars create for EU
businesses willing to invest in Iran, which is undermining the delivery of expected economic benefits from the JCPOA to the Iranian people.
Sectoral cooperation: noting that Iran has the second-largest gas reserves in the world and the fourth-largest oil reserves, Parliament stated
that energy cooperation can play a significant role in diversifying the sources of energy supply to the EU and reducing Member States' energy
dependency on single suppliers, thereby contributing to the EUs energy security.
Members are convinced that lifting economic sanctions has the potential to unlock significant spending on the oil and gas industry as well as
other sectors of the economy, which would benefit from investment and access to new technology.
They therefore called on European companies to invest in the Iranian energy sector.
Parliament noted that nuclear energy might not be competitive in Iran because of low reserves of uranium and the cost of extracting it.
Therefore, they called on the Commission to explore the potential for civilian nuclear cooperation with Iran and to encourage Iran to sign the
Convention on Nuclear Safety.
Regional security: Parliament stated that the nuclear deal opens the possibility for cooperation in resolving the regions security crisis and that
Iran should play a stabilisation role in the region. It also considered that EU-Iran cooperation in countering terrorism and violent extremism in
the region to be an important part of the political dialogue.
As regards conflicts in the Middle East, North Africa and the Gulf region, Members welcomed Irans engagement in the Syrian peace talks via
its participation in the International Syria Support Group (ISSG).
Members welcomed Irans contribution to the fight against ISIS/Daesh, including its early support for the Kurdish Regional Government in Erbil,
and recognises its decisive contribution in Iraq, which halted ISIS/Da'esh's advance and recovered territories that had been subject to jihadist
terrorism.
Socio-economic issues, rule of law, democracy and human rights: Iran is called upon to enlarge the space for political pluralism and to
cooperate fully with all UN human rights mechanisms. It is also called upon to release of all political prisoners and to free imprisoned EU
citizens who have been detained or convicted under a judicial process that did not meet international standards. The Iranian authorities are
urged to ensure that the rights of religious and ethnic minorities are fully respected and protected in law and that religious freedom is extended.
Lastly, the EEAS and the Commission are called upon to work together with the Iranian authorities in areas such as judicial reform and reform
of the prison system, including prison conditions, government accountability, respect for the rule of law, freedom of speech, citizens universal
human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the fight against corruption.

