Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2001(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

State of EU-Russia relations

Subject
6.40.04.02 Relations with Russian Federation
Geographical area
Russian Federation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
07/10/2014

LANDSBERGIS
Gabrielius
Shadow rapporteur

JAAKONSAARI Liisa

FOTYGA Anna Elżbieta

VAN BAALEN
Johannes Cornelis

SCHOLZ Helmut

MESZERICS Tamás

Key events
15/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

11/05/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

13/05/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

09/06/2015

Debate in Parliament

10/06/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

10/06/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

10/06/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2001(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A8-0162/2015

Summary

T8-0225/2015

Summary

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/02472

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE551.764

12/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE554.689

01/04/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE551.966

24/04/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0162/2015

13/05/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0225/2015

10/06/2015

EP

Summary

2015/2001(INI) - 13/05/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Gabrielius LANDSBERGIS (EPP, LT) on the state of EU-Russia
relations.
Members recalled that Russia has illegally annexed Crimea, an action which was strongly condemned by the EU and which will not be
recognised. They stated that Russia is directly or indirectly, involved in a number of 'frozen conflicts' in its neighbourhood in Transnistria,
South Ossetia, Abkhasia and Nagorno Karabakh that constitute serious impediments to the development and stability of the neighbouring
countries concerned and to their rapprochement with the EU.
Members also stated that Russia - against the spirit of good neighbourly relations and in breach of international law, rules and standards - has,
taken deliberate actions aimed at destabilising its neighbours through illegal trade embargos or the conclusion of integration treaties with
separatist and breakaway regions.
Recalling its acts in Crimea and the east of Ukraine, Members stressed that the EU cannot envisage a return to 'business as usual' and has no
choice but to conduct a critical re-assessment of its relations with Russia, which includes the drafting, as promptly as possible, of a softpower
contingency plan to counter the aggressive and divisive policies conducted by Russia, and a comprehensive plan on its future relations with
that country and with its Eastern European partners. They underlined that the resolution of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine can only be political
in nature.
Members are alarmed by the growing atmosphere of hatred directed against opposition activists, human rights defenders, minorities and
neighbouring nations, and the deterioration in the situation of human rights and condemned the intimidation of critical voices through violence,
trials, imprisonments and other measures used by the state.
Bilateral relations in danger: Members underlined that EU-Russia relations must henceforth be based on respect for international law and a
dialogue, whereby the EU would be ready to re-engage and relaunch cooperation with the authorities in Moscow in a number of specific fields
of common interest. A resumption of cooperation would be envisaged on the condition that Russia respects the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine, including Crimea, fully implements the Minsk Agreements (which include full control of the border by the Ukrainian
authorities, the unconditional withdrawal of Russian troops and weapons, and an immediate halt to the provision of assistance to rebel
groups), and stops destabilising military and security activities at the EU Member States' borders.
According to Members, the EU must clearly define both its expectations of Russia, especially as regards respecting international law and
contractual commitments and acting as a predictable partner, and the measures it will take after 31 December 2015, should Russia fail to
honour its commitments.
Members commended the solidarity and unity demonstrated by the Member States in the context of Russia´s illegal annexation of Crimea and
underlined that the deepening of EU integration and coherence between its internal and external policies is the key to a more coherent,
effective and successful EU external and security policy, including vis-à-vis Russia. They called on the Member States to carry on with, and
intensify their efforts towards, the effective elimination of decision-making bottlenecks and, also with candidate countries, the consolidation of
common policies, in particular in the areas of trade, financial services and transactions, migration, energy, external borders management,
information and cyber security.
Energy policy: Members reiterated their conviction that energy policy is a significant element of EU external policy. They support, therefore, the
swift creation of a robust European Energy Union, specifically the interconnection of national energy networks in order to reduce considerably
the dependence of individual Member States on external energy suppliers, particularly Russia.
Restrictions of individual freedoms: Members are deeply concerned by the ever-growing restrictions on media and internet freedom, the
tightening of online media control, the use of coercion to curb impartial reporting and the erosion of journalistic standards in Russia. They are
also deeply concerned at the ever more intensive contacts and cooperation, tolerated by the Russian leadership, between European populist,
fascist and extreme right-wing parties on the one hand and nationalist groups in Russia on the other. They urged the EU to provide support to
projects aimed at promoting and developing high journalistic standards, freedom of the media, and unbiased and trustworthy information in
Russia, and at deconstructing propaganda within the EU and the Eastern Partnership countries. The Commission is called upon to make
available adequate funding for initiatives developing Russian-language media alternatives to Russian state-controlled media .

Members called on Russia to acknowledge the scope and gravity of the problem of violence and harassment against LGBTI people in Russia,
and to commit to taking steps to end these abuses and to repeal the provisions of Law No. 135-FZ of June 29, 2013 (the gay propaganda law)
banning distribution of information about LGBTI relationships. They strongly condemned the government's continued crackdown on dissent by
targeting independent NGOs through the so-called "foreign agents law" and the persistent and multiform repression of activists, political
opponents and critics of the regime. It drew particular attention to the assassinations of Anna Politkovskaya, Natalya Estemirova, Boris
Nemtsov, Sergey Magnitsky, Alexander Litvinenko and others. They reiterated their call on the Council to deliver on its commitment to defend
these principles, and to adopt restrictive measures for the officials involved in the well-documented Magnitsky case.
Measures are also called for the continued political and financial support for independent civil society activists, human rights defenders,
bloggers, independent media, outspoken academics and public figures and NGOs. They encouraged the EU to reach out to Russian officials
and civil society organisations.
Lastly, Members called on the Commission to propose legislation forbidding financing of political parties in the EU by political or economic
stakeholders outside the EU.

2015/2001(INI) - 10/06/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 494 votes to 135, with 69 abstentions, a resolution on the state of EU-Russia relations.
Crimea issue: Parliament reiterated that Russia's direct and indirect involvement in the armed conflict in Ukraine and its illegal annexation of
Crimea, together with its violation of the territorial integrity of Georgia, and economic coercion and political destabilisation of its European
neighbours constitute a deliberate violation of democratic principles and fundamental values and of international law. In this context, the EU
cannot envisage a return to 'business as usual' and has no choice but to conduct a critical re-assessment of its relations with Russia, which
includes the drafting, as promptly as possible, of a soft-power contingency plan to counter the aggressive and divisive policies conducted by
Russia, and a comprehensive plan on its future relations with that country and with its Eastern European partners.
It also stressed that:
the resolution of the conflict in Eastern Ukraine can only be political in nature;
Russia can no longer be treated as, or considered, a strategic partner.
Parliament condemned the arbitrary measure of banning EU politicians and officials from access to Russian territory, and stressed that the
Russian leadership is repeatedly trespassing against international law and is violating universal standards and impeding transparency.
Parliament considered this act to be counterproductive and detrimental to the already weak channels of communication between the European
Union and Russia. Targeted EU politicians and officials should have the right to appeal such a decision before an independent court.
Bilateral relations in danger: Parliament underlined that EU-Russia relations must henceforth be based on respect for international law and a
dialogue, whereby the EU would be ready to re-engage and relaunch cooperation with the authorities in Moscow in a number of specific fields
of common interest. A resumption of cooperation would be envisaged on the condition that Russia respects the territorial integrity and
sovereignty of Ukraine, including Crimea, fully implements the Minsk Agreements (which include full control of the border by the Ukrainian
authorities, the unconditional withdrawal of Russian troops and weapons, and an immediate halt to the provision of assistance to rebel
groups), and stops destabilising military and security activities at the EU Member States' borders.
According to Members, the EU must clearly define both its expectations of Russia, especially as regards respecting international law and
contractual commitments and acting as a predictable partner, and the measures it will take after 31 December 2015, should Russia fail to
honour its commitments.
Parliament commended the solidarity and unity demonstrated by the Member States in the context of Russia´s illegal annexation of Crimea
and underlined that the deepening of EU integration and coherence between its internal and external policies is the key to a more coherent,
effective and successful EU external and security policy, including vis-à-vis Russia. It called on the Member States to carry on with, and
intensify their efforts towards, the effective elimination of decision-making bottlenecks and, also with candidate countries, the consolidation of
common policies, in particular in the areas of trade, financial services and transactions, migration, energy, external borders management,
information and cyber security.
Energy policy: Parliament reiterated its conviction that energy policy is a significant element of EU external policy. It supports, therefore, the
swift creation of a robust European Energy Union, specifically the interconnection of national energy networks in order to reduce considerably
the dependence of individual Member States on external energy suppliers, particularly Russia.
Restrictions of individual freedoms: Parliament is deeply concerned by the ever-growing restrictions on media and internet freedom, the
tightening of online media control, the use of coercion to curb impartial reporting and the erosion of journalistic standards in Russia.
It renewed its call for the development of strengthened analytical and monitoring capabilities of Russian propaganda, especially in the Russian
language, in order to be able to identify, and respond swiftly and appropriately to, deliberately biased information spread in various EU
languages. It called on the Commission to earmark without delay adequate funding for concrete projects aimed at countering Russian
propaganda and misinformation within the EU and abroad, and at providing objective information to the general public in Eastern partner
countries, and to develop the appropriate instruments for strategic communication. It called on the Commission and the Member States to also
devise a coordinated mechanism for transparency of and for the collection, monitoring and reporting of financial, political or technical
assistance provided by Russia to political parties and other organisations within the EU, with a view to assessing its involvement in, and
influence over, political life and public opinion in the EU and its Eastern neighbours, and to take appropriate measures. Plenary is deeply
concerned at the recent tendency of the Russian state-controlled media to rewrite and reinterpret historical events of the twentieth century ,
such as the signing of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact and its secret protocols, as well as the selective use of historical narrative for current
political propaganda.
It is also deeply concerned at the ever more intensive contacts and cooperation, tolerated by the Russian leadership, between European
populist, fascist and extreme right-wing parties on the one hand and nationalist groups in Russia on the other. It urged the EU to provide

support to projects aimed at promoting and developing high journalistic standards, freedom of the media, and unbiased and trustworthy
information in Russia, and at deconstructing propaganda within the EU and the Eastern Partnership countries. The Commission is called upon
to make available adequate funding for initiatives developing Russian-language media alternatives to Russian state-controlled media .
Parliament called on Russia to acknowledge the scope and gravity of the problem of violence and harassment against LGBTI people in Russia
, and to commit to taking steps to end these abuses and to repeal the provisions of Law No. 135-FZ of June 29, 2013 (the gay propaganda
law) banning distribution of information about LGBTI relationships. It strongly condemned the government's continued crackdown on dissent
by targeting independent NGOs through the so-called "foreign agents law" and the persistent and multiform repression of activists, political
opponents and critics of the regime. It drew particular attention to the assassinations of Anna Politkovskaya, Natalya Estemirova, Boris
Nemtsov, Sergey Magnitsky, Alexander Litvinenko and others. Members reiterated their call on the Council to deliver on its commitment to
defend these principles, and to adopt restrictive measures for the officials involved in the well-documented Magnitsky case.
Measures are also called for the continued political and financial support for independent civil society activists, human rights defenders,
bloggers, independent media, outspoken academics and public figures and NGOs. They encouraged the EU to reach out to Russian officials
and civil society organisations.
Moreover, Parliament called on Russia to cooperate fully with the international community on the investigation into the downing of flight MH17.
Lastly, Members called on the Commission to propose legislation forbidding financing of political parties in the EU by political or economic
stakeholders outside the EU in line with the recommendation of the Council of Europe with regard, in particular, to political or economic
stakeholders outside the EU.

