Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2894(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2015 report on Montenegro

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Montenegro, from 06/2006

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
08/10/2015

TANNOCK Charles
Shadow rapporteur

KOVATCHEV Andrey

ANDROULAKIS Nikos

RADOŠ Jozo

HADJIGEORGIOU
Takis

LUNACEK Ulrike

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

HAHN Johannes

Key events
15/12/2015

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

23/02/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

09/03/2016

Debate in Parliament

10/03/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

10/03/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

10/03/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information

T8-0092/2016

Summary

Procedure reference

2015/2894(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/04679

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE573.038

14/01/2016

EP

Motion for a resolution

B8-0309/2016

09/03/2016

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0092/2016

10/03/2016

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)349

04/07/2016

Summary

2015/2894(RSP) - 10/03/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution tabled by its Committee on Foreign Affairs on the 2015 report on Montenegro.
Members recall that further progress has been made in the accession negotiations with Montenegro and it is the most advanced enlargement
country in the negotiation process. Although they welcome the progress in the enlargement negotiations with Montenegro, they stress that this
progress must be accompanied by the strict implementation of relevant action plans and strategies.
Democratic control: Members urge more parliamentary scrutiny over the accession process. They welcomes the adoption of the 2015 action
plan for strengthening parliamentary oversight, but emphasise the need to reinforce the capacities of the Montenegrin parliament and to
improve its access to accession-related information. In parallel, they urge all political forces, in government and opposition alike, to re-engage
in sustainable dialogue and constructive cooperation within the Montenegrin parliament. They recall that dialogue and compromise are
cornerstones of any democratic decision-making process and consider it essential for a well-functioning democracy that any form of protest be
conducted peacefully and in line with the relevant laws. Parliament calls on the government to fully implement the new electoral legislation
prior to any new elections.
Fighting corruption: Parliament encourages further depoliticisation of the public administration to ensure the citizens right to good
administration free of corruption. Although, it welcomes the progress made in this field, Members remain concerned about undue influence on
judicial independence in this country. In this regard, Parliament welcomes the establishment of the Special Prosecutors Office, whose tasks
include combating corruption offences. It calls for its independence and capacity to conduct administrative investigations to be ensured.
Asylum seekers: Parliament calls for the improvement of legislative and administrative capacity in the field of asylum and migration, and urges
the Commission to provide support to this end. It commends the government of Montenegro for the steps it has taken and encourages
Montenegro to continue its efforts in this field, especially with regard to children, including by further facilitating birth registration and
subsequent or re-registration in civil registers.
Islamic terrorism: Members encourage further measures against trafficking in human beings to complement the relevant legal and institutional
aspects. They note that the Montenegrin police have intensified checks throughout the country with a view to preventing possible terrorist
attacks and recruitment of Montenegrin nationals to jihadist organisations. They encourage the competent authorities to strengthen regional
and international cooperation, including by exchanging information and best practices in a move to prevent radicalisation and respond to
terrorist activities.
Freedom of expression: Parliament remains concerned about the freedom of the media in Montenegro, which is ranked 114th in terms of press
freedom by the annual ranking of Reporters Without Borders. It encourages progress to be made in freedom of expression and decisions to be
aligned with European Court of Human Rights case law on freedom of expression. It expresses concern, however, at the shortcomings in the
investigation of previous cases of violence and intimidation against journalists and urges the competent authorities to resolve the pending
cases of violence and threats against journalists, including the murder of Duko Jovanovi? in 2004.
Minorities: Members call on the competent authorities to encourage better representation of ethnic minorities in public sector employment,
including in the police and the judiciary. In particular, Parliament urges them to adopt a new law on minorities and a law on the legal status of
religious communities in line with European standards and after due consultations with all stakeholders, to make further efforts to protect the
multi-ethnic identity of Boka Kotorska (Bay of Kotor).
Members call, once again, for additional measures to facilitate the access of Roma, Egyptian minorities and Ashkali to health care, housing
and employment. Likewise, measures need to be taken to encourage the integration of the LGBTI community in Montenegrin society.
Violence against women: Members remain concerned about domestic and sexual violence against women and girls and call for stronger
measures to be taken in this area. They stress the importance of increasing womens representation in politics during the next elections, as
well as access to the labour market for women.
Improved economic situation: Parliament, while commending the macroeconomic stability and favourable developments in the Montenegrin

economy, notes also that Montenegro does not always enforce legislation regarding contracts, which leads to legal uncertainty. It calls on the
country to implement economic reforms that will create jobs and growth, to address the countrys large current-account and general budget
deficits, to ensure the sustainability of public finances, and to implement policies that will help diversify the economy.
In parallel, Parliament reiterates its concern that in some parts of the country many people are living in relative poverty and that youth and
long-term unemployment are at persistently high levels.
Environment: Members call for further efforts to preserve the biodiversity of the Saline in Ulcinj, in particular, as the most important breeding
and wintering site for birds on the eastern Adriatic coast. It encourages the sustainable development of the coastline, and the protection of the
natural environment and biodiversity in line with European standards.
Regional cooperation: Parliament welcomes the border agreements with Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, and urges Montenegro to build
on this and speed up work to deal with unresolved border issues with Croatia and Serbia. Should it prove impossible to reach a solution by
mutual agreement, it calls for disputes to be settled in the Hague International Court of Justice, in accordance with the rules and principles of
international law. In addition, Parliament renews its call on the authorities to help resolve the succession issues related to the legacy of the
former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY), including the military and naval legacy. It also encourages Montenegro to continue to
address, in a constructive and neighbourly spirit, outstanding bilateral issues with its neighbours as early as possible in the accession process.

