Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2322(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Towards a new energy market design

Subject
3.60 Energy policy

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Rapporteur

Industry, Research and Energy

Appointed
28/10/2015

LANGEN Werner
Shadow rapporteur

ZANONATO Flavio

KRASNODĘBSKI
Zdzisław

TELIČKA Pavel

TURMES Claude

TAMBURRANO Dario

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Energy

ŠEFČOVIČ Maroš

Key events
26/11/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

14/06/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

21/06/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

12/09/2016

Debate in Parliament

13/09/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

13/09/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

13/09/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2322(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A8-0214/2016

Summary

T8-0333/2016

Summary

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ITRE/8/05064

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE575.127

27/01/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE580.478

29/03/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE578.777

05/04/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0214/2016

21/06/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0333/2016

13/09/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)876

21/12/2016

2015/2322(INI) - 21/06/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted the report by Werner LANGEN (EPP, DE) on Towards a New Energy Market
Design.
While welcoming the Commission communication of 15 July 2015 on a new energy market design, the report endorsed the view that the
transformed electricity market should be coupled with the implementation of existing legislation .
This market should enhance regional cooperation on all dimensions of energy supply and demand, and should focus on improved, more
decentralised and more flexible markets, in order to ensure a well-regulated, market-based system which is capable of delivering on all of the
EU's established energy and climate goals for 2030.
Improve the regulatory framework: Members called for the existing regulatory framework for European markets to be adjusted in order to allow
a growing share of renewable energy sources and to close existing cross-border regulatory gaps.
A new market design for electricity as part of an increasingly decentralised energy system must be based on market principles, which would
stimulate investment, ensure that SMEs have access to the energy market and unlock a sustainable and efficient electricity supply through a
stable, integrated and smart energy system. The Commission is urged to secure the implementation of the current regulatory framework.
Member States are called upon to be more proactively involved in designing a flexible and decentralised European internal market in electricity
in order to enhance coordination between national transition strategies.
Prosumers: Members called on the Commission to guide a participative process aimed at reaching a common practical understanding of the
definition of prosumers at the EU level and to include a new chapter on prosumers in the revised Renewable Energy Directive.
Price signals: Members stated that a strengthened European internal market in electricity is possible, on the basis of stronger price signals on
the wholesale market through prices that reflect actual scarcity and surplus of supplies, including price spikes, which, along with other
measures, play the role of investment signals for new capacity and flexibility services. Members stated that whether prices that reflect the
actual scarcity of supply in fact lead to adequate investment in electricity production capacity should be evaluated on a regular basis.
In working on new energy market design, the Commission should ensure a level playing field between power producers in EU and non-EU
countries and to provide European consumers with secure, sustainable and affordable energy.
Regional cooperation: stressing the enormous potential of strengthened regional cooperation, the report stressed the importance of a common
analysis of system adequacy at regional level, facilitated by the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER) and the European
Network of Transmission System Operators (ENTSO-E). It called for the transmission system operators (TSOs) of neighbouring markets to
devise a common methodology, approved by the Commission, to that end. It also stressed the importance of coordinated long-term planning
for the efficient development of transmission infrastructure and electricity markets in Europe.
Interconnection: Members regretted that there are still large gaps in the interconnections within and between some Member States, leading to
network bottlenecks and significantly impairing operational security and cross-border energy trading. They called for new approaches to be
developed with a view to overcoming bottlenecks and achieving a smart distribution grid that allows the smooth integration and provision of
services by decentralised generators, prosumers and consumers. They also reiterated support for EU regional interoperability targets.
Storage: the report stressed the need to promote the deployment of energy storage systems and to create a level playing field on which
energy storage can compete with other flexibility options, on the basis of a technology-neutral design of the energy market.
It called on the Commission to clarify the position of storage in different steps of the electricity chain, and to allow transmission and distribution
operators to invest in, use and exploit energy storage services for the purpose of grid balancing and other ancillary services.
Renewable energies: stressing that full integration of renewables into the electricity market is essential, the report called for the completion of
the integration of internal market and balancing and reserve services by fostering liquidity and cross-border trading in all market timeframes.
Members stressed the importance of stable and cost-effective renewable support schemes for long-term investment that remain responsive

and adaptable in the short term and are tailored to national needs and circumstances, allowing the gradual phasing-out of subsidies for mature
renewable technologies.

2015/2322(INI) - 13/09/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 454 votes to 188 with 61 abstentions, a resolution on the issue Towards a New Energy Market Design.
While welcoming the Commission communication of 15 July 2015 on a new energy market design, Parliament endorsed the view that the
transformed electricity market should be coupled with the implementation of existing legislation.
This market should enhance regional cooperation on all dimensions of energy supply and demand, and should focus on improved, more
decentralised and more flexible markets, in order to ensure a well-regulated, market-based system which is capable of delivering on all of the
EU's established energy and climate goals for 2030.
Members considered that three innovative elements which have necessitated a redesign of the energy market are:
the increased presence of renewables with market-driven remuneration;
stronger integration of national markets through the development of interconnections;
the development of smart grids and new decentralised generation technologies, which will allow consumers to play a more active role
as both consumer and producer, and will foster better demand-side management.
Improve the regulatory framework: Members considered the full implementation of the Third Energy Package in all Member States to be one of
the most important steps towards a European energy market. They urged the Commission, therefore, to secure the implementation of the
current regulatory framework and Member States to be more proactively involved in designing a flexible and decentralised European internal
market in electricity.
Parliament called for the existing regulatory framework for European markets to be adjusted in order to allow a growing share of renewable
energy sources and to close existing cross-border regulatory gaps.
A new market design for electricity must be based on market principles, which would stimulate investment, ensure that SMEs have access to
the energy market and unlock a sustainable and efficient electricity supply through a stable, integrated and smart energy system.
Given that investments in the field of energy require a stable and predictable long?term framework, the challenge EU has to face will be that of
instilling confidence in the outcome of the new rules.
Prosumers: Members called on the Commission to guide a participative process aimed at reaching a common practical understanding of the
definition of prosumers at the EU level and to include a new chapter on prosumers in the revised Renewable Energy Directive.
Price signals: Parliament stated that a strengthened European internal market in electricity is possible, on the basis of stronger price signals on
the wholesale market through prices that reflect actual scarcity and surplus of supplies, including price spikes, which, along with other
measures, play the role of investment signals for new capacity and flexibility services. It felt that whether prices that reflect the actual scarcity
of supply in fact lead to adequate investment in electricity production capacity should be evaluated on a regular basis.
In working on new energy market design, the Commission should ensure a level playing field between power producers in EU and non-EU
countries and to provide European consumers with secure, sustainable and affordable energy.
Regional cooperation: stressing the enormous potential of strengthened regional cooperation, Parliament stressed the importance of a
common analysis of system adequacy at regional level, facilitated by the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (ACER) and the
European Network of Transmission System Operators (ENTSO-E). It called for the transmission system operators (TSOs) of neighbouring
markets to devise a common methodology, approved by the Commission, to that end. It also stressed the importance of coordinated long-term
planning for the efficient development of transmission infrastructure and electricity markets in Europe.
Any capacity mechanism in the EU must be designed from the perspective of cross-border cooperation following the completion of thorough
studies on its necessity, and must comply with EU rules on competition and State aid.
Interconnection: Parliament regretted that there are still large gaps in the interconnections within and between some Member States, leading
to network bottlenecks and significantly impairing operational security and cross-border energy trading. It called for new approaches to be
developed with a view to overcoming bottlenecks and achieving a smart distribution grid that allows the smooth integration and provision of
services by decentralised generators, prosumers and consumers. It also reiterated support for EU regional interoperability targets.
Storage: Parliament stressed the need to promote the deployment of energy storage systems and to create a level playing field on which
energy storage can compete with other flexibility options, on the basis of a technology-neutral design of the energy market.
It called on the Commission to clarify the position of storage in different steps of the electricity chain, and to allow transmission and distribution
operators to invest in, use and exploit energy storage services for the purpose of grid balancing and other ancillary services.
Renewable energies: stressing that full integration of renewables into the electricity market is essential, Parliament called for the completion of
the integration of internal market and balancing and reserve services by fostering liquidity and cross-border trading in all market timeframes.
Members stressed the importance of stable and cost-effective renewable support schemes for long-term investment that remain responsive
and adaptable in the short term and are tailored to national needs and circumstances, allowing the gradual phasing-out of subsidies for mature
renewable technologies.

