Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2095(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Situation in the Mediterranean and need for a holistic EU approach to
migration

Subject
7.10.08 Migration policy
Geographical area
Mediterranean Sea area

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
26/02/2015

METSOLA Roberta

26/02/2015

KYENGE Cécile
Kashetu
Shadow rapporteur

STEVENS Helga

WIKSTRÖM Cecilia

SPINELLI Barbara

SARGENTINI Judith

CORRAO Ignazio
NI FONTANA Lorenzo
Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
13/05/2015

PAPADAKIS Demetris
DEVE

Development

08/06/2015
BECERRA
BASTERRECHEA Beatriz

BUDG

Budgets

24/04/2015
DEPREZ Gérard

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

07/10/2015
MORIN-CHARTIER
Elisabeth

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

09/06/2015
KYLLÖNEN Merja

REGI

Regional Development

01/12/2015
COZZOLINO Andrea

FEMM

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

28/04/2015
HONEYBALL Mary

PETI

05/05/2015

Petitions
MIZZI Marlene

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Migration and Home Affairs

AVRAMOPOULOS Dimitris

Key events
30/04/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

12/10/2015

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

Summary

09/11/2015

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

Summary

16/03/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

23/03/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

12/04/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

12/04/2016

Debate in Parliament

12/04/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/04/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0066/2016

Summary

T8-0102/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2095(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Strategic initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/03166

Documentation gateway
Committee opinion

BUDG

PE560.807

04/09/2015

EP

Committee opinion

TRAN

PE565.012

19/10/2015

EP

Committee opinion

FEMM

PE560.730

22/10/2015

EP

Committee opinion

PETI

PE560.805

26/10/2015

EP

Committee opinion

DEVE

PE565.184

12/11/2015

EP

Committee opinion

AFET

PE560.599

18/11/2015

EP

PE575.215

19/01/2016

EP

Committee draft report
Committee opinion

REGI

PE573.159

17/02/2016

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE571.679

18/02/2016

EP

PE577.029

22/02/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

Amendments tabled in committee

PE577.030

22/02/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE577.031

22/02/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE577.032

22/02/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0066/2016

23/03/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0102/2016

12/04/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)484

20/09/2016

2015/2095(INI) - 12/10/2015 Resolution/conclusions adopted by Council
The Foreign Affairs council adopted conclusions on migration in the context of the unprecedented migratory and refugee crisis that the EU is
now facing, marked by a sharp increase of mixed migratory flows along the Eastern Mediterranean and Western Balkans, in parallel with a
constant flow along the Central Mediterranean route.
The Council confirmed the need of a comprehensive and balanced external migration and asylum policy for the EU and reaffirmed its full
commitment to human rights, including to the situation of women and girls as well as other vulnerable persons and groups.
Addressing the root causes of migratory flows: the Council confirmed its commitment to mobilise all appropriate instruments and policies and
support efforts to address the root causes of migratory flows, in particular conflicts, political instability, human rights violations, poor
socio-economic development, including lack of employment opportunities, poor governance and climate change.
In this regard, the Council continues to support diplomatic initiatives by the UN to find solutions to the conflicts in Syria and Libya , underpinned
by efforts of the HRVP, the Commission and Member States.
The importance of close cooperation with first countries of asylum, countries of origin and transit to jointly address this common challenge was
also underlined.
Cooperation with Turkey: the Council considered it essential to step-up EU-Turkey cooperation on support of refugees and migration and
looked forward to an agreement with Turkey as part of a comprehensive agenda based on mutual commitments.
Financing: the Council welcomed the decision to substantially increase the funding of the EU Regional Trust Fund recently established in
response to the Syrian crisis (the "Madad Fund") with over 500 EUR million in EU funding to be matched by efforts from EU Member States
and other countries. The extension of its scope to the Western Balkans was proposed.
Dialogue with African countries: the Council recalled the importance to engage in a comprehensive dialogue with African countries of origin
and transit in order to jointly manage migration and asylum flows in the spirit of partnership, ownership and shared responsibility .
In this context, it called for a closer engagement with African partners through the EU-Africa Migration and Mobility continental dialogue, the
EU's regional strategies (Sahel, Horn of Africa, Gulf of Guinea) and dialogues (Rabat, Khartoum) and the Cotonou Partnership Agreement.
High Level Dialogues on migration: such dialogues on the broad agenda on migration and asylum should be encouraged, carried out in a spirit
of partnership and should help identify leverage and enhance cooperation, in particular on readmission.
The Council reiterated its call on the Commission, together with the EEAS, to propose, within six months, comprehensive and tailor-made
packages to reinforce overall cooperation with third-countries in order to implement effectively readmission and returns.
Cooperation with international partners: calling on the international community to increase its efforts to deal with this crisis, the Council wanted
to see further reinforcement of cooperation with key international partners and with the United Nations, in particular UN High Commissioner for
Refugees, UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA), UN Development Programme (UNDP), as well as with
organisations such as the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC).
Fight against criminal networks of traffickers and smugglers: reaffirming that this issue remains a priority, the Council welcomed the transition
to the second phase of EUNAVFOR MED Operation SOPHIA on the high seas. It invited the HRVP to continue work in order to allow the
transition to the successive phases of the operation.
It also asked for the reinforcement of EUCAP Sahel Niger.
Libya: underlining that a solution to the Libyan conflict remains crucial to any effort in addressing migratory flows through the Central
Mediterranean, the Council recalled that the EU stands ready to resume support to the Libyan authorities to address irregular migration ,
especially in the area of border management and the fight against trafficking of human beings.

2015/2095(INI) - 09/11/2015 Resolution/conclusions adopted by Council
The Council adopted conclusions on measures to handle the refugee and migration crisis. In full cooperation with the Commission and bearing
in mind the necessity to safeguard the functioning of the Schengen area and to reduce migratory pressures, the Council decided:
to encourage Member States and relevant third countries to intensify ongoing efforts to substantially increase reception capacities;
the establishment of hotspots in Italy and Greece will be intensified, so that all of these function by end of November 2015 as
previously agreed;

all participating Member States will speed up the relocation process, notably by communicating their capacities for first relocations and
by nominating as appropriate relocation liaison officers to Italy and Greece, preferably by 16 November 2015. The Council and the
Commission support Italy and Greece in their decisions to register migrants before further handling their case on the mainland, in
particular with Eurodac machines provided by Member States;
that Member States, with the full support of the Commission and Frontex, will substantially improve the return rate;
to overcome the potential lack of cooperation of migrants as they arrive into the European Union and while fully respecting the
fundamental rights and the principle of non-refoulement, Member States will make use of possibilities provided by the EU acquis, such
as (1) asylum procedures at borders or transit zones; (2) accelerated procedures; (3) non-admissibility of subsequent asylum
applications by the individuals concerned; (4) coercive measures, including, as a last resort, detention for a maximum period
necessary for the completion of underlying procedures;
to fully support the Commission in pursuing contingency planning of humanitarian assistance for the Western Balkans;
to assist the Member States concerned in respecting their legal obligation to perform adequate controls, to manage and to regain
controls of the external borders and increase coordination of actions relating to border management. This will involve a range of
supporting measures by Frontex, gradually extending, as necessary, to the deployment of Rapid Border Intervention Teams (RABITs)
in accordance with EU rules;
to support the upscaling by 1 December 2015 of the Poseidon Sea Joint Operation in Greece within the current operational plan;
to conduct a thorough debate on the functioning of the Schengen area;
to invite Europol to accelerate the establishment of the European Migrant Smuggling Centre (EMSC) and invite Member States, in
coordination with the Commission, to set up by 1 December 2015 a network of single operational contact points on migrant smuggling;
to continue examining pending legislative proposals on a crisis relocation mechanism and on safe countries of origin as already
planned, as well as on other priority actions such as on the adaptation of the Dublin system and on the gradual establishment of an
integrated management system for external borders;
to invite the Commission and the High Representative to press for practical results on return and readmission in their bilateral
dialogues, notably during the upcoming high-level meetings with Afghanistan, Morocco, Nigeria, Pakistan, Tunisia and Turkey;
the first European Migration Liaison Officers (EMLOs) should be deployed as a matter of priority to Ethiopia, Niger, Pakistan and
Serbia by the end of January 2016;
to support accelerating the fulfilment of the visa liberalisation roadmap with Turkey towards all participating Member States and the full
implementation of the readmission agreement, in the context of the enhanced cooperation foreseen in the action plan;
to define, as a matter of urgency, a common information strategy addressed to asylum seekers, migrants, smugglers and traffickers
aiming at (1) discouraging migrants to embark on perilous journey and to have recourse to smugglers, (2) explaining how EU rules on
the management of external borders and international protection operate, including resettlement, relocation and return.

2015/2095(INI) - 23/03/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the joint report by Roberta METSOLA (EPP, MT) and Kashetu KYENGE
(S&D, IT) on the situation in the Mediterranean and the need for a holistic EU approach to migration.
Facing a humanitarian disaster: Members highlighted that in 2015 1.83 million persons were detected while attempting to cross irregularly the
EUs external borders, setting an unprecedented record compared to the 282 500 migrants who arrived in the Union in the course of the whole
2014. In 2015, over 1.4 million applications for international protection were lodged in the EU+ (EU-28 plus Norway and Switzerland with
numbers rising steadily since April 2015).
Recalling that solidarity must be the principle upon which Union action on migration is based, Members stated that starting from the premise
that saving lives must be a first priority and that proper funding, at Union and Member State level, for search and rescue operations is
essential.
However, Members called for a clear distinction to be made between those persons who are smuggled into the Union and those who are
trafficked into the Union because, while the policy response must be properly integrated, they must also be properly targeted.
Members pointed out that humanitarian admission can be used as a complement to resettlement in order to give urgent protection, often on a
temporary basis, to the most vulnerable where needed, e.g. unaccompanied minors or refugees with disabilities.
On the revision of the Dublin III Regulation: the report noted that the current system does not take into sufficient consideration the particular
migratory pressure faced by Member States situated at the Unions external borders. Members called for changes in order to ensure fairness,
solidarity and shared responsibility between Member States. In reality, the current mechanisms of the Dublin system have failed to be
objective, to establish fair criteria for allocating responsibility for applications for international protection and to provide swift access to
protection. Members pointed out that one option for a fundamental overhaul of the Dublin system would be to establish a central collection of
applications at Union level viewing each asylum seeker as someone seeking asylum in the Union as a whole and not in an individual Member
State and to establish a central system for the allocation of responsibility for any persons seeking asylum in the Union. They suggest that such
a system could provide for certain thresholds per Member State relative to the number of arrivals, which could conceivably help in deterring
secondary movements, as all Member States would be fully involved in the centralised system and no longer have individual responsibility for
allocation of applicants to other Member States. Members stated that such a system could function on the basis of a number of Union hotspots
from where Union distribution should take place and underlined that any new system for allocation of responsibility must incorporate the key
concepts of family unity and the best interests of the child.
Relocation and resettlement: the report called on the Member States to respect their obligations as regards the emergency relocalisation
measure. It underlined that on 3 March 2016, only 338 of the 39 600 asylum seekers awaiting reassignment from Italian reception facilities to
other Member States had actually been relocated, while in the case of Greece 322 out of the 66 400 projected relocations had actually taken
place.
On resettlement, Members stressed that the Union needs a binding and mandatory legislative approach to resettlement. They recommended
that, to have an impact, such an approach must provide for resettlement of a meaningful number of refugees, with regard to the overall
numbers of refugees seeking international protection in the Union.
As regards hotspots, Members called for the allocation of technical and financial resources and support to Member States of first arrival, such
as Italy and Greece, to enable the swift and effective registration and referral to the competent authorities of all migrants arriving in the Union

with full respect for their fundamental rights.
Schengen: Members took note that on 15 December 2015, the Commission came forward with a proposal for a targeted revision of the
Schengen Borders Code, proposing to introduce systematic controls of all Union nationals (not only on third-country nationals) against the
relevant databases at the external borders of the Schengen Area. They recalled that the Schengen Area is one of the major achievements of
European integration and that the conflict in Syria and other conflicts elsewhere in the region have triggered record numbers of refugees and
migrants arriving in the Union, which in turn has revealed deficiencies at parts of the Union's external borders. Therefore, in response, some
Member States have felt the need to close their internal borders or introduce temporary border controls, thus calling into question the proper
functioning of the Schengen Area.
Returns: lastly, Members stated that it is necessary to adopt new EU readmission agreements which should take preference over bilateral
agreements between Member States and third countries. The return of migrants should be carried out safely and where the country to which
they are being returned is safe for them.

2015/2095(INI) - 12/04/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 459 votes to 206 with 52 abstentions, a resolution on the situation in the Mediterranean and the need for
a holistic EU approach to migration.
Dealing with a humanitarian disaster: Parliament noted that according to Frontex data, in 2015 1.83 million persons were detected while
attempting to cross irregularly the EUs external borders, setting an unprecedented record compared to the 282 500 migrants who arrived in
the Union in the course of the whole 2014. According to IOM/UNICEF data, around 20 % of all migrants arriving by sea are children.
Recalling the principle of solidarity and fair sharing of responsibility in matters relating to migration, which is at the heart of the whole of the
Union system, Parliament starts from the premise that saving lives must be a first priority and that proper funding, at Union and Member State
level, for search and rescue operations is essential. It noted that there has been an increase in the number of irregular arrivals by sea and an
alarming increase in the number of deaths at sea, and that a better European response is still required.
However, Parliament called for a clear distinction to be made between those persons who are smuggled into the Union and those who are
trafficked into the Union because the policy response must be properly targeted. It stated that, in general terms, the criminal smuggling of
migrants involves facilitating the irregular entry of a person to a Member State, whereas human trafficking involves the recruitment,
transportation or reception of a person through the use of violent, deceptive or abusive means, for the purpose of exploitation.
Parliament pointed to the role of Union agencies in the fight against criminal smuggling. It noted, as a positive step forward, that the
Commission adopted a Union Action Plan against Migrant Smuggling on 27 May 2015, under which it provides for the setting up of a Contact
Group of Union Agencies on migrant smuggling, to strengthen their operational cooperation and information exchange.
On relocation: the resolution noted that, within the last year, the Council has adopted two decisions on temporary relocation measures in the
Union, and that they involve the transfer of applicants for international protection from Greece and Italy to other Member States. It observed
that, although the Relocation Decisions do not end the current Dublin rules on allocation of responsibility, they do constitute a temporary
derogation from the Dublin rules. Parlaiment was concerned that, under the current Relocation Decisions, Member States of first arrival still
have to handle the more complicated claims for international protection (and appeals), have to organise longer periods of reception, and will
have to coordinate returns for those ultimately not entitled to international protection. It reiterated that any new system for the management of
the Common European Asylum System must be based on solidarity and a fair sharing of responsibility. It
felt that the preferences of the applicant should, as much as practically possible, be taken into account when carrying out relocation.
On resettlement: Parliament took the view that resettlement is one of the preferred options for granting safe and lawful access to the Union for
refugees and those in need of international protection, where the refugees can neither return to their home countries nor receive effective
protection or be integrated into the host country. It pointed out that, given the unprecedented flows of migrants that have reached and continue
to reach the Unions external borders, the Union needs a binding and mandatory legislative approach to resettlement. Such an approach must
provide for resettlement of a meaningful number of refugees seeking international protection and be permanent Union-wide resettlement
programme, with mandatory participation of Member States.
On the revision of the Dublin III Regulation: recalling the general principles of common European asylum and the question of humanitarian
admission, Parliament observed that the operation of the Dublin III Regulation has raised many questions linked to fairness and solidarity in
the allocation of the Member State responsible for examining an application for international protection. It noted that the current system does
not take into sufficient consideration the particular migratory pressure faced by Member States situated at the Unions external borders . It
believed that Member States need to accept the on-going difficulties with the Dublin logic, and that the Union should develop options for
solidarity both among Member States and the migrants concerned.
Members pointed out that the pressure placed on the system as established by the Dublin Regulation has shown that the system has largely
failed to achieve its two primary goals of establishing objective and fair criteria for allocation of responsibility and of providing swift access to
international protection. It reiterated its reservations regarding the criterion whereby currently it is the Member State of first entry that is
responsible for the examination of a claim for international protection, and considered that this criterion should be revised.
Parliament further pointed out that, at the same time, the incidence of secondary movements across the Union remains high. The Dublin
system was not designed to share responsibility among Member States, but to assign swiftly responsibility for processing an asylum
application to a single Member State. Members recommended that the criteria on which the Relocation Decisions are based should be built
directly into the Unions standard rules for allocating responsibility for handling claims for international protection. They took the view that the
European Union should support the Member States receiving the most asylum claims with proportionate and adequate financial and technical
support. They considered that the rationale of using solidarity and responsibility-sharing measures is to enhance the quality and functioning of
the CEAS.
Parliament pointed out that one option for a fundamental overhaul of the Dublin system would be to establish a central collection of
applications at Union level viewing each asylum seeker as someone seeking asylum in the Union as a whole and not in an individual Member
State and to establish a central system for the allocation of responsibility for any persons seeking asylum in the Union. It suggested that such
a system could provide for certain thresholds per Member State relative to the number of arrivals, which could conceivably help in deterring

secondary movements, as all Member States would be fully involved in the centralised system and no longer have individual responsibility for
allocation of applicants to other Member States. Such a system could function on the basis of a number of Union hotspots from where Union
distribution should take place.
Integration: Parliament underlined that integration measures for all legally residing third-country nationals should promote inclusion, rather than
isolation. It emphasised that hosting Member States must offer refugees support and opportunities to integrate and build a life in their new
society. This should necessarily include accommodation, literacy and language courses, inter-cultural dialogue, education and professional
training, and also effective access to democratic structures in society as provided for in the Qualifications Directive. However, integration is a
two-way process and respect for the values upon which the Union is built must be an integral part of the integration process, as must respect
for the fundamental rights of the refugees.
Parliament also stressed the importance of family unity and the rights of the child.
On a list of safe countries of origin: Members acknowledged the recent Commission proposal for a Union list of safe countries of origin,
amending the Asylum Procedures Directive. They observed that if such a Union list became obligatory for Member States it could, in principle,
be an important tool for facilitating the asylum process, including return. They regretted the current situation in which Member States apply
different lists, containing different safe countries, hampering uniform application and incentivising secondary movements.
On the European Asylum Support Office (EASO): Parliament recommended that EASO be developed, in the long term, into a principal
coordinator of the CEAS with a view to guaranteeing common application of the rules of that system. It understood that the Commission
recently proposed European Border and Coast Guard, which is intended to replace Frontex and is meant to ensure a European integrated
border management at the external borders.
On Schengen and the management and security of the external borders: Parliament recalled that, since the establishment of the Schengen
Area, the Union is an area without internal borders, and that the inherent logic of such a system has always been that the abolition of internal
border controls has to go hand in hand with compensatory measures strengthening the external borders of the Schengen Area and the sharing
of information through the Schengen Information System (SIS). It accepted that the Union needs to strengthen its external border protection
and further develop the CEAS, and that measures are necessary to enhance the capacity of the Schengen Area to address the new
challenges facing Europe and preserve the fundamental principles of security and free movement of persons. Members stressed again that, as
regards legislation specifically in the area of asylum and migration, in order for legislation on internal and external borders to be effective, it is
essential that measures agreed at Union level are implemented properly by Member States . It underlined that better implementation of
measures by Member States at the external borders, following increased pressure, is essential.
Parliament took note that on 15 December 2015 the Commission came forward with a proposal for a targeted revision of the Schengen
Borders Code. It considered that the Schengen Area is one of the major achievements of European integration, and noted that the conflict in
Syria and other conflicts elsewhere in the region have triggered record numbers of refugees and migrants arriving in the Union. Members were
concerned by the fact that, in response, some Member States have felt the need to close their internal borders or introduce temporary border
controls, thus calling into question the proper functioning of the Schengen Area.
Hotspots: Parliament called for the hotspots to be set up as soon as possible in order to give concrete operational assistance to Member
States. It calls for the allocation of technical and financial resources and support to Member States of first arrival, such as Italy and Greece, to
enable the swift and effective registration and referral to the competent authorities of all migrants arriving in the Union with full respect for their
fundamental rights. It considered that quick and effective support by the Union to Member States and the acceptance of such support is
important for mutual trust. One of the main purposes of hotspots is to allow the Union to grant protection and humanitarian assistance in a swift
manner to those in need.
Parliament stressed the need for cooperation with third countries on issues related to asylum. It understood that the external dimension should
focus on cooperation with third countries in tackling the root causes of, and addressing, irregular flows to Europe. It recalled that the Union has
intensified its external cooperation with third countries in migration and asylum in order to respond adequately to the current refugee crisis, and
has launched new cooperation initiatives, such as the EU-Turkey Joint Action Plan. Members emphasised, in that respect, the need for all
parties to fulfil their commitments deriving from the Joint Action Plan, including addressing the root causes leading to the massive influx of
Syrians. On addressing root causes, they reaffirmed that the Union must adopt a long-term strategy to help counteract the push factors in third
countries (conflict, persecution, ethnic cleansing, generalised violence or other factors such as extreme poverty, climate change or natural
disasters), which force people into the hands of criminal smuggling networks, which they see as their only chance to reach the Union.
Funding: Parliament welcomed the recently established Emergency Trust Fund for Africa and the EUR 1.8 billion pledged to the fund, which
has added an additional element to third country funding, and called on the Member States to continue contributing to the fund. It
recommended that the four thematic pillars addressing (i) legal migration and mobility, (ii) irregular migration and trafficking in human beings,
(iii) international protection, and (iv) the development impact of migration, should be of equal importance in Union external policy and funding.
Lastly, Parliament agreed that, while recent budgetary proposals and the additional funding foreseen in the Unions budget for 2016, including
the use of the flexibility instrument, should be welcomed, medium and longer-term funding remain a concern. It was concerned that the
increase in the amounts proposed for budget lines under AMIF for 2016 have not been accompanied by a proposed revision of the global
resources available under that fund for the 2014-2020 funding period. It understood that, left as is, the result will be that funding under AMIF
will have dried up long before 2020.

