Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2036(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Strategic military situation in the Black Sea basin following the illegal
annexation of Crimea by Russia

Subject
6.10.02 Common security and defence policy; WEU, NATO
6.10.04 Third-country political situation, local and regional conflicts
6.10.05 Peace preservation, humanitarian and rescue tasks, crisis
management
Geographical area
Black Sea area
Ukraine
Russian Federation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
22/09/2014

PAŞCU Ioan Mircea
Shadow rapporteur

LANDSBERGIS
Gabrielius

JUREK Marek

NART Javier

COUSO PERMUY
Javier

TARAND Indrek

Key events
12/02/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

04/05/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

21/05/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

10/06/2015

Debate in Parliament

11/06/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

11/06/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/06/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0171/2015

Summary

T8-0232/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2036(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/02489

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE546.620

06/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE552.050

27/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0171/2015

21/05/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0232/2015

11/06/2015

EP

Summary

2015/2036(INI) - 21/05/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Ioan Mircea PA?CU (S&D, RO) on the strategic military situation in the
Black Sea Basin following the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia.
Members recalled that the European Council has strongly condemned the Russian Federations annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol. They
recalled that the European Council firmly supported the non-recognition of Russias annexation of Crimea and that Russias actions have
seriously weakened the armed forces of Ukraine and destabilised the situation in the east of Ukraine.
Russia now unlawfully controls hundreds of kilometres of the Crimean coastline and the adjacent waters facing NATO and EU maritime
borders. It has fuelled aggressive actions on Ukrainian territory in spite of the sanctions imposed on it by the European Union. Members
warned that by occupying the entire peninsula, Russia has gained a very important launching pad facing both west (the Balkans, Transnistria
and the Danube Mouths) and south (the Eastern Mediterranean), where it has established a permanent naval task force, and that the illegal
annexation of Crimea offers Russia a southern Kaliningrad, another outpost directly bordering on NATO.
Change in the strategic and security landscape of the Black Sea: in this context, Members firmly supported the non-recognition of Russias
annexation of Crimea not without reiterating their commitment to the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. They noted
that the illegal annexation of Crimea has precipitated a significant change in the strategic landscape of the Black Sea Basin and the adjacent
area. They considered that the aggressive actions of Russia represent its return to a hostile, block-to-block type approach.
Members stated that the change in the geostrategic landscape, the evolving military situation in the Black Sea Basin and the forceful
annexation of Crimea by Russia are indicative of broader and systemic challenges to the post-Cold War, norms-based European security
architecture. The EU and the Member States must have a security response to these challenges and reconsider their foreign and security
policies in light of this, which must be reflected in a reviewed European Security Strategy, in the European Maritime Security Strategy and in
the EU Strategy for the Black Sea. Members are particularly concerned about Russias continuous military build-up in the occupied Abkhazia
and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions of Georgia. This military infrastructure of both defensive and offensive character, with its wide
operational range, poses a serious threat to the whole Black Sea region .
Noting with concern that Russia has bolstered its air and naval defences in the Black Sea Basin considerably, deploying new naval defence
(anti-ship) missiles (with a range of 600 km, able to reach the Bosphorus), Members recalled President Putins declaration that he was ready to
put Russian nuclear forces on alert during Russias seizure of Crimea, had the West intervened against the annexation. The potential Russian
deployment of dual-capable weapon systems in Crimea place in doubt Russias good intentions when it comes to achieving progress on the
multilateral nuclear disarmament agenda in the forthcoming Non-Proliferation Treaty review, undermining the efforts already made in that
direction.
Members are concerned about the situation in the east of Ukraine and called for all hostilities to be halted and prevent further war crimes and
new victims.
Staying firm and communicating with Russia: Members underlined that the relationship with Russia should, in general, be cooperative rather
than confrontational in the long run. They called for a change of Russian policy towards Ukraine, in particular the full and unconditional
implementation of the Minsk agreements of September 2014 and February 2015 and the return of Crimea to Ukraine.
Members called on EU Member States to remain firm and united in their commitment to the agreed sanctions against Russia, also by freezing
all military and defence cooperation and by cancelling contracts, such as for the delivery of Mistral class amphibious assault ships to Russia.
Energy, maritime, border and human security in the Black Sea region: Members urged the Member States to take the steps needed to reduce
their energy dependence and to ensure the security of oil and gas exploitation and transportation activities in the Black Sea region. They called

on Commission to resume the work towards the construction of the Nabucco gas pipeline. They reaffirmed that given Europes dependence on
the Black Sea for the transit of energy supplies, the EU has a strategic interest in deterring regional actors from brinkmanship and, for that
purpose, may need to mobilise European naval and airspace assets to the Black Sea.
Members condemned the violations of human rights in Crimea that have occurred since the occupation by Russian forces, including
censorship of freedom of speech and the persecution of minorities (Crimean Tatars in particular).
On an ecological level, Members drew attention to the extreme environmental vulnerability of the Black Sea basin and stressed that the
growing militarisation of the region poses further risks to this delicate eco-system.
They recalled that, faced with the Russian hybrid war in Ukraine, the EU must stay united and speak with a single voice which is considered as
a prerequisite of an effective response to all security threats.
Role of the EU and international actors: Members underlined that the Black Sea region should have real priority for the EU. They considered
that the current Black Sea Synergy (BSS) format is outdated and called for a revision of this strategy.
They stressed that, in spite of the fact that the BSS is practically on hold, effective cooperation with the states in the Black Sea Basin should
continue.
Members stressed the critical importance of coordinating with NATO, in particular with the Black Sea littoral states that are members of the
Alliance, and with the United States, as the Black Sea Basin is a key component of Euro-Atlantic security. They called for the modernisation
and enhancement of the military capabilities of those Black Sea littoral states that are members of EU and NATO. They called on NATO to
continue to develop its cyber and missile defence capabilities, including in the Black Sea region, and to develop contingency plans for
deterring and countering asymmetric and hybrid warfare. They urged the Commission to support the Member States in their efforts to identify
solutions for increasing their defence budget to the level of 2%. They welcomed, in passing, the pledge made by members of NATO during the
last NATO Summit in Newport to ensure that their defence spending reaches a minimum of 2% GDP by 2024. They noted that following the
2008 war in Georgia and the 2014 illegal annexation of Crimea, Russia has territorially crippled the two countries, making them ineligible for
NATO membership. They considered that, while not being able to defend them directly, NATO has a moral obligation to support Georgias and
Ukraines ability to defend themselves.
Lastly, Members recalled that NATO should preserve its general naval and air superiority in the Black Sea Basin.

2015/2036(INI) - 11/06/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 356 votes to 183, with 96 abstentions, a resolution on the strategic military situation in the Black Sea
Basin following the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia.
Parliament recalled that the European Council has strongly condemned the Russian Federations annexation of Crimea and Sevastopol. It
recalled that the European Council firmly supported the non-recognition of Russias annexation of Crimea and that Russias actions have
seriously weakened the armed forces of Ukraine and destabilised the situation in the east of Ukraine.
Russia now unlawfully controls hundreds of kilometres of the Crimean coastline and the adjacent waters facing NATO and EU maritime
borders. It has fuelled aggressive actions on Ukrainian territory in spite of the sanctions imposed on it by the European Union. Members
warned that by occupying the entire peninsula, Russia has gained a very important launching pad facing both west (the Balkans, Transnistria
and the Danube Mouths) and south (the Eastern Mediterranean), where it has established a permanent naval task force, and that the illegal
annexation of Crimea offers Russia a southern Kaliningrad, another outpost directly bordering on NATO.
Change in the strategic and security landscape of the Black Sea: in this context, Parliament firmly supported the non-recognition of Russias
annexation of Crimea not without reiterating their commitment to the independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity of Ukraine. It noted that
the illegal annexation of Crimea has precipitated a significant change in the strategic landscape of the Black Sea Basin and the adjacent area.
It considered that the aggressive actions of Russia represent its return to a hostile, block-to-block type approach.
Members stated that the change in the geostrategic landscape, the evolving military situation in the Black Sea Basin and the forceful
annexation of Crimea by Russia are indicative of broader and systemic challenges to the post-Cold War, norms-based European security
architecture. The EU and the Member States must have a security response to these challenges and reconsider their foreign and security
policies in light of this, which must be reflected in a reviewed European Security Strategy, in the European Maritime Security Strategy and in
the EU Strategy for the Black Sea.
Enhancement of Russian military complex: Parliament is deeply concerned about Russias current defensive and offensive military build-up in
the Black Sea, including in the occupied Abkhazia and Tskhinvali/South Ossetia regions of Georgia. This military infrastructure poses a serious
threat to the whole Black Sea region. It is also concerned about the intensified Russian pressure on the EU eastern border, including on
Romania, Poland and the Baltic States.
Members noted with concern that Russia has bolstered its air and naval defences in the Black Sea Basin considerably, deploying new naval
defence (anti-ship) missiles (with a range of 600 km, able to reach the Bosphorus) and ensuring that Russian fighter planes control about three
quarters of the Black Sea Basin airspace (by practically tripling the number of airports in Crimea). Russia has bolstered its capabilities in both
strategic and tactical terms: strategically, long-range bombers, capable of carrying cruise missiles, and reconnaissance aviation operating
close to the western shores of the Black Sea, have the potential to penetrate deep into Central Europe. In this context, Parliament welcomed
France's decision to reconsider the delivery of the Mistral amphibious assault ships to Russia and salutes France's negotiations to
unequivocally and finally cancel this deal.
Parliament recalled President Putins declaration that he was ready to put Russian nuclear forces on alert during Russias seizure of Crimea,
had the West intervened against the annexation. The potential Russian deployment of dual-capable weapon systems in Crimea place in doubt
Russias good intentions when it comes to achieving progress on the multilateral nuclear disarmament agenda in the forthcoming
Non-Proliferation Treaty review, undermining the efforts already made in that direction.
Members are concerned about the situation in the east of Ukraine and called for all hostilities to be halted and prevent further war crimes and
new victims. They condemned the fact that Russia is providing direct and indirect support to the separatist groups in Ukraine, including the

shooting down of the civilian passenger plane MH-17. Once again, Parliament urged Russia to withdraw all its military forces from Ukrainian
territory immediately and to adhere to the Minsk Agreements.
Staying firm and communicating with Russia: Parliament underlined that the relationship with Russia should, in general, be cooperative rather
than confrontational in the long run. It called for a change of Russian policy towards Ukraine, in particular the full and unconditional
implementation of the Minsk agreements of September 2014 and February 2015 and the return of Crimea to Ukraine.
It believes that, in the event that Russia does not fully implement the Minsk ceasefire agreements and continues the destabilisation of eastern
Ukraine and the illegal annexation of Crimea, the sanction regime should be continued and strengthened, as well as the support to Ukraine in
enhancing its defence capabilities. The EU must remain firm and united in its commitment to the agreed sanctions against Russia, also by
freezing all military and defence cooperation and by cancelling contracts, such as for the delivery of Mistral class amphibious assault ships to
Russia.
Energy, maritime, border and human security in the Black Sea region: Parliament urged the Member States to take the steps needed to
reduce their energy dependence and to ensure the security of oil and gas exploitation and transportation activities in the Black Sea region. It
called on Commission to resume the work towards the construction of the Nabucco gas pipeline. Members reaffirmed that given Europes
dependence on the Black Sea for the transit of energy supplies, the EU has a strategic interest in deterring regional actors from brinkmanship
and, for that purpose, may need to mobilise European naval and airspace assets to the Black Sea.
They are also concerned that the benefits of oil and gas exploitation and transportation in the Black Sea are increasingly dependent on the
level of militarisation triggered by the illegal annexation of Crimea by Russia. Parliament condemned the violations of human rights in Crimea
that have occurred since the occupation by Russian forces, including censorship of freedom of speech and the persecution of minorities
(Crimean Tatars in particular).
On an ecological level, Parliament drew attention to the extreme environmental vulnerability of the Black Sea basin and stressed that the
growing militarisation of the region poses further risks to this delicate eco-system. It recalled that, faced with the Russian hybrid war in Ukraine,
the EU must stay united and speak with a single voice which is considered as a prerequisite of an effective response to all security threats.
Role of the EU and international actors: Parliament underlined that the Black Sea region should have real priority for the EU. It considered that
the current Black Sea Synergy (BSS) format is outdated and called for a revision of this strategy.
It stressed that, in spite of the fact that the BSS is practically on hold, effective cooperation with the states in the Black Sea Basin should
continue.
Members stressed the critical importance of coordinating with NATO, in particular with the Black Sea littoral states that are members of the
Alliance, and with the United States, as the Black Sea Basin is a key component of Euro-Atlantic security. They called for the modernisation
and enhancement of the military capabilities of those Black Sea littoral states that are members of EU and NATO. Parliament called on NATO
to continue to develop its cyber and missile defence capabilities, including in the Black Sea region, and to develop contingency plans for
deterring and countering asymmetric and hybrid warfare. It urged the Commission to support the Member States in their efforts to identify
solutions for increasing their defence budget to the level of 2%. It welcomed, in passing, the pledge made by members of NATO during the last
NATO Summit in Newport to ensure that their defence spending reaches a minimum of 2% GDP by 2024.
The resolution recalled that although in 2008 Georgias and Ukraines applications to join the NATO Membership Action Plan were not
accepted, at the Bucharest Summit NATO declared that Georgia and Ukraine will become members of the Alliance. However, following the
2008 war in Georgia and the 2014 illegal annexation of Crimea, Russia has territorially crippled the two countries, making them ineligible for
NATO membership. Parliament considered that, while not being able to defend them directly, NATO has a moral obligation to support
Georgias and Ukraines ability to defend themselves.
Lastly, Parliament recalled that NATO should preserve its general naval and air superiority in the Black Sea Basin.

