Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2229(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Annual report on human rights and democracy in the world 2014 and the
European Union's policy on the matter

Subject
6.10.09 Human rights situation in the world

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
16/06/2015

PREDA Cristian Dan
Shadow rapporteur

PANZERI Pier Antonio

HENKEL Hans-Olaf

MICHEL Louis

LOCHBIHLER Barbara

CORRAO Ignazio
CHAUPRADE Aymeric
Committee for opinion
DEVE

Rapporteur for opinion

Development

Appointed
25/09/2015

FRUNZULICĂ
Doru-Claudian
FEMM

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

09/09/2015
JIMÉNEZ-BECERRIL
BARRIO Teresa

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Secretariat-General

TIMMERMANS Frans

Key events
10/09/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

16/11/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/11/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

16/12/2015

Debate in Parliament

17/12/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

A8-0344/2015

Summary

17/12/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

17/12/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

T8-0470/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2229(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/04386

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE567.654

15/09/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE569.499

16/10/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE569.706

05/11/2015

EP

Committee opinion

FEMM

PE567.810

12/11/2015

EP

Committee opinion

DEVE

PE567.834

12/11/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0344/2015

30/11/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0470/2015

17/12/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)190

03/05/2016

2015/2229(INI) - 30/11/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Cristian Dan PREDA (EPP, RO) on the Annual Report on Human Rights
and Democracy in the World 2014 and the European Unions policy on the matter.
Recalling that more than half the worlds population is still living under non-democratic and repressive regimes and global freedom has
continuously declined over the past few years, the report stressed that human rights and democracy support policy should be mainstreamed
across all other EU policies with an external dimension, such as development, migration, security, counter-terrorism, enlargement and trade, in
order to continue the promotion of respect for human rights.
EU Annual Report on Human Rights and Democracy in the World: Members considered that the Annual Report is an indispensable tool for
scrutiny, communication and debate regarding the EUs policy on human rights, democracy and the rule of law in the world. The EEAS and the
Commission are called upon to ensure comprehensive follow-up to the issues raised in the Annual Report, including specific proposals tailored
to resolving these problems. They also considered that the current format of the Annual Report on Human Rights and Democracy could be
improved by offering a better overview of the concrete impact of the EUs actions on human rights and democracy in third countries.
EU Strategic Framework and the (new) Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy: the report welcomed the adoption by the Council in July
2015 of a new Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy for 2015-2019. In order fulfil the ambitious objectives set out in the new Action
Plan, the EU must set aside sufficient resources and expertise, both in terms of dedicated human resources in Delegations and in
Headquarters and in terms of funds available for projects.
Mandate of the EU Special Representative for Human Rights: Members welcomed the extension of the EUSRs mandate until February 2017,
and reiterated their request for this mandate to be turned into a permanent one. They called, therefore, for the revision of the mandate, so as
to grant the EUSR own-initiative powers, adequate staff and financial resources.
Enlargement and neighbourhood policy: Members expressed their conviction that the revised European Neighbourhood Policy should continue
to have the promotion of human rights and democratic principles at its core.
EU action on migration and refugees: expressing deep regret at the tragic loss of lives among people trying to reach the EUs borders,
Members stressed the urgent need to tackle the root causes of migration flows. There is an urgent need to develop stronger policies at Union

level in order to deal with the pressing issues related to migrants and refugees and find an effective, fair and sustainable mechanism for
burden-sharing among Member States.
Member reiterated their call for an EU common position on the use of armed drones which upholds human rights and international
humanitarian law and should address issues such as legal framework, proportionality, accountability, protection of civilians and transparency.
Freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief: the report called on the EU and the Member States to step up their efforts to contribute
to the eradication of all form of religious discrimination and to promote inter-religious dialogue when engaging with third countries. Members
maintain their view that the worldwide abolition of the death penalty should be one of the EUs central objectives as regards human rights.
Respect for the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and intersex (LGBTI) and persons with disabilities should be enhanced.
Rights of women and girls: the report strongly condemned all forms of abuse and violence against women, girls and children, especially the
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war. Members stressed the need for women, girls and children abused in conflicts to have access to
health and psychological care. Members called on the Commission, the EEAS and the VP/HR to continue promoting the political and
economic empowerment of women and girls by mainstreaming gender equality in all their external policies and programmes and ensuring
sufficient resources for this purpose.
Childrens rights: reaffirming the urgent need for universal ratification and effective implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Child
and its Optional Protocols, Members called on all states to commit themselves to eliminating the worst forms of child labour which include child
slavery, trafficking, prostitution, and hazardous work affecting a childs physical and mental health.
The Commission is urged once again to propose a comprehensive Child Rights Strategy and Action Plan for the next five years, in order to
prioritise children's rights within EU external policies.
Defending freedom of expression and strengthening civil society: the EU and its Member States should enhance their monitoring of all types of
restrictions on freedom of expression and the media in third countries, and to rapidly and systematically condemn such limitations even when
imposed with legitimate aims such as counter-terrorism, state security or law enforcement. Increased support is needed in the areas of
promoting freedom of the media, protecting independent journalists and bloggers.
EU support for human rights defenders: renewed efforts are required to challenge the restrictions and intimidation that people working for civil
society organisations face worldwide, and for the EU to set an example in protecting and promoting the rights concerned. Members called on
the Commission, the EEAS and the EU Delegations to ensure that the funding available for human rights defenders is properly used.
Supporting electoral processes in third countries: Members reiterated their positive view of the EUs continued support for electoral processes
and its provision of electoral assistance and support for domestic observers. However, proper follow-up is needed of the Election Observation
Missions (EOMs) in order to enhance their impact.
Enhancing the European Parliaments actions on human rights: lastly, Members emphasised the need for continued reflection regarding the
most appropriate ways to maximise the credibility, visibility and effectiveness of Parliament's resolutions on breaches of human rights,
democracy and the rule of law. They encouraged discussion of the inclusion of the different tools available to Parliament regarding support for
and promotion of human rights in a single strategy document, to be adopted by Parliament in plenary.

2015/2229(INI) - 17/12/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 421 votes to 86, with 116 abstentions, a resolution on the Annual Report on Human Rights and
Democracy in the World 2014 and the European Unions policy on the matter.
Recalling that more than half the worlds population is still living under non-democratic and repressive regimes and global freedom has
continuously declined over the past few years, Parliament stressed that human rights and democracy support policy should be mainstreamed
across all other EU policies with an external dimension, such as development, migration, security, counter-terrorism, enlargement and trade, in
order to continue the promotion of respect for human rights.
Consistent EU action: Parliament insisted on the importance of ensuring coherence of EU policy towards situations of occupation or
annexation of territory and recalled that it expressed its firm opposition to the annexation, occupation and settlement of territories, and insists
on the inalienable right of peoples to self-determination. In general, Parliament considered that the EU and its Member States need to speak
with a consistent, single voice and ensure that their message is heard.
EU Annual Report on Human Rights and Democracy in the World: Parliament considered that the Annual Report is an indispensable tool for
scrutiny, communication and debate regarding the EUs policy on human rights, democracy and the rule of law in the world. The EEAS and the
Commission are called upon to ensure comprehensive follow-up to the issues raised in the Annual Report, including specific proposals tailored
to resolving these problems. It also considered that the current format of the Annual Report on Human Rights and Democracy could be
improved by offering a better overview of the concrete impact of the EUs actions on human rights and democracy in third countries.
EU Strategic Framework and the (new) Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy: Parliament welcomed the adoption by the Council in
July 2015 of a new Action Plan on Human Rights and Democracy for 2015-2019. In order fulfil the ambitious objectives set out in the new
Action Plan, the EU must set aside sufficient resources and expertise, both in terms of dedicated human resources in Delegations and in
Headquarters and in terms of funds available for projects. It reiterated its view that a solid consensus and enhanced coordination between
Member States and the EU institutions is needed in order to coherently and consistently advance the human rights and democracy agenda. In
this regard, Member States should, without exception, take on greater ownership of the implementation of the Action Plan and of the EU
Strategic Framework and use them as their own blueprint in promoting human rights and democracy bilaterally and multilaterally.
Mandate of the EU Special Representative for Human Rights (EUSR): Parliament welcomed the extension of the EUSRs mandate until
February 2017, and reiterated its request for this mandate to be turned into a permanent one. It called, therefore, for the revision of the
mandate, so as to grant the EUSR own-initiative powers, adequate staff and financial resources.
Human rights country strategies and the role of the EU Delegations: Parliament recalled its recommendation to the VP/HR and the EEAS to
develop clear operational guidelines as to the role of focal points in Delegations, in order to empower them to act as true human rights
advisors. This should enable them to efficiently carry out their work with coherence and inclusiveness, so as to optimise the work of the

Delegations. The work of the human rights focal points should be fully independent and free of political interference and harassment from
national authorities of third countries. The EU and its delegations should increase their political dialogue with governments in breach of human
rights and this dialogue must include a more inclusive and comprehensive definition of non-discrimination, inter alia with regard to LGBTI
people, religion or belief, sex, racial or ethnic origin, age, disability and sexual orientation.
Enlargement and neighbourhood policy: Parliament recalled that EU enlargement policy is one of the strongest tools for reinforcing respect for
human rights and democratic principles. It noted that the enlargement process will be pursued despite the fact that no enlargement can take
place until 2019 because of the state of negotiations and the situation in the countries concerned.
Human rights through trade: Parliament reiterated its support for the systematic introduction of human rights clauses in all international
agreements between the EU and third countries. It called on the Commission to effectively and systematically monitor and assess the
implementation of the human rights clauses and to report regularly to Parliament on partner countries respect for human rights.
It considered that trade and human rights can go hand in hand and that the business community has an important role to play in promoting
human rights and democracy. It reaffirmed in this context that European companies should undertake adequate measures to ensure that their
operations in third countries respect human rights standards. It also reaffirmed the importance for the EU to promote corporate social
responsibility and for European enterprises to play a leading role in promoting international standards on business and human rights.
Daesh: Parliament took a positive note of the counter-terrorism guidance document drafted by the EEAS and the Commission and endorsed
by the Council with the aim of ensuring respect for human rights in the planning and implementation of counter-terrorism assistance projects
with third countries. It recalled that respect for fundamental rights and freedoms is the foundation of successful counter-terrorism policies,
including the use of digital surveillance technologies. It supported the international efforts to stop the human rights violations being perpetrated
by ISIS/Daesh.
EU action on migration and refugees: expressing deep regret at the tragic loss of lives among people trying to reach the EUs borders,
Members stressed the urgent need to tackle the root causes of migration flows. They stressed the urgent need to develop stronger policies at
Union level in order to deal with the pressing issues related to migrants and refugees and find an effective, fair and sustainable mechanism for
burden-sharing among Member States.
It called on the Union to participate actively in the debate on the term climate refugee and reiterated its call for an EU common position on the
use of armed drones which upholds human rights and international humanitarian law and should address issues such as legal framework,
proportionality, accountability, protection of civilians and transparency. Once again, Parliament urged the EU to ban the development,
production and use of fully autonomous weapons which enable strikes to be carried out without human intervention.
Western Sahara: in an amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament called for the fundamental rights of the people of Western Sahara, including
freedom of association, freedom of expression and the right to assembly, to be respected demanded the release of all Sahrawi political
prisoners.
Freedom of thought, conscience and religion or belief: the resolution called on the EU and the Member States to step up their efforts to
contribute to the eradication of all form of religious discrimination and to promote inter-religious dialogue when engaging with third countries.
Parliament maintained its view that the worldwide abolition of the death penalty should be one of the EUs central objectives as regards human
rights. Members expressed concern at the growing number of death sentences and executions worldwide (e.g. in Belarus).
Respect for the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and intersex (LGBTI) and persons with disabilities should be enhanced.
Rights of women and girls: Parliament strongly condemned all forms of abuse and violence against women, girls and children, especially the
use of sexual violence as a weapon of war. It stressed the need for women, girls and children abused in conflicts to have access to health and
psychological care. It called on the Commission, the EEAS and the VP/HR to continue promoting the political and economic empowerment of
women and girls by mainstreaming gender equality in all their external policies and programmes and ensuring sufficient resources for this
purpose.
In parallel, Parliament deplored the fact that half the worlds population is faced with wage discrimination, and that globally women earn
between 60 and 90 % of mens average income. It invited the Commission, the EEAS and the VP/HR to continue promoting the political and
economic empowerment of women and girls by mainstreaming gender equality in all their external policies and programmes, including through
structured dialogues with third countries.
Parliament also stressed the importance of family planning, maternal health and easy access to contraception and safe abortion in saving
womens lives and helping them rebuild their lives if they have been victims of rape. These policies should be placed at the core of
development cooperation with third countries. Parliament condemned the practice of surrogacy, which undermines the human dignity of the
woman since her body and its reproductive functions are used as a commodity. For the Parliament, this practice should be prohibited and
treated as a matter of urgency in human rights instruments.
Childrens rights: reaffirming the urgent need for universal ratification and effective implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Child
and its Optional Protocols, Parliament called on all states to commit themselves to eliminating the worst forms of child labour which include
child slavery, trafficking, prostitution, and hazardous work affecting a childs physical and mental health.
The Commission is urged once again to propose a comprehensive Child Rights Strategy and Action Plan for the next five years, in order to
prioritise children's rights within EU external policies.
Defending freedom of expression and strengthening civil society: the EU and its Member States should enhance their monitoring of all types of
restrictions on freedom of expression and the media in third countries, and to rapidly and systematically condemn such limitations even when
imposed with legitimate aims such as counter-terrorism, state security or law enforcement. Increased support is needed in the areas of
promoting freedom of the media, protecting independent journalists and bloggers.
EU support for human rights defenders: renewed efforts are required to challenge the restrictions and intimidation that people working for civil
society organisations face worldwide, and for the EU to set an example in protecting and promoting the rights concerned. Parliament called on
the Commission, the EEAS and the EU Delegations to ensure that the funding available for human rights defenders is properly used.
Supporting electoral processes in third countries: Parliament reiterated its positive view of the EUs continued support for electoral processes
and its provision of electoral assistance and support for domestic observers. However, proper follow-up is needed of the Election Observation
Missions (EOMs) in order to enhance their impact.

Enhancing the European Parliaments actions on human rights: lastly, Parliament emphasised the need for continued reflection regarding the
most appropriate ways to maximise the credibility, visibility and effectiveness of Parliament's resolutions on breaches of human rights,
democracy and the rule of law. It encouraged discussion of the inclusion of the different tools available to Parliament regarding support for and
promotion of human rights in a single strategy document, to be adopted by Parliament in plenary.

