Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2045(BUD)

BUD - Budgetary procedure

Procedure completed

Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund:
redundancies in aircraft repair and installation services in Ireland

Subject
3.40.05 Aeronautical industry, aerospace industry
3.40.18 Services sector
4.15.05 Industrial restructuring, job losses, redundancies, relocations,
Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF)
8.70.55 2015 budget
Geographical area
Ireland

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgets

BUDG

Appointed
10/02/2015

NEGRESCU Victor
Shadow rapporteur

ŠTEFANEC Ivan

KÖLMEL Bernd

ARTHUIS Jean

NÍ RIADA Liadh

VANA Monika

ZANNI Marco
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Budget

Appointed

Commissioner
GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
06/02/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

12/02/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

16/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

COM(2015)0047

Summary

16/03/2015

Draft budget approved by Council

18/03/2015

Budgetary report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading

25/03/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

25/03/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

25/03/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

24/04/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0052/2015

Summary

T8-0085/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2045(BUD)

Procedure type

BUD - Budgetary procedure

Procedure subtype

Mobilisation of funds

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

BUDG/8/02778

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0047

06/02/2015

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE549.358

03/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE551.795

06/03/2015

EP

Budgetary report tabled for plenary, 1st reading

A8-0052/2015

18/03/2015

EP

Summary

Budgetary text adopted by Parliament

T8-0085/2015

25/03/2015

EP

Summary

Final act
Decision 2015/643
OJ L 106 24.04.2015, p. 0027 Summary

2015/2045(BUD) - 06/02/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) to assist Ireland following redundancies in its aircraft repair and
installation services.
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
CONTENT: Article 12 of Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1311/2013 laying down the multiannual financial framework for the years
2014-2020 provides that the EGF shall not exceed a maximum annual amount of EUR 150 million (2011 prices) over and above the relevant
headings of the financial framework.
The rules applicable to financial contributions from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) are laid down in Regulation (EU) No
1309/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (2014-2020) and repealing
Regulation (EC) No 1927/2006 (the 'EGF Regulation').
In this context, the Commission examined the application for mobilisation of the EGF to assist Ireland and concluded the following:
Ireland: EGF/2014/016 IE/Lufthansa Technik: the Irish authorities submitted application EGF/2014/016 IE/Lufthansa Technik for a financial
contribution from the EGF, following redundancies in Lufthansa Technik Airmotive Ireland Ltd (LTAI) and two of its suppliers in Ireland.
The Irish authorities submitted the application within 12 weeks of the date on which the intervention criteria set out below were met. The
deadline expired on 6 February 2015.
In order to establish the link between the redundancies and major structural changes in world trade patterns due to globalisation, Ireland
argues that the closure of the LTAI is a result of a serious shift in the EU trade in goods and services resulting from a technological shift
towards the production of new generation aircraft and components; a shift in wider aircraft component production practices with resultant

impacts on the market fundamentals of the underlying business model of LTAI and a shift in location of global aircraft production.
Over the last 20 years, the most popular aircraft types have evolved from largely allmetal, mechanical, electro-mechanical, hydraulic and
pneumatic designs to increasing composite, metal/composite structures, fly-by-wire automated, fully computer-controlled aircraft.
With the arrival of further new generation types such as the B737 Max and A320 Neo, operators have moved to retire the older classic aircraft
and to some extent the older versions of the new generation types.
The traditional business model of LTAI was based on a number of elements which have come under severe pressure as a result of changes in
the world aircraft fleet profiles and resultant rapid decline of the aircraft models that formed the base of the LTAI portfolio. A driving force
behind increases in global air travel growth has been the industrialisation of countries such as India and China. In Asia Pacific and the Middle
East, ambitious construction plans for new international and domestic airports will provide new opportunities for commercial aircraft MRO
providers.
Lufthansa Technik has also in 2013 and early 2014 either entered into, or renewed, aircraft service contracts with Malaysia, India and Sri
Lanka and Pakistan. These non-EU companies are clearly intended to provide capacity and services at lower cost than Lufthansas main bases
in the EU and will help cater for the rapid growth of the aviation industry outside the EU.
The events giving rise to the redundancies in Lufthansa Technik Airmotive Ireland Ltd are the closure of the enterprise and the dismissal of the
entire workforce.
The application relates to 148 workers made redundant in Lufthansa Technik Airmotive Ireland Ltd and 1 worker made redundant in 1 supplier
of the primary enterprise during the same reference period of four months, from 1 March to 30 June 2014.
Basis of the Irish application: the Irish authorities submitted the application under the intervention criteria of Article 4(2) of the EGF Regulation,
derogating from the criteria of Article 4(1)(a), which requires at least 500 workers being made redundant or self-employed persons' activity
ceasing, over a reference period of four months in an enterprise in a Member State, including workers made redundant by suppliers and
downstream producers and/or self-employed persons whose activity has ceased.
Ireland has argued that exceptional circumstances prevail in this case, as the redundancies have a serious impact on employment and the
local and regional economy. In addition to the workers already referred to, the eligible beneficiaries include 275 workers made redundant
before or after the reference period of four months. The total number of eligible beneficiaries is therefore 424.
The Commission therefore proposes to mobilise the EGF for the amount of EUR 2 490 758.
FINANCIAL IMPLICATIONS: having examined the application in respect of the conditions set out in Article 13(1) of the EGF Regulation, and
having taken into account the number of targeted beneficiaries, the proposed actions and the estimated costs, the Commission proposes to
mobilise the EGF for the amount of EUR 2 490 758, representing 60% of the total costs of the proposed actions, in order to provide a financial
contribution for the application.
The proposed decision to mobilise the EGF will be taken jointly by the European Parliament and the Council, as laid down in point 13 of the
Interinstitutional Agreement of 2 December 2013 between the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline,
on cooperation in budgetary matters and on sound financial management.
At the same time as it presents this proposal for a decision to mobilise the EGF, the Commission will present to the European Parliament and
to the Council a proposal for a transfer to the relevant budgetary line for the amount requested.
At the same time as it adopts this proposal for a decision to mobilise the EGF, the Commission will adopt a decision on a financial contribution,
by means of an implementing act, which will enter into force on the date at which the European Parliament and the Council adopt the
proposed decision to mobilise the EGF.

2015/2045(BUD) - 18/03/2015 Budgetary report tabled for plenary, 1st reading
The Committee on Budgets adopted the report by Victor NEGRESCU (S&D, RO) on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for an amount of EUR 2 490 758 in commitment and
payment appropriations in order to assist Ireland following redundancies in its aircraft repair and installation services.
Members recalled that the Union set up legislative and budgetary instruments to provide additional support to workers who are suffering from
the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to assist their reintegration into the labour market.
Irish application: Ireland submitted application EGF/2014/016 IE/Lufthansa Technik for a financial contribution from the EGF, following a total
of 424 redundancies in Lufthansa Technik Airmotive Ireland Ltd (LTAI) and two of its suppliers in Ireland. Members stated that the application
does not fulfil the eligibility criteria laid down in Article 4(1)(a) of the EGF Regulation and is based on the exceptional circumstances provision
contained in Article 4(2) of that Regulation. By exceptional circumstances, this means that the redundancies have a serious impact on
employment and the local and regional economy, and justify a derogation from the intervention criteria set out in Article 4(2) of the EGF
Regulation.
Therefore, Ireland is entitled to a financial contribution under that Regulation.
Members noted, however, that the exceptional circumstances in this case relate to only 250 persons. Therefore, they recommended that the
Commission establish clear criteria for applications relating to less than 500 workers. According to the Members, if the criteria laid down in
Article 4(1)(a) of that Regulation are not entirely met, applications should be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
Members also welcomed the fact that, in order to provide workers with speedy assistance, the Irish authorities decided to initiate the
implementation of the personalised services to the affected workers on 7 December 2013, well ahead of the decision and even the application
on granting the EGF support for the proposed coordinated package.
Nature of the redundancies: Members highlighted that the redundancies are linked to major structural changes in world trade patterns due to
globalisation, as a result of a serious shift in Union trade in goods and services resulting from a technological shift towards the production of
new generation aircraft and components, and the shift in location of global aircraft production.

These redundancies are expected to have huge negative impacts on Southern and Eastern Ireland, which presents pockets of considerable
local disadvantage and workers with a lack of professional qualifications. Moreover, a series of redundancies in enterprises in this sector over
the last years has made it even more difficult for the workforce that possesses some very specific skills that are difficult to exploit in other
sectors to find a new job. Members regretted that this is particularly true for those workers who are closer to retirement (around 20 % of the
Lufthansa Technik workers) or have been with that same employer for a number of years.
Package of personalised services: Members noted that the coordinated package of personalised services to be co-funded consists of
guidance and career planning, EGF training grants, training and further education programmes, higher education programmes, enterprise and
self-employment supports, income supports including the EGF course expense contribution scheme.
They recalled that in line with Article 7 of the EGF Regulation, the design of the coordinated package of personalised services should
anticipate future labour market perspectives and required skills and should be compatible with the shift towards a resource-efficient and
sustainable economy.
NEET: the report noted that the Irish authorities decided to provide personalised services co-financed by the EGF to up to 200 young people
not in employment, education or training (NEETs) under the age of 25 in addition to the redundant workers (despite the fact that this in this
case, the NEETs do not belong to the group of redundant workers and were not employed in the same sector). It noted the personalised
services which are to be provided to NEETs consist of the same options as for the redundant workers but will be tailor-made for each NEET
individual as appropriate.
Members recalled the importance of improving the employability of all workers by means of adapted training and the recognition of skills and
competences gained throughout a worker's professional career. They stressed that EGF assistance can co-finance only active labour market
measures which lead to durable, long-term employment.
Lastly, Members recommended that the Commission evaluate the possibility of reducing the required minimum number of workers made
redundant to 200 for EGF projects because of the impact on unemployment generated by redundancies in SMEs affected by the economic
crisis.

2015/2045(BUD) - 25/03/2015 Budgetary text adopted by Parliament
The European Parliament adopted by 522 votes by 74, with 8 abstentions, a resolution on the proposal for a decision of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for an amount of EUR 2 490 758 in
commitment and payment appropriations in order to assist Ireland following redundancies in its aircraft repair and installation services.
Parliament recalled that the Union set up legislative and budgetary instruments to provide additional support to workers who are suffering from
the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to assist their reintegration into the labour market.
Irish application: Ireland submitted application EGF/2014/016 IE/Lufthansa Technik for a financial contribution from the EGF, following a total
of 424 redundancies in Lufthansa Technik Airmotive Ireland Ltd (LTAI) and two of its suppliers in Ireland. Members stated that the application
does not fulfil the eligibility criteria laid down in Article 4(1)(a) of the EGF Regulation and is based on the exceptional circumstances provision
contained in Article 4(2) of that Regulation. By exceptional circumstances, this means that the redundancies have a serious impact on
employment and the local and regional economy, and justify a derogation from the intervention criteria set out in Article 4(2) of the EGF
Regulation.
Therefore, Ireland is entitled to a financial contribution under that Regulation.
Parliament noted, however, that the exceptional circumstances in this case relate to only 250 persons and therefore recommended that the
Commission to establish clear criteria for applications relating to less than 500 workers. It stated that if the criteria laid down in Article 4(1)(a) of
that Regulation are not entirely met, applications should be assessed on a case-by-case basis and that there should not be an automatic
endorsement of applications that don't meet the basic conditions.
Nature of the redundancies: Parliament considered that the redundancies in the 'repair and installation of machinery and equipment' sector in
the region of Southern and Eastern Ireland are linked to major structural changes in world trade patterns due to globalisation, as shown by the
closure of LTAI as a result of a serious shift in Union trade in goods and services resulting from a technological shift towards the production of
new generation aircraft and components, by the shift in wider aircraft component production practices with resultant impacts on the market
fundamentals of the underlying business model of LTAI and the shift in location of global aircraft production.
These redundancies are expected to have huge negative impacts on Southern and Eastern Ireland, which presents pockets of considerable
local disadvantage, with low levels of educational achievement, lack of professional qualifications and a high level of local authority housing.
All these factors point to considerable local disadvantage and poverty and that, moreover, a series of redundancies in enterprises in this sector
over the last years has made it even more difficult for the workforce that possesses some very specific skills that are difficult to exploit in other
sectors.
Parliament noted that Blanchardstown-Tyrrelstown, Tallaght-Killinarden, Clondalkin-Rowlagh and Tallaght-Fettercairn are a few of the areas
where the Lufthansa workers reside where the average unemployment figure is around 23%.
Package of personalised services: Parliament noted that the coordinated package of personalised services to be co-funded consists of
guidance and career planning, EGF training grants, training and further education programmes, higher education programmes, enterprise and
self-employment supports, income supports including the EGF course expense contribution scheme.
NEET: the resolution noted that the Irish authorities decided to provide personalised services co-financed by the EGF to up to 200 young
people not in employment, education or training (NEETs) under the age of 25 in addition to the redundant workers (despite the fact that this in
this case, the NEETs do not belong to the group of redundant workers and were not employed in the same sector). It noted the personalised
services which are to be provided to NEETs consist of the same options as for the redundant workers but will be tailor-made for each NEET
individual as appropriate.
Parliament noted that the authorities plan to utilise the maximum allowed 35% of all costs on allowances and incentives in the form of income
supports including course expense contributions (CECs); acknowledges that those allowances do not replace the measures provided from

national funds.
It also recalled the importance of improving the employability of all workers by means of adapted training and the recognition of skills and
competences gained throughout a worker's professional career. Parliament stressed that EGF assistance can co-finance only active labour
market measures which lead to durable, long-term employment.
Lastly, it recommended that the Commission evaluate the possibility of reducing the required minimum number of workers made redundant to
200 for EGF projects because of the impact on unemployment generated by redundancies in SMEs affected by the economic crisis.

2015/2045(BUD) - 15/04/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) to assist Ireland following redundancies in its aircraft repair and
installation services.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2015/643 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the European
Globalisation Adjustment Fund (application EGF/2014/016 IE/Lufthansa Technik from Ireland).
CONTENT: by this Decision, the European Parliament and the Council decided to mobilise EUR 2 490 758 in commitment and payment
appropriations from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund in the framework of the 2015 budget.
This amount shall assist Ireland following redundancies in Lufthansa Technik Airmotive Ireland Ltd and two suppliers in Ireland.
Given that the Irish application complies with the requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) No 1309/2013 ( EGF Regulation 2014-2020), the
European Parliament and the Council decided to mobilise the abovementioned amount.
To recall, the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) was established to provide support for workers made redundant and
self-employed persons whose activity has ceased as a result of major structural changes in world trade patterns due to globalisation, as a
result of a continuation of the global financial and economic crisis addressed in Regulation (EC) No 546/2009 of the European Parliament and
of the Council, or as a result of a new global financial and economic crisis and to assist them with their reintegration into the labour market.
Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1311/2013 laying down the multiannual financial framework for the years 2014-2020 allows the
mobilisation of the EGF within a maximum annual amount of EUR 150 million.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 15.04.2015.

