Procedure file
Basic information
RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

2015/2684(RSP)

Procedure completed

Resolution on the List of issues adopted by the United Nations Committee
on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in relation to the initial report of the
European Union

Subject
4.10.06 People with disabilities
6.40.13 Relations with/in the context of international organisations: UN,
OSCE, OECD, Council of Europe, EBRD

Key players
European Parliament

Key events
19/05/2015

Debate in Parliament

20/05/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

20/05/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

20/05/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0208/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2684(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Documentation gateway
Motion for a resolution

B8-0460/2015

18/05/2015

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0208/2015

20/05/2015

EP

Summary

SWD(2015)0127

22/06/2015

EC

Summary

SP(2015)470

24/09/2015

Follow-up document
Commission response to text adopted in plenary

2015/2684(RSP) - 20/05/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on the List of Issues adopted by the United Nations Committee on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities in relation to the initial report of the European Union.
The resolution was tabled by the S&D, ECR, EFD, Greens/EFA, ALDE, GUE/NGL, and EPP groups.
Noting that the EU had formally ratified the CRPD, and that Parliament formed part of the EU Framework to monitor the implementation of the
CRPD, Members assured the CRPD Committee that the European Parliament would respond to questions directly addressed to it, while also
urging the Commission to take Parliaments views into account when formulating its own answers to the committee. They recalled that the
Commission had been designated to answer the List of Issues adopted by the CRPD Committee.

Review process: recalling that several civil society organisations had submitted information to the CRPD Committee for the List of Issues,
Parliament urged the Commission to further develop a structured dialogue and to consult and cooperate with organisations representing
persons with disabilities as part of the review process, including in formulating an answer to the CRPD Committee on its List of Issues, and in
developing, implementing and monitoring EU policies in this area.
List of Issues: Members went on to note Parliaments actions in respect of the List of Issues raised in relation to the initial report of the EU as
part of the CRPD review, and these include:
highlighting the need for accessibility in respect of universal service and the 112 emergency number;
setting up an inter-committee coordination working group arranging awareness-raising events open to staff and MEPs, including the
organisation of sign language courses as part of professional training.
Legislation: Parliament highlighted the following:
an EU anti-discrimination directive was proposed by the Commission in 2008, but it remained blocked in the Council. Members
deplored the lack of progress within the Council on this proposal and urged Member States to work towards the adoption of a common
position without any further delay. This directive would seek to protect people with disabilities against discrimination in social
protection, health care and rehabilitation, education and access to and supply of goods and services, such as housing, transport and
insurance;
the Commission was asked to present an ambitious proposal for a European Accessibility Act, which should include a full range of
policy areas with regard to the accessibility of goods and services for all EU citizens, fostering the independent living and full inclusion
of people with disabilities and establishing an effective and independent monitoring and enforcement mechanism.
In addition:
the Council was urged to accelerate its work on the proposal for a directive on the accessibility of public sector bodies websites , with a
view to reaching a common position;
Member States must translate into national law the obligations derived from Article 12 of the CRPD, most specifically to ease any
restrictions on rights of disabled people to cast their vote and to be elected.
Lastly, Parliament considered it regrettable that the Code of Conduct was adopted by the Commission and the Council without the involvement
of Parliament, with the result that Parliament had limited competences with regard to the monitoring of the CRPD.

2015/2684(RSP) - 22/06/2015 Follow-up document
The Commission presents a document containing the replies of the European Union to the questions of the UN Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities concerning the EUs report on the implementation of the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities,
which entered into force in 2011. The Commission prepared the replies in liaison with other EU institutions, bodies and agencies.
The List of Issues and the Commissions responses include action taken to promote and protect the rights of persons with disabilities in the EU
as well as a detailed discussion of specific rights such as equality and non-discrimination, accessibility, and health and employment.
In this connection, the Commission noted that the European Disability Strategy 2010-2020 lays down actions to implement the Convention at
EU level.
The Commission implements some actions directly; others require the agreement of Parliament and Council, while for others implementation is
shared with Member States.
The Commission regularly discusses implementation of the Convention at EU and Member State level in the High-level Group on Disability
and the Work Forum. The Commission prepares an annual report of the High-level Group with input from Member States. The Work Forum
brings together focal points, coordination and monitoring mechanisms, and civil society organisations, from the EU and its Member States.
In its Resolution of 20 May 2015 on the List of Issues, the European Parliament called on the Commission, inter alia, to present an ambitious
proposal for a European Accessibility Act, with the full involvement of persons with disabilities.
Other salient issues highlighted included:
Equal treatment: the Commission also noted that in 2008, it proposed an Equal Treatment Directive to extend the existing EU
anti-discrimination legal framework beyond employment to social protection, healthcare, education and access to goods and services
available to the public, including housing. The proposal is still being considered by Council.
Health: in its proposed 2008 Directive, the Commission proposed to extend protection from discrimination in the provision of health
care services on different grounds, including disability. In 2015, with financial support from Parliament, the Commission will launch a
pilot project to develop strategies to address the health needs of vulnerable groups. A particular focus will be on those living in
geographically and socially isolated communities, including the elderly and persons with disabilities.
112 emergency number: in the Parliaments resolution the need to highlight the Europe-wide emergency number 112 was stressed.
The document noted that in 2015, 22 Member States reported the implementation of an alternative access to 112. 18 Member States
reported the take-up of SMS to 112; while three Member States reported the deployment of similar alternative means to contact
emergency services.
Situations of risk and humanitarian emergencies: the document recalled that the Commissions mandate in humanitarian aid includes
the provision of needs-based assistance in particular to the most vulnerable, which often includes persons with disabilities; the needs
of persons with disabilities are expected to be mainstreamed in operations within all sectors of humanitarian aid. The Commission is
working on humanitarian guidelines on shelter and settlements, where the needs of persons with disabilities will be considered. In
2015, the Commission and the Latvian Presidency of the Council organised a conference to raise awareness of disability among those
responsible for response to emergency situations.

