Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2112(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Towards a new international climate agreement in Paris

Subject
3.70.03 Climate policy, climate change, ozone layer
3.70.18 International and regional environment protection measures and
agreements

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ENVI Environment, Public Health and Food Safety
(Associated committee)

Rapporteur

Appointed
28/04/2015

PARGNEAUX Gilles
Shadow rapporteur

FLORENZ Karl-Heinz

DUNCAN Ian

GERBRANDY
Gerben-Jan

MINEUR Anne-Marie

JÁVOR Benedek

AFFRONTE Marco
Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/05/2015

ŠUICA Dubravka
DEVE

Development

08/05/2015
ZÁBORSKÁ Anna

INTA

International Trade

ITRE Industry, Research and Energy
(Associated committee)
TRAN

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
04/05/2015
KELLY Seán

Transport and Tourism

15/04/2015
EICKHOUT Bas

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Environment

VELLA Karmenu

Key events
25/02/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

21/05/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

COM(2015)0081

Summary

21/05/2015

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

23/09/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/09/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

14/10/2015

Debate in Parliament

14/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/10/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0275/2015

Summary

T8-0359/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2112(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Strategic initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ENVI/8/02851

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0081

25/02/2015

EC

Committee draft report

PE557.269

26/05/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE557.421

23/06/2015

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

TRAN

PE554.961

16/07/2015

EP

Committee opinion

AFET

PE560.685

01/09/2015

EP

Committee opinion

DEVE

PE557.325

10/09/2015

EP

Committee opinion

ITRE

PE557.327

10/09/2015

EP

PE567.674

23/09/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0275/2015

30/09/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0359/2015

14/10/2015

EP

Summary

Amendments tabled in committee

2015/2112(INI) - 25/02/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to set out the blueprint for tackling global climate change beyond 2020 the Paris Protocol.
BACKGROUND: according to the latest findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), without urgent action, climate
change will bring severe, pervasive and irreversible impacts on all the world's people and ecosystems. Limiting dangerous rises in global
average temperature to below 2°C compared with pre-industrial levels will require substantial and sustained reductions in greenhouse gas
emissions by all countries.
This global transition to low emissions can be achieved without compromising growth and jobs, and can provide significant opportunities to
revitalise economies in Europe and globally. Action to tackle climate change also brings significant benefits in terms of public well-being.
Delaying this transition will, however, raise overall costs and narrow the options for effectively reducing emissions and preparing for the
impacts of climate change.

All countries need to act urgently and collectively. Since 1994, the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) have focused on this challenge, resulting in more than 90 countries, both developed and developing, pledging to curb their
emissions by 2020. However, these pledges are insufficient to achieve the below 2°C objective. For these reasons, in 2012, the UNFCCC
Parties launched negotiations towards a new legally binding agreement applicable to all Parties that will put the world on track to achieve the
below 2°C objective. The 2015 Agreement is to be finalised in Paris in December 2015 and implemented from 2020 .
Possible agreement in Paris: the progress made at the recent climate conference in Lima brings a robust agreement in Paris within reach. A
first full draft text of the 2015 Agreement was also developed, reflecting the positions of all Parties on all the elements under negotiation.
This communication responds to the decisions taken in Lima, and is a key element in implementing the Commission's priority of building a
resilient Energy Union. This communication prepares the EU for the last round of negotiations before the Paris conference in December 2015.
CONTENT: in particular, this communication:
translates the decision taken at the European Summit in October 2014 into the EU's proposed emissions target - its Intended
Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) to be submitted by the end of the first quarter of 2015;
proposes that all UNFCCC Parties submit their INDCs well in advance of the Paris conference. The EU, China, the US and other G20
countries, as well as high and middle income countries should be in a position to do so by the first quarter of 2015. Greater flexibility
should be provided to Least Developed Countries (LDCs);
sets out a vision for a transparent and dynamic legally binding agreement, containing fair and ambitious commitments from all Parties
based on evolving global economic and geopolitical circumstances. In aggregate these commitments - based on scientific evidence should put the world on track to reduce global emissions by at least 60% below 2010 levels by 2050 . Should there be a gap in the
level of ambition set in Paris, this should be addressed by devising a work programme starting in 2016 working closely with the GCF to
identify additional action to reduce emissions;
proposes that the 2015 Agreement should be in the form of a Protocol under the UNFCCC. Major economies, in particular the EU,
China and the US, should show political leadership by joining the Protocol as early as possible. It should enter into force as soon as
countries with a collective total of 80% of current global emissions have ratified it. Under the new Protocol, climate finance, technology
development and transfer, and capacity building should promote universal participation and facilitate the efficient and effective
implementation of strategies to reduce emissions and adapt to the adverse effects of climate change;
underlines that the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO), the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) and the Montreal
Protocol should act to effectively regulate emissions from international aviation and shipping and the production and consumption of
fluorinated gases before the end of 2016;
highlights how other EU policies such as, trade, scientific research, innovation and technological cooperation, economic and
development cooperation, disaster risk reduction and environment could reinforce the EUs international climate policy; and
is complemented by a climate diplomacy action plan jointly developed by the European External Action Service and the Commission.
The action plan is aimed at scaling up EU outreach and building alliances with ambitious international partners in the run up to the
Paris conference.
Next steps: the Commission will organise an international conference to improve mutual understanding of the range of INDCs and the
adequacy of their collective ambition, and facilitate an open exchange of views prior to the Paris conference. This conference will aim to bring
together partner countries, key experts from academia, think-tanks and international organisations and will take place by November 2015.
By mid-2015, the Commission will also start to present legislative proposals to implement the 2030 climate and energy framework to the
European Parliament and the Council.
It will continue to mainstream climate change action into its economic and development cooperation; take initiatives to work closer together
with Member States in the delivery of climate relevant development finance; and take better advantage of the openness of its scientific
research and innovation programmes to support its international partners, assisting them in preparing to carry out their commitments under the
new Protocol.
Against this background, the Commission invites the European Parliament and the Council to endorse the proposed approach as soon as
possible.
Annex and working document: it should be noted that some aspects of this communication are set out in further detail in the accompanying
Staff Working Document. An annexed table presents the EU 2030 target and intended nationally determined contribution which aims to
achieve at least 40% domestic reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in 2030.

2015/2112(INI) - 30/09/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted an own-initiative report by Gilles PARGNEAUX (S&D, FR)
entitled Towards a new international climate agreement in Paris.
An ambitious, global, legally binding agreement: faced with the extraordinary scale and seriousness of the threats induced by climate change,
Members called on governments to take, without delay, binding and concrete measures against climate change and towards an ambitious and
legally binding global agreement in Paris 2015 in order to meet this target.
The 2015 Protocol must be legally binding and ambitious from the outset when adopted in Paris, and should aim at phasing out global carbon
emissions by 2050 or shortly thereafter so as to keep the world on a cost-effective emission trajectory compatible with the below 2 °C target.
In case of a gap between the level of ambition of the aggregate effect of the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) submitted
before Paris and the necessary level of greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction required to keep temperatures below 2 °C above pre-industrial
levels, it will be necessary to draw up a work programme to start in 2016 in order to set out the additional reduction measures .
Members called on the COP 21 Parties to support five-year commitment periods as the most appropriate choice so as to avoid locking into a
low level of ambition.
Unions climate policy: Members called for general reinvigoration of the EUs climate policy, which would help build momentum in international
climate discussions and would be in line with the upper limit of the EUs commitment to reducing its GHG emissions to 80-95 % below 1990

levels by 2050. They called on the Member States to consider complementary commitments that build on the agreed 2030 target, including
action outside of the EU, in order to enable the world to achieve the below 2 °C target.
In this regard, the report recalled the European Parliament resolution of 5 February 2014 which called for three binding targets: an energy
efficiency target of 40%, a renewables target of at least 30% and a GHG reduction target of at least 40%.
Pre-2020 ambition and the Kyoto Protocol: the report placed particular emphasis on the urgent need for progress in closing the gigatonne gap
which exists between the scientific analysis and the current Parties pledges for the period up to 2020. It emphasised that, although the second
commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol will be limited in its extent, it should be seen as a very important interim step, and therefore called on
the Parties, including the EU Member States, to complete the ratification process as soon as possible and in any case before December 2015 .
Comprehensive effort of all sectors: the report stressed the need to ensure long-term price stability for emissions allowances and a predictable
regulatory environment which directs investment towards measures to reduce GHG emissions and fosters the transition to a low-carbon
economy. It called for an agreement that covers sectors and emissions in a comprehensive manner and sets economy-wide absolute targets
combined with emissions budgets, which should ensure the highest possible level of ambition.
Members highlighted that the agreement should set a comprehensive accounting framework for emissions and removals from land (LULUCF).
They emphasised the role of forests in climate change mitigation and the need to enhance the adaptive capacities and resilience of forests to
climate change whilst calling on the EU to pursue its objective of halting global forest loss by 2030 and to at least halve tropical deforestation
by 2020, compared with 2008 levels.
Recalling that transport is the second biggest GHG emitting sector, the report insisted on the need to put a range of policies in place aimed at
lowering emissions from this sector. It called for all the Parties to work through the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) and the
International Maritime Organisation (IMO) to develop a global policy framework to enable an effective response, and to take measures to set
adequate targets before the end of 2016 for achieving the necessary reductions in the light of the 2 °C target.
Climate finance: cornerstone of the Paris Agreement: Members called for climate finance to be included in the agreement as a dynamic
element that reflects the changing environmental and economic realities.
The report requested that the EU and its Member States agree on a roadmap for scaling up predictable, new and additional finance, in line
with existing commitments, towards their fair share in the overall targeted amount of USD 100 billion a year by 2020 from a variety of public
and private sources. The EU is invited to encourage all countries to deliver their fair share of climate finance.
Members also called for concrete EU and international commitments to deliver additional sources of climate finance, including setting aside
some EU ETS emission allowances in the 2021-2030 period and allocating revenues from EU and international measures on aviation and
shipping emissions for international climate finance and the Green Climate Fund, inter alia technological innovation projects.
The Commission, the Member States and all the Parties to the UNFCCC are called upon to use all means at their disposal to encourage
financial institutions to redirect their investments on the scale necessary to finance a genuine transition to resilient low carbon economies.
The report also insisted on the need to:
enhance scientific research, technological development and innovation in combating climate change, by taking advantage of Horizon
2020;
strengthen coordination and climate-risk management at EU level and to create a clear EU adaptation strategy.
The report also stressed the need for climate diplomacy to be part of a comprehensive approach to the EUs external action. The EU should
play an ambitious and central role at the conference, speaking with one voice and playing the role of mediator in seeking progress towards an
international agreement and staying united in that regard.

2015/2112(INI) - 14/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 434 votes to 96, with 52 abstentions, a resolution tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public
Health and Food Safety entitled Towards a new international climate agreement in Paris.
Parliament recalled that according to the scientific evidence presented in the 5th Assessment Report (AR5) of the Intergovernmental Panel on
Climate Change (IPCC), warming of the climate system is unequivocal. Climate change represents an urgent and potentially irreversible global
threat to human societies and the biosphere and must thus be addressed at international level by all Parties.
An ambitious, global, legally binding agreement: Members called on governments to take, without delay, binding and concrete measures
against climate change and towards an ambitious and legally binding global agreement in Paris 2015 in order to meet this target. Such an
ambitious and legally binding international agreement would help to address the carbon leakage and competitiveness concerns of the relevant
sectors and in particular the energy intensive sector.
The 2015 Protocol must be legally binding and ambitious from the outset when adopted in Paris, and should aim at phasing out global carbon
emissions by 2050 or shortly thereafter so as to keep the world on a cost-effective emission trajectory compatible with the below 2 °C target.
In case of a gap between the level of ambition of the aggregate effect of the Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) submitted
before Paris and the necessary level of greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction required to keep temperatures below 2 °C above pre-industrial
levels, it will be necessary to draw up a work programme to start in 2016 in order to set out the additional reduction measures. Members called
on the COP 21 Parties to support five-year commitment periods as the most appropriate choice so as to avoid locking into a low level of
ambition.
Moreover, Parliament is concerned that the early analysis of the aggregate impact of the INDCs submitted so far has concluded that current
unrevised INDCs would result in the global average temperature rising by between 2.7°C and 3.5°C. It called for the Parties to agree at
COP21 in Paris to revise the current INDCs before 2020 in order to bring them into line with the latest scientific assessments and a safe
2°C-compatible global carbon budget.
Unions climate policy: Members called for general reinvigoration of the EUs climate policy, which would help build momentum in international

climate discussions and would be in line with the upper limit of the EUs commitment to reducing its GHG emissions to 80-95 % below 1990
levels by 2050. They called on the Member States to consider complementary commitments that build on the agreed 2030 target, including
action outside of the EU, in order to enable the world to achieve the below 2 °C target.
In this regard, Parliament recalled the European Parliament resolution of 5 February 2014 which called for three binding targets: an energy
efficiency target of 40%, a renewables target of at least 30% and a GHG reduction target of at least 40%.
Moreover, Members stressed that the Paris Agreement will contain the provisions needed to tackle the human rights dimension of climate
change and provide support for poorer countries whose capacities are strained by climate change impacts.
Pre-2020 ambition and the Kyoto Protocol: Parliament placed particular emphasis on the urgent need for progress in closing the gigatonne gap
which exists between the scientific analysis and the current Parties pledges for the period up to 2020. To close further this gap, Members
emphasised the important role of other policy measures, to which a collective effort should be dedicated, including energy efficiency,
substantial energy savings, renewable energy, resource efficiency, the phase-out of HFCs, sustainable production and consumption, the
phase-out of fossil fuel subsidies.
Parliament emphasised that, although the second commitment period of the Kyoto Protocol will be limited in its extent, it should be seen as a
very important interim step, and therefore called on the Parties, including the EU Member States, to complete the ratification process as soon
as possible and in any case before December 2015.
Comprehensive effort of all sectors: Parliament stressed the need to ensure long-term price stability for emissions allowances and a
predictable regulatory environment which directs investment towards measures to reduce GHG emissions and fosters the transition to a
low-carbon economy. It called for an agreement that covers sectors and emissions in a comprehensive manner and sets economy-wide
absolute targets combined with emissions budgets, which should ensure the highest possible level of ambition.
Members highlighted that the agreement should set a comprehensive accounting framework for emissions and removals from land (LULUCF).
They emphasised the role of forests in climate change mitigation and the need to enhance the adaptive capacities and resilience of forests to
climate change whilst calling on the EU to pursue its objective of halting global forest loss by 2030 and to at least halve tropical deforestation
by 2020, compared with 2008 levels.
Recalling that transport is the second biggest GHG emitting sector, the resolution insisted on the need to put a range of policies in place aimed
at lowering emissions from this sector. It called for all the Parties to work through the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) and the
International Maritime Organisation (IMO) to develop a global policy framework to enable an effective response, and to take measures to set
adequate targets before the end of 2016 for achieving the necessary reductions in the light of the 2 °C target.
Climate finance: cornerstone of the Paris Agreement: Parliament urged the EU and other countries to prepare a credible financial package,
covering both pre-2020 and post-2020 periods, in order to support greater efforts for GHG reduction, forest protection and adaptation to
climate change impacts. It called for climate finance to be included in the agreement as a dynamic element that reflects the changing
environmental and economic realities.
The resolution requested that the EU and its Member States agree on a roadmap for scaling up predictable, new and additional finance, in line
with existing commitments, towards their fair share in the overall targeted amount of USD 100 billion a year by 2020 from a variety of public
and private sources. The EU is invited to encourage all countries to deliver their fair share of climate finance.
Members also called for concrete EU and international commitments to deliver additional sources of climate finance, including setting aside
some EU ETS emission allowances in the 2021-2030 period and allocating revenues from EU and international measures on aviation and
shipping emissions for international climate finance and the Green Climate Fund, inter alia technological innovation projects.
The Commission, the Member States and all the Parties to the UNFCCC are called upon to use all means at their disposal to encourage
financial institutions to redirect their investments on the scale necessary to finance a genuine transition to resilient low carbon economies.
The resolution also insisted on the need to:
enhance scientific research, technological development and innovation in combating climate change, by taking advantage of Horizon
2020;
strengthen coordination and climate-risk management at EU level and to create a clear EU adaptation strategy.
Parliament also stressed the need for climate diplomacy to be part of a comprehensive approach to the EUs external action. The EU should
play an ambitious and central role at the conference, speaking with one voice and playing the role of mediator in seeking progress towards an
international agreement and staying united in that regard.

