Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2226(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

How can the CAP improve job creation in rural areas?

Subject
3.10 Agricultural policy and economies
3.10.01.02 Rural development, European Agricultural Fund for Rural
Development (EAFRD)

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AGRI

Rapporteur

Agriculture and Rural Development

Appointed
03/09/2015

ANDRIEU Eric
Shadow rapporteur

KALINOWSKI Jarosław

GIRLING Julie

MÜLLER Ulrike

CARTHY Matt

ROPĖ Bronis

ZULLO Marco
LOISEAU Philippe
Committee for opinion
EMPL

Rapporteur for opinion

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
19/10/2015

LÓPEZ BERMEJO
Paloma
FEMM

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

09/09/2015
KÖSTINGER Elisabeth

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Agriculture and Rural Development

HOGAN Phil

Key events
10/09/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

29/09/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

10/10/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

27/10/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

A8-0285/2016

Summary

27/10/2016

Debate in Parliament

27/10/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/10/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0427/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2226(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AGRI/8/04371

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE580.547

06/04/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE582.437

24/05/2016

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE577.059

26/05/2016

EP

Committee opinion

FEMM

PE582.229

12/07/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0285/2016

10/10/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0427/2016

27/10/2016

EP

Summary

SP(2017)54

29/03/2017

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

2015/2226(INI) - 10/10/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted the own-initiative report by Eric ANDRIEU (S&D, FR) on how the CAP can
improve job creation in rural areas.
The report noted highlighted that rural areas represent more than 77% of EU territory and that many jobs in those areas depend on agriculture
and the agrifood industry. The foundations of the last CAP reform enabled aid to be redirected and distributed more fairly among the Member
States and the various agricultural sectors. Members reaffirmed the role of the CAP in economic terms and as a social stabilising factor for
farms and rural regions.
However, the economic crisis is affecting in particular rural areas.
Under the current CAP: the report noted that it is of crucial importance to maintain the two pillars of the CAP. Pillar I prevents out-migration of
small and family farms from the sector and maintains jobs in the agricultural sector, while Pillar II funds ensure job creation in other areas such
as tourism, food processing and other related sectors.
Members called upon the Member States to:
give young farmers long-term prospects in order to address rural depopulation and to make full use of all the possibilities provided
under the new CAP to support young farmers and new entrants to farming (especially those aged over 40);
step up their support for small and medium-sized farms, in particular by making more use of the redistributive payment.
Members pointed out that the Member States have made extensive use of the option of granting coupled aid which secures jobs in
disadvantaged areas. They called on the Member States to increase the proportion of such aid for active farmers, to make it more flexible and
to earmark more of it towards producing more plant proteins in the EU, which currently depends on imports from third countries for supply of
this commodity.
The report noted that there is a need to implement the environmental dimension of direct aid.
Members considered that, given the high mortality rate among honey bees in several EU countries and the essential role they play in food
security and the economy of many plant sectors, the Union should provide greater support for this sector by adopting a genuine European
strategy for bee repopulation.

The report called for the EU to establish prevention tools along similar lines to the Milk Market Observatory in all major production sectors in
order to monitor markets, which would help steer production and ensure a response to crises by means of flexible and responsive market
management tools which would be activated when necessary.
Members considered that it is necessary to simplify the implementation of rural development policy, to adopt more coherent approaches, along
the same lines as multi-funds, and to stop the Member States and the Commission imposing overly painstaking administrative and financial
checks.
The Commission is called upon to submit a proposal for a medium-term reform of the Common Agricultural Policy which will be a response to
the current scenario of prolonged crisis and to the serious impact on employment, particularly in rural areas, will limit red tape and the
administrative burden for Europe's farmers.
Members also called for the establishment of binding rules on fair payment in the food supply chain between food producers, wholesalers and
processors to ensure that farmers receive an appropriate share of the value added which is sufficient to enable them to practice sustainable
farming.
Under the future CAP after 2020: the report emphasised that the CAP procedures must be simplified and must have sufficient funding
maintained. Greater importance should be attached to instruments geared towards modernisation and investment.
The funds under the future CAP ought to provide more support to slow the loss of small and medium-sized farms. CAP direct payments should
only be allocated to persons whose main area of activity is agriculture.
Members stated that regaining control of the European market must remain the primary principal action under the future CAP, before turning to
and without neglecting markets outside the EU. In this regard, they considered that trade agreements such as TTIP, CETA and the
EU-Mercosur Trade Agreement can pose a real and significant threat to European agriculture and employment markets.
Direct payments should remain a CAP instrument beyond 2020, in order to support and stabilise farm incomes and compensate for the costs
arising from complying with high EU standards.
Against the backdrop of the recent animal epidemics, Members called for a significant increase in the amount spent on food and feed security,
since the EUR 1.93 billion allocated for the current seven-year period is completely inadequate.
Lastly, the Commission and Member States should decrease administrative burden by cutting red tape and simplifying the CAP, as well as
ensuring its cost-effective transposition.

2015/2226(INI) - 27/10/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 237 votes to 201 with 67 abstentions, a resolution on how the CAP can improve job creation in rural
areas.
Members highlighted the fact that rural areas represent more than 77% of EU territory and that many jobs in those areas depend on Members
recalled that rural areas represent more than 77 % of EU territory, but nowadays employs only a fraction of the working population. Many rural
areas face a series of challenges such as low income, negative population growth, a lack of jobs and a high rate of unemployment, slow
development in the tertiary sector, a lack of processing capacity for food products, low skills and limited capital.
Whilst the economic crisis hit all parts of Europe, none were more affected than rural areas. In that connection, the CAP must be made more
effective and its legitimacy reaffirmed as one of the principal tools for EU action aimed at the retention and creation of employment and
competitiveness in rural areas.
Parliament made the following recommendations:
Under the current CAP: the resolution noted that it is of crucial importance to maintain the two pillars of the CAP. Pillar I prevents out-migration
of small and family farms from the sector and maintains jobs in the agricultural sector, while Pillar II funds ensure job creation in other areas
such as tourism, food processing and other related sectors.
Members called upon the Member States to:
give young farmers long-term prospects in order to address rural depopulation by making full use of all the support measures for
young farmers and new entrants to farming (especially those aged over 40);
step up their support for small and medium-sized farms, in particular by making more use of the redistributive payment.
The resolution called for a better distribution of CAP payments towards small farmers, as well as greater account taken of territories with
geographical handicaps (such as mountain areas, overseas territories, the most outlying areas and sensitive natural areas).
Members pointed out that the Member States have made extensive use of the option of granting coupled aid which secures jobs in
disadvantaged areas. They called on the Member States to increase the proportion of such aid for active farmers, to make it more flexible and
to earmark more of it towards producing more plant proteins in the EU, which currently depends on imports from third countries for supply of
this commodity. They also noted that there is a need to implement the environmental dimension of direct aid.
Parliament also recommended:
adopting a genuine European strategy for bee repopulation, given the high mortality rate among honey bees in several EU countries
and the essential role they play in food security and the economy of many plant sectors;
developing more rapid and effective intervention systems which can prevent the most negative effects;
regularly adjusting intervention prices in line with trends in cost prices so as to have a direct impact on producers income and the
perpetuation of their activities, as well as on employment;
establishing prevention tools in all major production sectors in order to monitor markets, which would help steer production and ensure
a response to crises by means of flexible and responsive market management tools which would be activated when necessary;
developing short supply chains linking farmers to local producers since quality schemes, geographical indications and organic farming
represent an opportunity to develop the agri-food sector and potentially create rural-based jobs;

establishing binding rules on fair payment in the food supply chain between food producers, wholesalers and processors to ensure
that farmers receive an appropriate share of the value added which is sufficient to enable them to practice sustainable farming.
Members also felt it necessary to simplify the implementation of rural development policy, to adopt more coherent approaches, along the same
lines as multi-funds, and to stop the Member States and the Commission imposing overly painstaking administrative and financial checks.
Under the future CAP after 2020: Parliament emphasised that the CAP procedures must be simplified and must have sufficient funding,
maintained at least at the current level. Greater importance should be attached to instruments geared towards modernisation and investment.
Highlighting the importance of the tourism sector as a source of income for farmers (e.g. farm holidays), Members urged instituting
programmes to support investment and entrepreneurship, and launching tourism campaigns.
The funds under the future CAP ought to provide more support to slow the loss of small and medium-sized farms. Furthermore, CAP direct
payments should only be allocated to persons whose main area of activity is agriculture. Direct payments should remain a CAP instrument
beyond 2020, in order to support and stabilise farm incomes and compensate for the costs arising from complying with high EU standards.
The resolution stressed the need to:
support a competitive and sustainable European agricultural model based on a family-run, diversified and multi-functional farming
model, with particular emphasis on territories facing specific constraints;
encourage the development, marketing and sale of high-quality agricultural products;
provide more effective support for organic and biodynamic farming and all other sustainable production methods, including integrated
farming and agroforestry.
With regard to the recent animal epidemics and the 2013 horsemeat scandal, Members considered that a significant increase in the amount
spent on food and feed security is needed, since the EUR 1.93 billion allocated for the current seven-year period is completely inadequate.
Lastly, Parliament took the view that ensuring food security in the European Union must remain the primary principle action under the future
CAP, without neglecting markets outside the EU. Trade agreements could pose a real risk, as well as possible opportunities, for European
agriculture. Members believed that free trade agreements should not lead to unfair competition towards small and medium-sized farms and
undermine local economies and jobs.

