Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2097(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Report on the application of Council Directive 2010/18/EU of 8 March 2010
implementing the revised Framework Agreement on parental leave
concluded by BUSINESSEUROPE, UEAPME, CEEP and ETUC and
repealing Directive 96/34/EC

Subject
4.10.02 Family policy, family law, parental leave

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL

Rapporteur

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
05/06/2015

ARENA Maria
Shadow rapporteur

HETMAN Krzysztof

GERICKE Arne

HARKIN Marian

PIMENTA LOPES João

VANA Monika

AGEA Laura
Committee for opinion
FEMM

Rapporteur for opinion

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

Appointed
06/11/2014

GARCÍA PÉREZ Iratxe

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

THYSSEN Marianne

Key events
21/05/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

16/03/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

05/04/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

12/05/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

12/05/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/05/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0076/2016

Summary

T8-0226/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2097(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Implementation

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/8/03516

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE569.733

11/12/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE575.187

29/01/2016

EP

PE571.424

22/02/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0076/2016

05/04/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0226/2016

12/05/2016

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

FEMM

2015/2097(INI) - 05/04/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Maria ARENA (S&D, BE) on the application of Council
Directive 2010/18/EU of 8 March 2010 implementing the revised Framework Agreement on parental leave concluded by BUSINESSEUROPE,
UEAPME, CEEP and ETUC and repealing Directive 96/34/EC.
Members recalled that there is little chance of the 75 % employment rate target set in the Europe 2020 strategy being achieved for women (it
currently stands at 63.5 %) by 2020. They felt, therefore, that there is a need for proactive policies designed to help women enter and stay in
the job market.
Transposition of the directive: the report stressed that the provisions necessary for the transposition of Directive 2013/62/EU on the application
of the revised Framework Agreement on parental leave concluded by BUSINESSEUROPE, UEAPME, CEEP and ETUC takes different forms
in the various Member States. Accordingly, Members believed that the transposition should comply fully with legislation in force in the area of
collective bargaining between social partners. They also felt that classifying the different types of leave at EU level is difficult, since not all
Member States have followed the EUs separate or sequential approach to maternity and parental leave.
They encouraged the Member States that have not yet done so to provide the Commission within a reasonable time with correspondence
tables between the provisions of the directive and the transposition measures. The committee considered it is crucial for Member States to
ensure that the necessary inspection resources are in place to verify that legislation protecting parents rights is being complied with. The
Commission is urged to produce a report on this issue.
Regretting the fact that there are disparities between the transposition measures of the directive in the field of application (e.g. more protection
is provided for in the public sector across the EU than in the private sector) Members recommended that all possible measures be taken to
enable the directive to be correctly implemented, in a uniform manner.
They asked Member States to adopt family-oriented social policies that provide for the application of all the benefits included in the directive in
the event of a prolonged stay abroad by parents seeking to complete an international adoption procedure.
Gender imbalance: the report noted that, more than a decade after the Member States transposed the directive, the gender imbalance in
taking parental leaves persists. It stated that the issue of pay during leave is crucial for low-income parents. Members believed that the
Commission should propose measures that encourage fathers to take more parental leave. They called on the Commission, to guarantee that
family rights assigned by public policies, including parental leave, are equal in terms of individual rights and equally accessible for both
parents.
With regard to income, Members noted that families with children and parents taking a career break to raise them have to bear not only a loss
of income but also higher expenditure. They also noted that the flexibility that the Directive grants Member States to define forms of parental
leave means that workers on non-standard contracts, such as fixed-term contracts, are not always included.
Members States were called upon to ensure:
that enterprises can plan with certainty, and to pay particular attention to the needs of the smallest and small and medium-sized
enterprises in this regard;
favourable conditions for the return to work of those who have benefited from parental leave, especially concerning reinstatement to
the same post or an equivalent or similar post.

Towards an effective directive to address the challenges of a work-life balance: Members noted the Commissions withdrawal of the draft
maternity leave directive, and called on the latter to return with an ambitious proposal that will effectively enable a better work-life balance
while respecting the principle of subsidiarity. Consideration should be given to a broad non-legislative initiative to promote the reconciliation of
work and family life in Member States.
At the same time, Members called for the social partners, on the basis of the draft implementation report, to acknowledge the failure of the
Parental Leave Directive in achieving its objectives in terms of work-life balance, female labour market participation, demographic challenges
and mens share of family tasks, including the care of children and other dependants. They considered, therefore, that more effective measures
should be taken to encourage a more equal sharing of family responsibilities between men and women.
Fair pay and extension of the minimum time period of parental leave: Members stressed that satisfactory parental leave arrangements are
closely linked to adequate pay. In this regard, they called on member States, in agreement with the social partners, to reconsider their system
of financial compensation for parental leave with a view to reaching a level that would act as an incentive for an adequate and decent level of
income replacement. They believed that the promotion of individualisation of the right to leave and of positive action aimed at the promotion of
the role of fathers is essential. Members called on the Commission and the social partners to consider offering an appropriate extension of the
minimum duration of parental leave from four to at least six months to improve work-life balance.
The committee went to on to call for:
an EU directive on a minimum two-week paternity leave;
an increase in the age of the child for which parental leave can be taken, and also the possibility of parental leave for parents of
children with disabilities or long-term illnesses should be extended beyond the statutory age of the child provided for in the directive;
tackling the many obstacles to the return to work after a period of long parental leave;
the exchange of best practices between Member States in the area of work-life balance, paying particular attention to policies that help
mothers to enter, stay in and return to the job market;
raising parents awareness of the benefits of participation in early childhood education and care programmes for their children and
themselves;
adapting the design and eligibility criteria of high-quality, inclusive early childhood education and care services to increasingly diverse
working patterns;
policies for overcoming stereotyped gender roles and ensuring the promotion of a gender-balanced work-life balance.
Lastly, Members called on the Commission, where appropriate, to incorporate workplace gender equality objectives into the European
Semester for economic policy coordination, so as to enable the targets of the Europe 2020 strategy to be met and to gauge the positive
influence of EU initiatives on improving work-life balance.

2015/2097(INI) - 12/05/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 491 votes to 101, with 38 abstentions, a resolution on the application of Council Directive 2010/18/EU of
8 March 2010 implementing the revised Framework Agreement on parental leave concluded by BUSINESSEUROPE, UEAPME, CEEP and
ETUC and repealing Directive 96/34/EC.
Parliament recalled that there is little chance of the 75 % employment rate target set in the Europe 2020 strategy being achieved for women (it
currently stands at 63.5 %) by 2020. It felt, therefore, that there is a need for proactive policies designed to help women enter and stay in the
job market.
Transposition of the directive: Parliament stressed that the provisions necessary for the transposition of Directive 2013/62/EU on the
application of the revised Framework Agreement on parental leave concluded by BUSINESSEUROPE, UEAPME, CEEP and ETUC takes
different forms in the various Member States. Accordingly, it believed that the transposition should comply fully with legislation in force in the
area of collective bargaining between social partners. It also felt that classifying the different types of leave at EU level is difficult, since not all
Member States have followed the EUs separate or sequential approach to maternity and parental leave.
Parliament recalled that gold-plating by Member States can add to the complexity of regulation and in effect reduce compliance; calls on the
Member States to avoid adding administrative burdens when transposing EU legislation.
In general, Parliament encouraged the Member States that have not yet done so to provide the Commission within a reasonable time with
correspondence tables between the provisions of the directive and the transposition measures. It considered it is crucial for Member States to
ensure that the necessary inspection resources are in place to verify that legislation protecting parents rights is being complied with . The
Commission is urged to produce a report on this issue.
Regretting the fact that there are disparities between the transposition measures of the directive in the field of application (e.g. more protection
is provided for in the public sector across the EU than in the private sector), Parliament recommended that all possible measures be taken to
enable the directive to be correctly implemented, in a uniform manner. It welcomed the fact that some Member States have transposed the
provisions of the directive beyond the minimum scope of application.
It asked Member States to adopt family-oriented social policies that provide for the application of all the benefits included in the directive in the
event of a prolonged stay abroad by parents seeking to complete an international adoption procedure.
Gender imbalance: Parliament noted that, more than a decade after the Member States transposed the directive, the gender imbalance in
taking parental leaves persists. It stated that the issue of pay during leave is crucial for low-income parents. It believed that the Commission
should propose measures that encourage fathers to take more parental leave. The Commission is called upon to guarantee that family rights
assigned by public policies, including parental leave, are equal in terms of individual rights and equally accessible for both parents so as to
encourage them to achieve a better work-life balance and in the best interest of their children. Those rights should be individualised as far as
possible to help achieve the 75 % employment rate targets for women and men set in the Europe 2020 strategy.
With regard to income, Parliament noted that families with children and parents taking a career break to raise them have to bear not only a
loss of income but also higher expenditure. It also noted that the flexibility that the Directive grants Member States to define forms of parental
leave means that workers on non-standard contracts, such as fixed-term contracts, are not always included.

Members States were called upon to ensure:
that enterprises can plan with certainty, and to pay particular attention to the needs of the smallest and small and medium-sized
enterprises in this regard;
favourable conditions for the return to work of those who have benefited from parental leave, especially concerning reinstatement to
the same post or an equivalent or similar post.
Towards an effective directive to address the challenges of a work-life balance: Parliament noted the Commissions withdrawal of the draft
maternity leave directive, and called on the latter to return with an ambitious proposal that will effectively enable a better work-life balance
while respecting the principle of subsidiarity. Consideration should be given to a broad non-legislative initiative to promote the reconciliation of
work and family life in Member States.
At the same time, Parliament called for the social partners, on the basis of the draft implementation report, to acknowledge the failure of the
Parental Leave Directive in achieving its objectives in terms of work-life balance, female labour market participation, demographic challenges
and mens share of family tasks, including the care of children and other dependants. It considered, therefore, that more effective measures
should be taken to encourage a more equal sharing of family responsibilities between men and women.
Parliament called on the social partners, on the basis of the Commission report published in February 2015, to address the shortcomings of
the Parental Leave Directive in fully achieving its objectives in terms of work-life balance, female labour market participation, demographic
challenges and mens share of family tasks, including the care of children and other dependants. It considered that more effective measures
should be taken to encourage a more equal sharing of family responsibilities between men and women.
Fair pay and extension of the minimum time period of parental leave: Parliament stressed that satisfactory parental leave arrangements are
closely linked to adequate pay. In this regard, it called on Member States, in agreement with the social partners, to reconsider their system of
financial compensation for parental leave with a view to reaching a level that would act as an incentive for an adequate and decent level of
income replacement. It believed that the promotion of individualisation of the right to leave and of positive action aimed at the promotion of the
role of fathers is essential. It called on the Commission and the social partners to consider offering an appropriate extension of the minimum
duration of parental leave from four to at least six months to improve work-life balance.
Parliament went on to call for:
an EU directive on a minimum two-week paternity leave;
the need to extend the period in which both parents can exercise their right to take parental leave ;
an increase in the age of the child for which parental leave can be taken, and also the possibility of parental leave for parents of
children with disabilities or long-term illnesses should be extended beyond the statutory age of the child provided for in the directive;
tackling the many obstacles to the return to work after a period of long parental leave;
the exchange of best practices between Member States in the area of work-life balance, paying particular attention to policies that help
mothers to enter, stay in and return to the job market;
raising parents awareness of the benefits of participation in early childhood education and care programmes for their children and
themselves;
adapting the design and eligibility criteria of high-quality, inclusive early childhood education and care services to increasingly diverse
working patterns;
policies for overcoming stereotyped gender roles and ensuring the promotion of a gender-balanced work-life balance.
Lastly, Parliament called on the Commission to gauge the positive influence of initiatives on improving work-life balance with a view to
redistributing family, care and domestic responsibilities, and to extend the particular responsibilities of those caring for children with disabilities,
in a position of dependency and/or belonging to disadvantaged categories and groups.

