Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2015/0079(COD)

Procedure completed

EU/Euratom/Moldova Association Agreement: implementing the safeguard
clause and anti-circumvention mechanism
See also 2014/0083(NLE)
Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.40.15 European neighbourhood policy
Geographical area
Moldova

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
INTA

Rapporteur

International Trade

Appointed
13/07/2015

SCHOLZ Helmut
Shadow rapporteur

WINKLER Iuliu

DANTI Nicola

ZAHRADIL Jan

TAKKULA Hannu

JADOT Yannick
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

AFET

Foreign Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

Appointed

19/05/2015
DĂNCILĂ Viorica

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Trade

Commissioner
MALMSTRÖM Cecilia

Key events
14/04/2015

Legislative proposal published

27/04/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

10/12/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

COM(2015)0154

Summary

14/12/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

03/02/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

03/02/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

29/02/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

29/02/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

09/03/2016

Final act signed

23/03/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0364/2015

Summary

T8-0035/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0079(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
See also 2014/0083(NLE)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 207-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

INTA/8/03249

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0154

14/04/2015

EC

PE560.764

14/10/2015

EP

Committee draft report

PE571.451

29/10/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE572.843

24/11/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0364/2015

14/12/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0035/2016

03/02/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)221

31/03/2016

Committee opinion

AGRI

Summary

Final act
Regulation 2016/400
OJ L 077 23.03.2016, p. 0053 Summary

2015/0079(COD) - 14/04/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to incorporate the anti-circumvention mechanism foreseen in the EU-Moldova Association Agreement into European Union law.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.

ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the EU-Moldova Association Agreement was signed on 24 June 2014 and has been provisionally applied from 1 September
2014. This Agreement includes:
a bilateral safeguard clause which allows for the temporary suspension of preferences in case their application would result in an
unexpected and significant increase of imports causing economic damage to the domestic industry of the importing party. In concrete
terms, this instrument makes it possible to either suspend the further tariff liberalization or reintroduce the most favoured nation (MFN)
customs duty rate;
a so-called anti-circumvention mechanism, which provides for the possibility to reintroduce the MFN customs duty rate when imports
of certain agricultural goods from Moldova exceed a given threshold without due justification of their exact origin.
The Commission considered it necessary to lay down the procedures to guarantee the effective application of the safeguard clause and the
anti-circumvention mechanism.
An implementing regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council is necessary to put in place in the EUs internal legislation the
necessary instrument to be able to apply the bilateral safeguard clause and the anti-circumvention mechanism.
CONTENT: the proposal for a Regulation constitutes the legal instrument for the implementation of the safeguard clause and the
anti-circumvention mechanism of the Agreement already concluded with the Republic of Moldova.
Safeguard measures: safeguard measures may be considered only if the product in question is imported into the Union in such increased
quantities, in absolute terms or relative to Union production, and under such conditions as to cause, or threaten to cause, serious injury to
Union producers of like or directly competing products. The maximum duration of safeguard measures is determined and specific provisions
regarding extension and review of such measures are laid down.
Initiating an investigation: the tasks of following up and reviewing the Agreement, carrying out investigations and, if necessary, imposing
safeguard measures should be carried out in the most transparent manner possible. The Commission should receive information including
available evidence from the Member States of any trends in imports which might call for the application of safeguard measures. If there is
sufficient prima facie evidence to justify the initiation of proceedings, the Commission should publish a notice in the Official Journal of the
European Union.
Investigations: the proposal provides that there should be detailed provisions on the initiation of investigations, access to and inspections by
interested parties of the information gathered, hearings for the interested parties involved and the opportunities for those parties to submit their
views. It also sets time limits for the initiation of an investigation and for determinations as to whether or not safeguard measures are
appropriate, with a view to ensuring that such determinations are made quickly, in order to increase legal certainty for the economic operators
concerned. An investigation should precede the application of any safeguard measure.
Anti-circumvention mechanism: the proposed Regulation provides for the possibility to suspend the preferential customs duties for a maximum
period of six months when the imports of certain agricultural products and processed agricultural products reach the annual import volumes
defined in the Association Agreement.
Implementation: in order to ensure uniform conditions for the adoption of provisional and definitive safeguard measures, for the imposition of
prior surveillance measures and for the termination of an investigation without measures provided for in the Agreement, implementing powers
should be conferred on the Commission.
The Commission should adopt immediately applicable implementing acts where, in duly justified cases a delay in the imposition of provisional
safeguard measures would cause damage which would be difficult to repair or in order to prevent a negative impact on the Union market as a
result of an increase in imports.

2015/0079(COD) - 14/12/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on International Trade adopted the report by Helmut SCHOLZ (GUE/NGL, DE) on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council implementing the safeguard clause and the anti-circumvention mechanism providing for the
temporary suspension of tariff preferences of the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy
Community and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Moldova, of the other part.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position, adopted at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure, should
amend the Commission proposal.
The proposed amendments seek to:
spell-out the obligation of the EU to hold consultations with the Moldovan authorities before the imposition of a definitive safeguard
measure in accordance with Article 160 of the Association Agreement between the EU and Moldovia. Where no satisfactory solution
has been reached within 30 days, the Commission may adopt definitive safeguard measures;
spell-out the reporting obligation of the Commission in more detail, so as to expressly mention the application of provisional and
definitive safeguard measures and the application of the anti-circumvention mechanism.

2015/0079(COD) - 03/02/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 577 votes to 11, with 52 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council implementing the safeguard clause and the anti-circumvention mechanism providing for the
temporary suspension of tariff preferences of the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy
Community and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Moldova, of the other part.

Parliaments position, adopted at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal regarding two
issues:
Imposition of definitive safeguard measures: the Commission shall invite the authorities of the Republic of Moldova to hold consultations in
accordance with Article 160(2) of the Agreement. Where no satisfactory solution has been reached within 30 days, the Commission may
adopt, by means of implementing acts, definitive safeguard measures.
Report: the amended text obliges the Commission to include in its annual report on the application and implementation of this Regulation
information about the application of provisional and definitive safeguard measures, as well as the application of the anti-circumvention
mechanism.

2015/0079(COD) - 09/03/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to implement the safeguard clause and the anti-circumvention mechanism provided for in the Association Agreement between the
EU and Moldavia.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/400 of the European Parliament and of the Council implementing the safeguard clause and the
anti-circumvention mechanism provided for in the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy
Community and their Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of Moldova, of the other part.
CONTENT: the EU-Moldova Association Agreement was signed on 24 June 2014 and has been provisionally applied from 1 September 2014.
This Agreement includes:
·

a bilateral safeguard clause which allows for the temporary suspension of preferences in case their application would result in an
unexpected and significant increase of imports causing economic damage to the domestic industry of the importing party. In
concrete terms, this instrument makes it possible to either suspend the further tariff liberalisation or reintroduce the most favoured
nation (MFN) customs duty rate;

·

an anti-circumvention mechanism, which provides for the possibility to reintroduce the MFN customs duty rate when imports of
certain agricultural goods from Moldova exceed a given threshold without due justification of their exact origin.

Objective: the Regulation lays down provisions for the implementation of the safeguard clause and the anti-circumvention mechanism provided
for in the Agreement. It applies to products originating in Moldova.
Safeguard measures: such measures may be imposed where a product originating in Moldova is imported into the Union in such increased
quantities, in absolute terms or relative to Union production, and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury to the
Union industry.
The Commission should receive information, including available evidence, from the Member States of any trends in imports that might call for
the application of safeguard measures. If there is sufficient prima facie evidence to justify the initiation of proceedings, the Commission should
publish a notice in the Official Journal of the European Union.
The Regulation contains detailed provisions on the initiation of investigations, access to information gathered and inspections by interested
parties of such information, hearings for the interested parties involved and opportunities for those parties to submit their views. An
investigation should precede the application of any safeguard measure, subject to the Commission being allowed to apply provisional
safeguard measures in critical circumstances.
A safeguard measure shall remain in force only for such period of time as may be necessary to prevent or remedy serious injury to Union
industry and to facilitate adjustment.
Anti-circumvention mechanism: the Regulation also provides for the possibility of suspending the preferential duties for a maximum period of 6
months when the imports of certain products reach the annual import volumes defined in the Agreement.
Implementation: implementing powers are conferred on the Commission in order to ensure uniform conditions for the adoption of provisional
and definitive safeguard measures, for the imposition of prior surveillance measures, for the termination of an investigation without measures
and for the implementation of the anti-circumvention mechanism provided for in the Agreement. The Commission will adopt immediately
applicable implementing acts imposing provisional safeguard measures in duly justified cases, where imperative grounds of urgency so
require.
Annual report: for reasons of transparency, the Commission will submit an annual report to the European Parliament and to the Council on the
implementation of the Agreement and the application of the safeguard measures and the anti-circumvention mechanism.
The European Parliament may, within 1 month of submission of the Commissions report, invite the Commission to an ad hoc meeting of its
responsible committee to present and explain any issues related to the implementation of the Regulation.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 24.3.2016.

