Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2044(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Financing for development

Subject
6.30 Development cooperation
6.30.02 Financial and technical cooperation and assistance

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
DEVE

Rapporteur

Development

Appointed
07/10/2014

SILVA PEREIRA Pedro
Shadow rapporteur

RÜBIG Paul

ZAHRADIL Jan

GOERENS Charles

SÁNCHEZ
CALDENTEY Lola

HAUTALA Heidi

CORRAO Ignazio
Committee for opinion
BUDG

Rapporteur for opinion

Budgets

Appointed
11/02/2015

GOERENS Charles

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

International Cooperation and Development

MIMICA Neven

Key events
12/02/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

20/04/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

27/04/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

18/05/2015

Debate in Parliament

19/05/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

19/05/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading
End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0143/2015

Summary

T8-0196/2015

Summary

19/05/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2044(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

DEVE/8/02766

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE549.307

02/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE551.961

26/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE552.108

26/03/2015

EP

PE551.788

16/04/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0143/2015

27/04/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0196/2015

19/05/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)470

24/09/2015

Committee opinion

BUDG

2015/2044(INI) - 27/04/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Development adopted the own-initiative report by Pedro SILVA PEREIRA (S&D, PT) on Financing for Development.
Recalling that 1.5 billion people are still living in poverty, Members called on the European Union to affirm its political leadership throughout the
preparatory process towards the definition of a sustainable development framework, a renewed agreement on financing for development and
other means of implementation on the matter. They welcomed the recent Commission communication entitled A Global Partnership for Poverty
Eradication and Sustainable Development after 2015, whilst regretting a certain lack of commitment regarding the timeline for future financial
targets.
International public financing: Members urged the EU and its Member States to re-commit without delay to the 0.7 % of GNI target for ODA,
with 50 % of ODA and at least 0.2 % of GNI being reserved for least developed countries. They welcomed the EUs firm stance on focusing
efforts on the quantity and quality of development aid. They stressed that the EU and other developed countries must honour their commitment
to provide scaled-up, new and additional climate finance in order to reach by 2020 the goal of jointly mobilising USD 100 billion annually. They
support innovative sources for additional development and climate finance, including financial transaction taxes, carbon taxes on international
aviation and maritime transport, and automatic allocation of carbon market revenues.
Recalling that the EU is the worlds leading donor of development aid, accounting for almost 60 % of global official development aid, Members
called on the EU to take account of long-term financial requirements by favouring and leading a more strategic, ambitious and universal
approach in line with the SDGs. They recalled the EU budgets contribution to financing for development, with EUR 19.7 billion for development
cooperation and EUR 6.8 billion for humanitarian aid between 2014 and 2020, in addition to the EUR 2.2 billion emergency aid reserve. They
also pointed to the EUR 30.5 billion European Development Fund (EDF). The 2015 budget dedicates EUR 2.4 billion in commitments (EUR
2.1 billion in payments) to development cooperation and EUR 928.8 million in commitments (EUR 918.8 million in payments) to humanitarian
aid.
Once again, Members called on the EU and its Member States to promote an aid effectiveness agenda to eradicate poverty, with a special
focus on basic social services for all and public goods that are less effectively provided by the private sector, such as primary education, social
safety nets, health care and infrastructure for sanitation, water supply and energy.
They also underlined the absolute need for the EU to aim for the highest level of coordination in order to achieve coherence with other policy
areas (environment, migration, international trade, human rights, agriculture, etc) and to avoid duplication of work and inconsistencies in
activities.
Domestic resource mobilisation and international tax cooperation: Members asked the Commission to enhance its capacity-building assistance
in the areas of tax administration, financial governance, public financial management, anti-corruption, the recovery of stolen assets and the

fight against tax evasion. They insisted on actively crack down on tax havens, tax evasion and illicit financial flows and supported the
setting-up of an intergovernmental body for tax cooperation under the auspices of the UN. They considered that international corporate tax
rules should include the principle that taxes should be paid where value is extracted or created.
Several priorities are also mentioned as regards gender equality, research, the environment and the transfer of technologies.
Private sector and civil society: Members underlined the high importance of establishing favourable conditions for private enterprise and
entrepreneurship in developing countries. They called for alignment of the private sector with the SDGs through appropriate partnerships,
financial instruments and incentives, notably for young people and women in the shape of access to credit to support start-ups.
They called on the Commission to support increased access to finance for MSMEs and cooperatives in developing countries through new
forms of cooperation such as blending and public private partnerships (PPPs). They also support increased market access for developing
countries, especially the least developed countries.
In parallel, Members called for increased participation of local authorities and civil society, including community-based NGOs, in discussions
on development priorities, and for a more inclusive and accountable implementation of the post-2015 agenda.
Global governance: Members called for a review of international organisations programmes and instruments of financial assistance for
development in order to align them with the new sustainable development goals. They urged the European Investment Bank, the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to establish the highest standards of
responsible financing and to gear their resources more closely to the needs of developing countries , including through mutually effective
pro-poor lending facilities.
Monitoring, accountability and review: Members called for an agreement at the Addis Ababa conference on robust, transparent and accessible
monitoring and accountability framework for effective tracking and follow-up of investment and progress as regards specific commitments and
objectives. They asked all parties to ensure the transparent and efficient implementation of aid and financing, in particular by signing and
effectively implementing the provisions of the UN Convention against Corruption. They called for an international initiative to improve the
quality of statistics, data and information in order to track spending, investment and progress on specific commitments and objectives. Lastly,
Members reiterated that, as a complement to GDP, a new set of other indicators is necessary in order to take account of new social and
environmental challenges, and that this set should include in particular the Human Development Index, the carbon footprint and the ecological
footprint.

2015/2044(INI) - 19/05/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 582 votes to 79, with 28 abstentions, a resolution on Financing for Development.
Recalling that 1.5 billion people are still living in poverty, Parliament called on the European Union to affirm its political leadership throughout
the preparatory process towards the definition of a sustainable development framework, a renewed agreement on financing for development
and other means of implementation on the matter. It welcomed the recent Commission communication entitled A Global Partnership for
Poverty Eradication and Sustainable Development after 2015, whilst regretting a certain lack of commitment regarding the timeline for future
financial targets.
International public financing: Parliament stressed that Official Development Assistance (ODA) remains a key instrument for financing
development and urged the EU and its Member States to re-commit without delay to the 0.7% of GNI target for ODA, with 50% of ODA and at
least 0.2% of GNI being reserved for Least Developed Countries (LDCs), and to present, taking into account budgetary constraints,
multiannual budget timetables for the scale-up to these levels by 2020.
Parliament welcomed the EUs firm stance on focusing efforts on the quantity and quality of development aid and called on the Commission
and the Member States to persuade public and private donors around the world to honour their financial promises and to make new
commitments.
Members stressed that the EU and other developed countries must honour their commitment to provide scaled-up, new and additional climate
finance in order to reach by 2020 the goal of jointly mobilising USD 100 billion annually. They support innovative sources for additional
development and climate finance, including financial transaction taxes, carbon taxes on international aviation and maritime transport, and
automatic allocation of carbon market revenues. They welcomed further European and international efforts to identify further additional
sources.
Recalling that the EU is the worlds leading donor of development aid, accounting for almost 60 % of global official development aid, Parliament
called on the EU to take account of long-term financial requirements by favouring and leading a more strategic, ambitious and universal
approach in line with the SDGs. It recalled the EU budgets contribution to financing for development, with EUR 19.7 billion for development
cooperation and EUR 6.8 billion for humanitarian aid between 2014 and 2020, in addition to the EUR 2.2 billion emergency aid reserve. It also
pointed to the EUR 30.5 billion European Development Fund (EDF).
The 2015 budget dedicates EUR 2.4 billion in commitments (EUR 2.1 billion in payments) to development cooperation and EUR 928.8 million
in commitments (EUR 918.8 million in payments) to humanitarian aid.
In an amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament called on the EU to ensure that negotiations on the post-2015 global development agenda,
financing for development and climate change have credible links with the new Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-2030 in
order to build resilience and preparedness while achieving the global goal of leaving no one behind.
Once again, Parliament called on the EU and its Member States to promote an aid effectiveness agenda to eradicate poverty, with a special
focus on basic social services for all and public goods that are less effectively provided by the private sector, such as primary education, social
safety nets, health care and infrastructure for sanitation, water supply and energy.
It also underlined the absolute need for the EU to aim for the highest level of coordination in order to achieve coherence with other policy
areas (environment, migration, international trade, human rights, agriculture, etc) and to avoid duplication of work and inconsistencies in
activities.
Domestic resource mobilisation and international tax cooperation: Parliament asked the Commission to enhance its capacity-building

assistance in the areas of tax administration, financial governance, public financial management, anti-corruption, the recovery of stolen assets
and the fight against tax evasion. It insisted on actively crack down on tax havens, tax evasion and illicit financial flows and supported the
setting-up of an intergovernmental body for tax cooperation under the auspices of the UN. Parliament called for the creation of public registers
of beneficial ownership and mandatory country-by-country reporting for transnational companies in all sectors and for ensuring a fair
distribution of taxing rights while negotiating tax and investment treaties with developing countries. It also considered that international
corporate tax rules should include the principle that taxes should be paid where value is extracted or created.
Several priorities are also mentioned as regards gender equality, research, the environment and the transfer of technologies.
Parliament supported investment in capacity-building, basic social services such as education and health (ensuring universal health coverage),
including sexual and reproductive health and rights, nutrition, public services and social protection and the fight against poverty.
Private sector and civil society: Parliament underlined the high importance of establishing favourable conditions for private enterprise and
entrepreneurship in developing countries. It called for alignment of the private sector with the SDGs through appropriate partnerships, financial
instruments and incentives, notably for young people and women in the shape of access to credit to support start-ups.
Parliament recalled that public aid alone is far from sufficient to cover all investment needs in developing countries . It insisted therefore on the
leverage role of blending and public-private partnerships (PPPs) as a means to enhance the impact of development assistance, to attract
private finance and to support local businesses. It stressed, however, that blended finance must not replace state responsibility for delivering
on social needs and should be aligned with national development objectives and with development effectiveness principles. It encouraged
PPPs in particular in the field of research related to the Innovative Medicines Initiative such as the Ebola+ programme.
It also supported increased market access for developing countries, especially the least developed countries.
In parallel, Parliament called for increased participation of local authorities and civil society, including community-based NGOs, in discussions
on development priorities, and for a more inclusive and accountable implementation of the post-2015 agenda.
Global governance: Members called for a review of international organisations programmes and instruments of financial assistance for
development in order to align them with the new sustainable development goals. They urged the European Investment Bank, the European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank to establish the highest standards of
responsible financing and to gear their resources more closely to the needs of developing countries , including through mutually effective
pro-poor lending facilities.
Monitoring, accountability and review: Parliament called for an agreement at the Addis Ababa conference on robust, transparent and
accessible monitoring and accountability framework for effective tracking and follow-up of investment and progress as regards specific
commitments and objectives. It asked all parties to ensure the transparent and efficient implementation of aid and financing, in particular by
signing and effectively implementing the provisions of the UN Convention against Corruption. It called for an international initiative to improve
the quality of statistics, data and information in order to track spending, investment and progress on specific commitments and objectives.
Lastly, it reiterated that, as a complement to GDP, a new set of other indicators is necessary in order to take account of new social and
environmental challenges, and that this set should include in particular the Human Development Index, the carbon footprint and the ecological
footprint.

