Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2115(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

European Central Bank annual report for 2014

Subject
5.20.03 European Central Bank (ECB), ESCB

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
11/05/2015

MARIAS Notis
Shadow rapporteur

VANDENKENDELAERE Tom

MAVRIDES Costas

VAN NIEUWENHUIZEN
Cora

CARTHY Matt

URTASUN Ernest

VALLI Marco
Committee for opinion
EMPL

European Commission

Employment and Social Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Economic and Financial Affairs

DOMBROVSKIS Valdis

Key events
20/04/2015

Additional information

21/05/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

25/01/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

28/01/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

01/02/2016

Debate in Parliament

25/02/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

25/02/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st

Summary

A8-0012/2016

Summary

T8-0063/2016

Summary

reading/single reading
25/02/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2115(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/03501

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE565.149

24/08/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE571.407

29/10/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0012/2016

28/01/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0063/2016

25/02/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)269

22/06/2016

2015/2115(INI) - 20/04/2015 Additional information
See the 2014 European Central Bank annual report

2015/2115(INI) - 28/01/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Notis MARIAS (ECR, EL) on the European Central
Bank Annual Report for 2014.
According to latest forecasts, economic recovery in the euro area is expected to expand, unemployment is expected to record a slow decrease
and the fiscal outlook in the euro area should exhibit an improvement.
Low energy prices, while having a negative impact on inflation expectations, could potentially help the economic recovery. The average
inflation rate in the euro area, after remaining close to zero in the first half of 2015, is expected to pick up, rising to 1.1% in 2016 and 1.7% in
2017.
Improving employment and SMEs: Members stressed the need to improve the conditions for both public and private investment aimed at
boosting growth and job creation. Further efforts are needed to ensure the financing of the real economy. They deplored the existing gaps
between the financing rates granted to SMEs and those granted to bigger companies, between lending rates on small and large loans, and
between credit conditions for SMEs located in different euro area countries, but recognises the limits of what monetary policy can achieve in
this respect.
Despite the ECB pursuing its actions in order to maintain favourable financing conditions, private and public investment in the euro area
remains significantly below the levels prior to the current crisis. In this respect, Members welcomed the setting-up of the European Fund for
Strategic Investments (EFSI), as well as the Commission's plan to establish a genuine Capital Markets Union (CMU), which should diversify
sources of financing in the EU economy, boost cross-border investment and increase access to financing for businesses, particularly SMEs.
Financial stability: Members stated that they are cautious of the potential risks to financial stability posed by protracted low interest rates in
certain Member States, which might have an adverse effect on life insurance and pension plans. The report stressed that the high and
divergent levels of public and private indebtedness in some Member States are obstacles to the correct transmission of monetary policy, and
that the non-conventional monetary policy implemented by the ECB is not, by itself alone, capable of changing this situation. Members urged
those euro area Member States which are subject to a macroeconomic adjustment programme to carry out a comprehensive audit of their
public finances so as, inter alia, to assess the reasons that led to the build-up of excessive levels of debt, as well as to track any possible
irregularities.
Members welcomed the ECB's attempt to boost inflation to under but close to 2 %, since this can also contribute to the success of other EU
policies and enhance competitiveness, economic growth and jobs in Europe.
Enhanced transparency: Members welcomed the step forward taken by the ECB in publishing the summary minutes of its meetings, and look
forward to the announcement of further steps to improve the transparency of its communication channels. Further progress could still be made

especially with regard to the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). They further welcomed the publication of clearer and more transparent
emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) procedures for solvent financial institutions (mostly national banks) facing temporary liquidity problems.
Members reiterated their call for the annual ECB report to include feedback on the inputs provided in the annual report of Parliament. The
report also stressed the need for democratic accountability in view of the new responsibilities conferred on the ECB regarding supervisory
tasks.

2015/2115(INI) - 25/02/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 400 votes to 169, with 59 abstentions, a resolution on the European Central Bank Annual Report for
2014.
Parliament recalled that according to the Commissions latest forecast, economic recovery in the euro area is expected to expand but that the
foundations for growth are fragile, unemployment in the euro area is expected to record a slow decrease and that the fiscal outlook in the euro
area should exhibit an improvement. According to the ECB projections, the average inflation rate in the euro area, after remaining close to zero
in the first half of 2015, is expected to pick up, rising to 1.1% in 2016 and 1.7% in 2017.
In 2014, the ECB lowered its key refinancing rates to the effective lower bound and reduced its deposit facility rate to -0.20 %. However lower
real rates have not significantly translated into credit for either households or businesses, especially SMEs, and this has contributed to setting
the ECB on the path to unconventional monetary policy measures. The ECB implemented a series of targeted longer-term refinancing
operations and purchase programmes for selected private-sector assets aiming at supporting lending to the real economy.
In this regard, Parliament made the following recommendations:
Stimulate growth and employment by investment: Parliament stressed the need to improve the conditions for both public and private
investment aimed at boosting growth and job creation. Further efforts are needed to ensure the financing of the real economy. Members
deplored the existing gaps between the financing rates granted to SMEs and those granted to bigger companies, between lending rates on
small and large loans, and between credit conditions for SMEs located in different euro area countries, but recognised the limits of what
monetary policy can achieve in this respect.
Despite the ECB pursuing its actions in order to maintain favourable financing conditions, private and public investment in the euro area
remains significantly below the levels prior to the current crisis. In this respect, Members welcomed the setting-up of the European Fund for
Strategic Investments (EFSI), as well as the Commission's plan to establish a genuine Capital Markets Union (CMU), which should diversify
sources of financing in the EU economy, boost cross-border investment and increase access to financing for businesses, particularly SMEs.
Role of the ECB: Parliament stressed that the ECB's contribution includes efforts aimed at increasing low-cost lending to the real economy and
facilitating economic recovery in the direction of jobs, growth and stability. It is concerned at the possible unintended consequences and
long-term effects of the ECB's non-conventional monetary policy instruments and is aware that exiting from these measures will be a complex
matter which will have to be carefully planned. It also insisted that monetary policy cannot resolve the fiscal and economic problems that exist
in many Member States, and cannot be a substitute for the necessary sustainable and socially balanced structural reforms, fiscal consolidation
and targeted investment.
Financial stability: Members stated that they are cautious of the potential risks to financial stability posed by protracted low interest rates in
certain Member States, which might have an adverse effect on life insurance and pension plans. The resolution stressed that the high and
divergent levels of public and private indebtedness in some Member States are obstacles to the correct transmission of monetary policy, and
that the non-conventional monetary policy implemented by the ECB is not, by itself alone, capable of changing this situation. Members urged
those euro area Member States which are subject to a macroeconomic adjustment programme to carry out a comprehensive audit of their
public finances so as, inter alia, to assess the reasons that led to the build-up of excessive levels of debt, as well as to track any possible
irregularities.
The resolution also welcomed the ECB's attempt to boost inflation to under but close to 2 %, since this can also contribute to the success of
other EU policies and enhance competitiveness, economic growth and jobs in Europe.
Enhanced transparency: Parliament welcomed the step forward taken by the ECB in publishing the summary minutes of its meetings, and look
forward to the announcement of further steps to improve the transparency of its communication channels. Further progress could still be made
especially with regard to the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM). It further welcomed the publication of clearer and more transparent
emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) procedures for solvent financial institutions (mostly national banks) facing temporary liquidity problems.
Members reiterated their call for the annual ECB report to include feedback on the inputs provided in the annual report of Parliament. Recalling
that the quarterly monetary dialogue is important to ensure the transparency of monetary policy, vis-à-vis Parliament and the wider public,
Parliament stressed the need for democratic accountability in view of the new responsibilities conferred on the ECB regarding supervisory
tasks.

