Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2015/0226(COD)

Procedure completed, awaiting publication in Official Journal

Common rules on securitisation and creating a European framework for
simple, transparent and standardised securitisation
Amending Directive 2009/138/EC 2007/0143(COD)
Amending Directive 2009/65/EC 2008/0153(COD)
Amending Regulation (EC) No 1060/2009 2008/0217(COD)
Amending Directive 2011/61/EU 2009/0064(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 2010/0250(COD)
See also 2015/0225(COD)
Subject
2.50.03 Securities and financial markets, stock exchange, CIUTS,
investments
2.50.05 Insurance, pension funds
2.50.08 Financial services, financial reporting and auditing
2.50.10 Financial supervision
Legislative priorities
Joint Declaration 2017

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
26/11/2015

TANG Paul
Shadow rapporteur

KARAS Othmar

SWINBURNE Kay

JEŽEK Petr

VIEGAS Miguel

SCOTT CATO Molly

VALLI Marco
MONOT Bernard
Committee for opinion
ITRE

IMCO

JURI

Rapporteur for opinion

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Legal Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
DOMBROVSKIS Valdis

Appointed

Markets Union

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
30/09/2015

Legislative proposal published

COM(2015)0472

Summary

14/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

08/12/2015

Debate in Council

08/12/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

08/12/2016

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

19/12/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0387/2016

Summary

11/07/2017

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE607.884

25/10/2017

Debate in Parliament

26/10/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

20/11/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

12/12/2017

Final act signed

12/12/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

T8-0415/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0226(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Directive 2009/138/EC 2007/0143(COD)
Amending Directive 2009/65/EC 2008/0153(COD)
Amending Regulation (EC) No 1060/2009 2008/0217(COD)
Amending Directive 2011/61/EU 2009/0064(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 2010/0250(COD)
See also 2015/0225(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed, awaiting publication in Official Journal

Committee dossier

ECON/8/04648

Summary

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0472

30/09/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2015)0185

30/09/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2015)0186

30/09/2015

EC

CON/2016/0011
OJ C 219 17.06.2016, p. 0002

11/03/2016

ECB

PE583.961

06/06/2016

EP

SWD(2016)0206

15/06/2016

EC

Amendments tabled in committee

PE587.495

27/07/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE587.508

27/07/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0387/2016

19/12/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0415/2017

26/10/2017

EP

Summary

European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report

Committee draft report
Document attached to the procedure

Summary

Summary

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

2015/0226(COD) - 30/09/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to restart a sustainable securitisation market that will improve the financing of the EU economy, while ensuring financial stability
and investor protection.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: securitisation involves transactions that enable a lender typically a credit institution to refinance a set of loans or exposures
such as loans for immovable property, auto leases, consumer loans or credit cards, by transforming them into tradable securities.
Securitisation can be an important channel for diversifying funding sources and allocating risk more efficiently within the EU financial system.
Overall, it can improve efficiencies in the financial system and provide additional investment opportunities. Securitisation can create a bridge
between credit institutions and capital markets with an indirect benefit for businesses and citizens (through, for example, less expensive loans
and business finance mortgages and credit cards).
In the Investment Plan for Europe presented on 26 November 2014, the Commission announced its intention to restart high quality
securitisation markets, without repeating the mistakes made before the 2008 financial crisis. The Commission considers that the development
of a simple, transparent and standardised securitisation market constitutes a building block of the Capital Markets Union (CMU) and
contributes to the Commission's priority objective to support job creation and a return to sustainable growth.
In its resolution of July 2015 on the Capital Markets Union, the European Parliament noted that the development of simple, transparent and
standardised securitisation should be exploited better and welcomed the initiative to establish a sustainable, transparent securitisation market
by developing a specific regulatory framework with a uniform definition of high-quality securitisation, combined with effective methods for
monitoring, measuring and managing risk.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the effects of the initiative are likely to change through time. The Commission considers that if the securitisation
market would return to pre-crisis average issuance levels, credit institutions could provide an additional amount of credit to the private sector
ranging between 100-150bn. This would represent a 1.6% increase in credit to EU firms and households. The policy options taken in this
proposal should have several positive effects on SME financing.
CONTENT: this proposal is based on what has been put in place in the EU to address the risks inherent in highly complex, opaque and risky
securitisation. It should help to better differentiate simple, transparent and standardised (STS) products which can provide a channel of
sustainable finance to the EU economy from more opaque and complex products. This framework should provide confidence to investors and
a high standard for the EU, to help parties evaluate the risks relating to securitisation (both within and across products).
The proposal forms a legislative package with the legislative proposal amending Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament
and of the Council concerning prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms. It aims to:
restart markets on a more sustainable basis, so that simple, transparent and standardised securitisation can act as an effective
funding channel to the economy;
allow for efficient and effective risk transfers to a broad set of institutional investors as well as banks;

allow securitisation to function as an effective funding mechanism for some longer term investors as well as banks;
protect investors and manage systemic risk by avoiding a recurrence of the flawed "originate to distribute" models.
Essentially, this proposal contains two main parts. The first part is devoted to rules that apply to all securitisation, whilst the second part
focuses only on STS Securitisation. Its main elements are as follows:
Due diligence rules for investors: since securitisations are not always the simplest and most transparent financial products and can
involve higher risks than other financial instruments, institutional investors are subject to due diligence rules. The proposal also
requires investors to perform appropriate due diligence before investing in STS securitisations. They also remain responsible for
assessing risks inherent to their exposure to the securitisation position and whether the securitisation is suitable and appropriate for
the needs of the investor.
Risk retention: the proposal imposes a direct risk retention requirement and a reporting obligation on the originator, sponsor or the
original lenders. Investors will thus in a simple manner be able to check whether these entities have retained risk.
Transparency rules: the proposal ensures that investors will have all the relevant information on securitisations at their disposal. It
covers all types of securitisations and applies across sectors. It requires originators, sponsors and Securitisation Special Purpose
Entities (SSPEs) to make freely available the information to investors, via standardised templates, on a website that meets certain
criteria such as control of data quality and business continuity.
STS securitisations: there will be two types of STS requirements: one for long-term securitisations and one for short-term
securitisations (ABCP). To a large extent the requirements are however similar. This proposal only allows 'true sale' securitisation to
become STS. The Commission will assess whether some synthetic securitisations that have performed well during the financial crisis
and that are simple, transparent and standardised should be able to meet the STS requirements.
STS notification and disclosure: originators, sponsors and SSPEs take responsibility for their claim that the securitisation is STS and
that there is transparency on the market. Originators and sponsors shall be liable for any loss or damage resulting from incorrect or
misleading notifications under the conditions stipulated by national law.
Surveillance : the proposal requires Member States to designate competent authorities in accordance with existing EU legal acts in the
area of financial services to ensure effective surveillance of the securitisation market.
Third country dimension: this proposal provides essentially for a system that is open to third country securitisations. EU institutional
investors can invest in non-EU securitisations and will have to perform the same due diligence as for EU securitisations. Moreover,
non-EU securitisations can also meet the STS requirements.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: this legislative proposal would have limited consequences on the EU budget ( EUR 1,733 millions). It will imply
further policy development within the Commission and in the three ESAs (EBA, ESMA and EIOPA).
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains measures empowering the Commission to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty
on the Functioning of the European Union.

2015/0226(COD) - 19/12/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the report by Paul TANG (S&D, NL) on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council laying down common rules on securitisation and creating a European framework for simple,
transparent and standardised securitisation and amending Directives 2009/65/EC, 2009/138/EC, 2011/61/EU and Regulations (EC) No
1060/2009 and (EU) No 648/2012.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Aim: the Regulation aims to strengthen the legislative framework implemented after the financial crisis to address the risks inherent in highly
complex, opaque and risky securitisation.
Members added that for that purpose, this Regulation should introduce a ban on re-securitisation and enhance the conditions for complying
with the risk retention obligations.
The amended Regulation stipulated that investors in securitisation shall be institutional investors, other than the originator, sponsor or original
lender of a securitisation, or institutions of third countries and territories, whose supervisory and regulatory requirements are considered
equivalent to the requirements of the Union.
The Securitisation Special Purpose Entity (SSPEs) shall not be established in a third country if the third country promotes itself as an off-shore
financial centre; there is a lack of effective exchange of information with foreign tax authorities; there is a lack of transparency with regard to
legislative, judicial or administrative provisions.
Risk retention: the amended text stipulated that the originator, sponsor or the original lender of a securitisation shall retain on an ongoing basis
a material net economic interest in the securitisation of not less than 5 % or 10 % depending on the retention modality chosen.
Moreover, the securitised exposures should not deliver a performance that would be significantly different from exposures that have not been
securitised
The European Banking Authority (EBA) in close cooperation with the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) shall take a reasoned decision
on required retention rates of up to 20 % in light of market circumstances
Transparency requirements: the originator, sponsor and SSPE of a securitisation shall make at least the following information available to
holders of a securitisation position, investors prior to them being exposed to a securitisation position and to the competent authorities: (i) all
underlying documentation that is essential for an understanding of the transaction, including, to the extent that they are available, at least; (ii) a
detailed description of the priority of payments; (iii) information about the credit granting and credit scoring process followed for the underlying
assets in the securitisation and the historical evolution of non-performing loans underwritten by the originator; (iv) details regarding loss
waterfall.
The investor in a securitisation position on the secondary market shall make at least the following information available to the competent

authorities: (a) its beneficial owner, including the country of establishment and business sector; and (b) the size of their investment and to
which tranche of the securitisation it relates.
The European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) must safeguard the transparency of the securitisation market to the benefit of market
participants and supervisors. It may adopt guidelines in order to further specify the conditions in which the securitised exposures do not
represent material risk exposure.
Conditions and procedures for registration of a securitisation repository: the proposed amendments seeks to introduce new articles as regards:
the registration of a securitisation repository with ESMA, examination of the application, notification of ESMA decisions relating to
registration;
the possibility for the ESMA, by simple request or by decision, to require securitisation repositories and related third parties to whom
the securitisation repositories have outsourced operational functions or activities to provide all information that is necessary in order to
carry out its duties under this Regulation;
the possibility for the ESMA to conduct necessary investigations and on-site inspections;
procedural rules concerning the adoption of surveillance measures and imposing fines: the basic amounts of the fines shall range from
EUR 5 000 to EUR 200 000 depending on the type of infringement;
ESMA shall, by decision, impose periodic penalty payments in order to compel a securitisation repository to put an end to an
infringement: the amount of the periodic penalty payments shall be 3 % of the average daily turnover in the preceding business year,
or, in the case of natural persons, 2 % of the average daily income in the preceding calendar year;
the opportunity for persons to be heard before the ESMA takes any decision on a fine or on a periodic penalty payment. ESMA shall
base its decisions only on findings on which the persons subject to the proceedings have had an opportunity to comment;
supervisory measures used ESMA, for instance, to require the securitisation repository to bring the infringement to an end; to impose
a temporary prohibition on the acceptance of new originators, sponsors or SSPE or the extension of the services that the securitisation
repository offers, when these would compromise the stability or the accuracy of data; require the removal of a natural person from the
governing bodies of a trade repository.
Simple, transparent and standardised securitisation (STS): the amended text underlined that the ESMA should therefore, together with the
national authorities competent for securities markets, supervise compliance with the STS criteria and develop guidelines to ensure a common
and consistent understanding of the STS requirements throughout the Union, in order to address potential interpretation issues.
The originator and the sponsor shall publish information on the long-term, sustainable nature of the securitisation for the investors , using
environmental, social and governance criteria to describe how the securitisation contributed to real economy investments and in which way the
original lender used the freed-up capital.
Simple, transparent and standardised asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) securitisation: there should be two types of STS requirements:
one for long-term securitisations and one for short-term securitisations (ABCP). Members proposed regular stress testing for financial
institutions that want to support an ABCP programme.

2015/0226(COD) - 26/10/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 459 votes to 135 with 23 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council laying down common rules on securitisation and creating a European framework for simple,
transparent and standardised securitisation and amending Directives 2009/65/EC, 2009/138/EC, 2011/61/EU and Regulations (EC) No
1060/2009 and (EU) No 648/2012.
The European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as
follows:
Aims: the Regulation aims to strengthen the legislative framework implemented after the financial crisis to address the risks inherent in highly
complex, opaque and risky securitisation, by laying down a general framework for securitization and a specific framework for simple,
transparent and standardised (' STS') securitisation.
It is specified that securitisation involves transactions that enable a lender or a creditor typically a credit institution or a corporation to
refinance a set of loans, exposures or receivables, such as residential loans, auto loans or leases, consumer loans, credit cards or trade
receivables, by transforming them into tradable securities.
Selling of securitisations to retail clients: the amended text states that the seller of a securitisation position shall not sell such a position to a
retail client unless a series of specified conditions are fulfilled.
Furthermore, the text states that a securitisation special purpose entity (SSPE) shall not be established in a third country that is listed as a
high-risk and non-cooperative jurisdiction by the FATF.
Risk retention: the draft regulation provides that the originator, sponsor or the original lender in a securitisation process must always retain a
material net economic interest, measured at the time of origination, in the securitisation of not less than 5%. A sponsor should be able to
delegate tasks to a servicer, but should remain responsible for risk management. In particular, a sponsor should not transfer the risk-retention
requirement to his servicer.
Transparency requirements for originators, sponsors and SSPEs: the originator, sponsor and SSPE of a securitisation shall make available to
holders of a securitisation position, to the competent authorities and, upon request, to potential investors all underlying documentation that is
essential for the understanding of the transaction.
Ban on resecuritisation: the draft regulation puts in place a ban on resecuritisation, subject to derogations for certain cases of resecuritisations
that are used for legitimate purposes. The text states that resecuritisations could hinder the level of transparency that this Regulation seeks to
establish, but can also, in exceptional circumstances, be useful in preserving the interests of investors. Therefore, resecuritisations should only
be permitted in specific instances as established by this Regulation. In addition, fully supported asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) will
remain outside the scope of the ban on resecuritisation.

It is stipulated that originators, sponsors and original lenders should apply to exposures to be securitised the same sound and well-defined
criteria for credit-granting which they apply to non-securitised exposures.
Market transparency: it is proposed to establish a framework for securitisation repositories (a repository being a legal person that centrally
collects and maintains the records of securitisations) to collect relevant reports, primarily on underlying exposures in securitisations. Such
securitisation repositories should be authorised and supervised by the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA).
Requirements regarding simple, transparent and standardised securitization (STS): these requirements are laid down. For example, in the
case of an STS securitisation where the underlying exposures are residential loans or auto loans or leases, the originator, the sponsor and the
SSPE should publish the available information related to the environmental performance of the assets financed by such residential loans or
auto loans or leases. The STS notification to ESMA should include an explanation on how each of the STS criteria has been complied with.
The European Banking Authority (EBA) should develop guidelines to ensure a common and consistent understanding of the STS requirements
throughout the Union, in order to address potential interpretation issues.
Third party verification of conformity with STS criteria: originators, sponsors and SSPEs could use the services of a third party authorised in
accordance with the Regulation to assess whether their securitisation complies with the STS criteria. Those third parties should be subject to
authorisation by competent authorities. However, the involvement of a third party should not in any way shift away from originators, sponsors
and institutional investors the ultimate legal responsibility for notifying and treating a securitisation transaction as STS.
Sanctions: competent authorities should apply sanctions only in the case of intentional or negligent infringements. The application of remedial
measures should not depend on evidence of intention or negligence. In determining the appropriate type and level of sanction or remedial
measure, when taking into account the financial strength of the responsible natural or legal person, competent authorities should in particular
take into consideration the total turnover of the responsible legal person or the annual income and net assets of the responsible natural
person.
Macroprudential oversight of the securitisation market: the European Systemic Risks Board (ESRB) shall continuously monitor developments
in the securitisation markets. At least every 3 years, in order to highlight financial stability risks, the ESRB shall, in collaboration with the EBA,
publish a report on the financial stability implications of the securitisation market.

