Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2113(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Towards a European energy union

Subject
3.60 Energy policy

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

ITRE Industry, Research and Energy
(Associated committee)

Appointed
26/03/2015

GRÓBARCZYK Marek
Józef
Shadow rapporteur

GYÜRK András

ZANONATO Flavio

PETERSEN Morten
Helveg

SYLIKIOTIS Neoklis

TURMES Claude

TAMBURRANO Dario
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

AFET

Appointed
22/07/2015

ASSIS Francisco
INTA

International Trade

06/05/2015
BUCHNER Klaus

ENVI Environment, Public Health and Food Safety
(Associated committee)
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

15/04/2015
BELET Ivo
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
26/03/2015
VIRKKUNEN Henna

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Energy

ŠEFČOVIČ Maroš

Key events
25/02/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

21/05/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
Referral to associated committees

COM(2015)0080

Summary

21/05/2015

announced in Parliament

10/11/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

24/11/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

14/12/2015

Debate in Parliament

15/12/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

15/12/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/12/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0341/2015

Summary

T8-0444/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2113(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Strategic initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ITRE/8/03374

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0080

25/02/2015

EC

Committee draft report

PE557.042

29/04/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE560.739

19/06/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE560.740

19/06/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE560.750

19/06/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE557.382

23/06/2015

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

TRAN

PE554.970

14/07/2015

EP

Committee opinion

AFET

PE565.044

16/09/2015

EP

Committee opinion

ENVI

PE557.259

18/09/2015

EP

Committee opinion

INTA

PE560.712

24/09/2015

EP

PE569.629

19/10/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0341/2015

24/11/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0444/2015

15/12/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)190

03/05/2016

Amendments tabled in committee

2015/2113(INI) - 25/02/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to present a framework strategy for an Energy Union with a forward-looking climate change policy.

BACKGROUND: latest data shows that the EU imported 53% of its energy at a cost of around EUR 400 billion, which makes it the largest
energy importer in the world. Six Member States depend on a single external supplier for their entire gas imports and therefore remain too
vulnerable to supply shocks.
Wholesale electricity prices for European countries are at low levels, though still 30% higher than in the US. At the same time, post-tax
electricity prices for households increased on average by 4.4% from 2012 to 2013. Wholesale gas prices are still more than twice as high as in
the US
European renewable energy businesses have a combined annual turnover of EUR 129 billion and employ over a million people. EU
companies have a share of 40% of all patents for renewable technologies. The challenge is to retain Europe's leading role in global investment
in renewable energy.
Over EUR 1 trillion need to be invested into the energy sector in EU by 2020 alone.
Today, the European Union has energy rules set at the European level, but in practice it has 28 national regulatory frameworks. This cannot
continue.
The Commission considers that the EU should view the current low oil and gas prices, while they last, as an historic opportunity to reset the
EU's energy policy in the right direction: that of an Energy Union.
CONTENT: the Energy Union strategy proposed by the Commission has five mutually-reinforcing and closely interrelated dimensions
designed to bring greater energy security, sustainability and competitiveness.
1) Energy security, solidarity and trust: Member States should be assured that in situations of tight supply, they can rely on their neighbours.
Solidarity among Member States, in particular in times of supply crisis, has to be strengthened.
EU action should include:
diversification of supply (energy sources, suppliers and routes): the EU needs to diversify its supply of gas and make it more resilient
to supply disruptions. The Commission will propose a resilience and diversification package for gas in 2015-2016 by revising the
existing security of gas supply Regulation. It will prepare a comprehensive strategy for liquid natural gas (LNG) and its storage;
working together on security of supply: the Commission will propose preventive and emergency plans at regional and EU level. It will
assess options for voluntary demand aggregation mechanisms for collective purchasing of gas during a crisis and where Member
States are dependent on a single supplier;
stronger European role in global energy markets, through negotiating agreements with countries that are important from a security of
supply perspective, and revitalising European energy and climate diplomacy;
more transparency on gas supply, when EU States conclude agreements related to the buying of energy from third countries. The
Commission will propose a revision of the Decision on Intergovernmental Agreements in 2016 to ensure compatibility with EU
legislation before agreements are negotiated, involve the Commission in such negotiations, develop standard contract clauses
covering EU rules.
2) A fully-integrated internal energy market: the Commission will use all available policy instruments and insist that Member States fully
implement and enforce the 3rd Internal Energy Market Package, and ensure strict enforcement of the Treaty's competition rules.
Actions will include:
support for the implementation of major infrastructure projects, particularly the Projects of Common Interest, through the available
financial means, e.g. the Connecting Europe Facility, the European Structural and Investment Funds and the future European Fund for
Strategic Investments. The Commission will submit an annual report on the progress towards the 10% electricity interconnection
target;
creating a dedicated Energy Infrastructure Forum to discuss progress on major infrastructure projects;
the creation of an internal market for energy to ensure security of supply and the integration of renewable energy sources into the
market. The Commission will propose (i) legislation on security of supply for electricity in 2016; (ii) a new European electricity market
design in 2015, which will be followed by legislative proposals in 2016.
strengthening the regulatory framework set-up by the 3rd Internal Energy Market Package;
development of regional approaches to market integration as an important part of the move towards a fully integrated EU-wide energy
market;;
greater transparency on energy costs and prices as well as on the level of public support. At the national and local levels, action
should be taken to protect vulnerable consumers through social policies. The Commission will continue to push for standardisation
and to support the national roll-out of smart meters.
3) Energy efficiency as a contribution to the moderation of energy demand: the European Council set in October 2014 an indicative target at
the EU level of at least 27% for improving energy efficiency in 2030. This will be reviewed by 2020, having in mind an EU level of 30%. It is in
this context necessary to fundamentally rethink energy efficiency and treat it as an energy source in its own right, representing the value of
energy saved.
In 2015 and 2016, the Commission will review all relevant energy efficiency legislation and will propose revisions, where needed, to underpin
the 2030 target. It will set out initiatives aiming to:
increase energy efficiency in the existing buildings sector to make them more energy efficient, and proposing a strategy for facilitate
investment in heating and cooling;
speed up energy efficiency and decarbonisation in the transport sector, its progressive switch to alternative fuels and the integration of
the energy and transport systems.
4) Decarbonisation of the economy: the EU agreed a climate and energy framework for 2030 at the European Council in October 2014 which
now needs to be implemented. The EU will provide an ambitious contribution to the international climate negotiations. It has also agreed the
target of at least 27% at EU level for renewable energy by 2030.
The EU is committed to becoming the world leader in renewable energy, the global hub for developing the next generation of technically
advanced and competitive renewable energies. In this context, the Commission intends to propose:

legislation to achieve the greenhouse gas reduction target agreed at the October 2014 European Council both in the Emissions
Trading System and in the sectors outside the Emissions Trading System;
a new Renewable Energy Package in 2016-2017. This will include a new policy for sustainable biomass and biofuels as well as
legislation to ensure that the 2030 EU target is met cost-effectively.
4) Research, innovation and competitiveness: the EU needs to develop a forward-looking, energy and climate-related R&I strategy to maintain
European technological leadership and expand export opportunities. The Commission:
will propose a European energy R&I approach, comprising an upgraded Strategic Energy Technology Plan and a strategic transport
R&I agenda, with a limited number of essential priorities and clear objectives, in 2015-2016;
will develop an initiative on global technology and innovation leadership on energy and climate to boost jobs and growth.
The Commission invites the European Parliament and Council to endorse this strategy to deliver the Energy Union and to actively engage in
its implementation, in close cooperation with all relevant stakeholders.

2015/2113(INI) - 24/11/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted the own-initiative report by Marek Józef GRÓBARCZYK (ECR, PL) in response to
the presentation by the Commission of a Framework Strategy for a European Energy Union.
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety, exercising its prerogatives as an associated committee under Article 54 of
the Parliaments internal Rules of Procedure, was also consulted for an opinion on the report.
Dimensions of the Energy Union: Members took note of the five pillars of the Energy Union outlined by the Commission and stressed that the
Energy Union should adopt a comprehensive approach focusing on dimensions such as:
achievement of a fully integrated internal energy market,
security of supply,
best use of EU's energy resources,
moderation of energy demand,
greenhouse gas reduction based essentially on renewable energy sources and an EU-wide carbon market,
research and innovation aiming for energy technology leadership;
the possibility for citizens to be provided with secure, sustainable and affordable energy.
Member States should develop long-term energy strategies in the light of the long-term target of achieving an 80-95% reduction of greenhouse
gases by 2050.
Moreover, the committee invited the Commission and the Member States to ensure that all legislative proposals forming part of the Energy
Union follow the ordinary legislative procedure, thus fully involving Parliament. The Commission is also asked to present on an annual basis a
report on the implementation of the Energy Union and to develop and update a set of key indicators to be included in the report.
Energy security, solidarity and trust: the report called on the Commission and the Member States to actively pursue more sustainable and
competitive prices and costs of imported energy for European citizens and businesses through the diversification of supply (energy sources,
suppliers and routes). To this end, the Commission should promote the construction of the relevant energy infrastructure priority corridors, with
a special focus on Member States with high dependency.
With a view to helping those most vulnerable countries to diversify their sources and supply routes, Member States and the Commission
should implement without delay the recommendations of the gas system stress tests. Members recommended that the Commission should
consider carrying out "electricity stress tests" in order to build an overview of the resilience of the entire energy market situation.
As regards the security of energy supply as well as its competitiveness, Member States should upgrade their coordination and cooperation at
EU level with their neighbours.
Members considered that the Energy Union entails negotiating with one voice with third countries. They called on the Commission to:
analyse the appropriateness and potential structure of a voluntary collective purchasing mechanism and its impact on the functioning
of the internal gas market, the undertakings affected and its contribution to ensuring security of gas supply;
set up a comprehensive framework for the external dimension of the Energy Union, with specific reference to the promotion of
strategic partnerships with producing and transit third countries;
create a high-level reflection group on energy security, foreign policy and the Energy Union, with strong representation and
involvement from Parliament and of societal stakeholders.
Members also considered that diversity in the energy mixes of Member States is an asset to the EU as a whole, however it must not represent
a barrier to the single market.
In addition, the committee expressed concern at the proposed doubling of capacity of the Nordstream pipeline and the effects this would have
on energy security and diversification of supply and the principle of solidarity between Member States.
A fully integrated European energy market: Members believed that the future Energy Union must establish a free flow of energy across EU and
Energy Community countries. The backbone of the future Energy Union must be a fully functioning, interconnected internal energy market that
delivers safe, secure, fairly distributed, socially and environmentally responsible, efficient, competitive, affordable and sustainable energy.
The report called on the Commission and Member States to ensure the full implementation and enforcement of existing EU state aid, energy,
environment and climate legislation.
According to Members, a properly designed future model of the electricity market in the EU is urgently needed and must aim at promoting the
necessary investment to guarantee supply in the long term and at a more market-based and from the point of view of network security
optimised integration of renewable energy sources.

Member States and the Commission are called upon to concentrate their efforts on driving PCIs and projects of the Energy Community interest
(PECIs) forward, with a view to achieving a pan-European electricity grid and gas network with the capacity to transmit power and gas across
EU countries from multiple sources. They reiterated their commitment to achieve the 10 % interconnectivity target in order to complete the
Internal Energy Market in EU, and welcomed the European Council's proposal for a minimum level of electricity interconnection between
Member States of 15 % by 2030.
The Energy Union should also contribute towards an "Energy Investment Union", ensuring that the more than EUR 1 trillion of investment
required in the coming years to revitalise Europe's economy comes from private and public investors.
Stressing the need to strengthen regional cooperation, Members invited the Commission to come forward with a macro-regional market
cooperation governance structure in which the European Parliament and national parliaments also have a role to play.
Energy efficiency contributing to moderation of demand: gains in energy efficiency both reduce energy bills for households and industries and
have the potential to create two million jobs as a result of energy efficiency measures by 2020, in particular in the building sector, which
accounts for 40 % of total EU energy demand.
The Commission is called upon to identify and remove remaining barriers to energy efficiency measures, and to develop a genuine market in
energy efficiency.
Towards a sustainable economy: Members underlined the crucial role of renewables in the EU in attaining energy security and political and
economic independence by reducing the need for energy imports. They welcomed the commitment from the Commission to make the
European Union "the world number one in renewables" and urged the Commission to present an operational and workable strategy to this
effect.
While recognising that the energy mix is primarily a Member State competence, Members believed that public concerns must be properly
addressed and that any hydraulic fracturing activities should comply with the highest climate, environmental and public health standards. They
asked those Member States which intend to pursue hydraulic fracturing to respect the 2014 Commission recommendation on minimum
principles for the exploration and production of hydrocarbons (such as shale gas) using high-volume hydraulic fracturing.
Members also stated that decarbonisation technologies such as CCS and Carbon Capture and Use (CCU) will need to be further developed
and improved through considerable research and innovation efforts.
As regards nuclear energy - which represents one of the most important contributions of the European energy system, providing for lower CO2
emissions -, the report called on Member States that are phasing out nuclear power to make certain that it is replaced with a mode of energy
production that can contribute commensurately to the energy supply and to stabilising the common system for production and distribution.
Delivering the Energy Union: citizens and cities: energy must be made affordable to all citizens of the EU. Members considered that avoiding
unnecessary consumption by undertaking efficiency improvements, stronger interconnections, higher market integration and sustainable
energy investment, particularly in buildings, would enable many households to access, on equal conditions, a single, sustainable, competitive
and secure energy market and escape energy poverty, which in 2012 affected one in four EU citizens.
The Commission is invited to present a communication on energy poverty in Europe, accompanied by an action plan to fight against it, which
contains a definition and indicators of energy poverty.
Transport: the report called for a move towards an energy-efficient and decarbonised transport sector. Transport represents over 30% of final
energy consumption in Europe and that 94% of transport relies on oil products. Members considered, therefore, that a cleaner energy system,
with a clear link to the decarbonisation of the transport sector, should be at the core of a framework strategy for a resilient energy union.
Research: Members called on the Commission to intensify its research efforts regarding the better use of Europes energy resources and the
lessening of their environmental impact: in this regard, Members recommended that all the EU's funding options for boosting safe and
sustainable low-carbon energy technologies, energy efficiency, renewables, smart grids, decentralised production, flexible generation,
electrical storage and electrification of the transport system must be fully exploited.

2015/2113(INI) - 15/12/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 403 votes to 177 with 117 abstentions, a legislative resolution entitled Towards a European Energy
Union in response to the Commission Communication on the subject.
Dimensions of the Energy Union: Parliament took note of the five pillars of the Energy Union outlined by the Commission and insisted that
policies pursued under these pillars must always contribute to ensuring the security of energy supply, decarbonisation, the long-term
sustainability of the economy and the delivery of affordable and competitive energy prices . It recalled that energy is a public social good and
that the EU should therefore focus closely on the issue of energy poverty and promote concrete measures to tackle this problem. The Energy
Union should: (i) ensure equal access to energy for all, (ii0 contribute to affordable energy prices for the benefit of consumers, (iii) promote
connections and energy infrastructure that have a strategic role for the benefit of the people, and (iv) strengthen regulation. Furthermore, it
should adopt a comprehensive approach focusing on dimensions such as:
achievement of a fully integrated internal energy market;
security of supply;
best use of EUs energy resources;
moderation of energy demand;
greenhouse gas reduction based essentially on renewable energy sources and an EU-wide carbon market, research and innovation
aiming for energy technology leadership;
placing citizens at its core, provided with secure, sustainable and affordable energy.
Parliament asked that all legislative proposals forming part of the Energy Union follow the ordinary legislative procedure, and expected the
post- 2020 governance framework for the Energy Union to be ambitious, reliable, transparent, democratic and fully inclusive of Parliament,
ensuring that the 2030 climate and energy targets are achieved. It called on the Commission to present swiftly to Parliament and the Council a
legislative proposal taking into account the Council conclusions and Parliaments views as expressed in this report.

Members called on Member States to develop long-term energy strategies in the light of the long-term target of achieving an 80-95 %
reduction of greenhouse gases by 2050. They recalled that Parliament has repeatedly called for binding 2030 climate and energy targets of at
least a 40 % domestic reduction in GHG emissions, at least 30 % for renewables and 40 % for energy efficiency, to be implemented by means
of individual national targets.
Energy security, solidarity and trust: Parliament called on the Commission and Member States to actively pursue more sustainable and
competitive prices and costs of imported energy for European citizens and businesses through the diversification of supply (energy sources,
suppliers and routes). To this end, the Commission should promote the construction of the relevant energy infrastructure priority corridors, with
a special focus on Member States with high dependency. Members called for: (i) identification of additional projects to be included in the
upcoming PCI 2015 list in order to significantly increase the capacity between Spain and France; (ii) a Mediterranean Gas Hub with increased
LNG capacities.
Parliament stressed that all EU infrastructure projects must be fully in line with EU climate and energy legislation and long-term objectives and
priorities, including EU energy security. Energy suppliers coming from third countries must also be subject to the EU acquis while operating on
the common market.
In order to end the isolation of Member States and regions from the internal energy market, the Commission should carry out gas stress tests
regularly, and consider carrying out electricity stress tests in order to build an overview of the resilience of the entire energy market situation.
As regards the security of energy supply as well as its competitiveness, Member States should upgrade their coordination and cooperation at
EU level with their neighbours.
Parliament considered that the Energy Union entails negotiating with one voice with third countries and strengthening the role of the
Commission in negotiations relating to energy. It called on the Commission to:
analyse the appropriateness and potential structure of a voluntary collective purchasing mechanism and its impact on the functioning
of the internal gas market, the undertakings affected and its contribution to ensuring security of gas supply;
set up a comprehensive framework for the external dimension of the Energy Union, with specific reference to the promotion of
strategic partnerships with producing and transit third countries;
create a high-level reflection group on energy security, foreign policy and the Energy Union, with strong representation and
involvement from Parliament and of societal stakeholders.
Members also considered that diversity in the energy mixes of Member States is an asset to the EU as a whole; however it must not represent
a barrier to the single market.
A fully integrated European energy market: Parliament believed that the future Energy Union must establish a free flow of energy across EU
and Energy Community countries. The backbone of the future Energy Union must be a fully functioning, interconnected internal energy market
that delivers safe, secure, fairly distributed, socially and environmentally responsible, efficient, competitive, affordable and sustainable
energy. Market-based mechanisms must be complemented by tangible and ambitious security of supply and solidarity mechanisms, such as
more efficient regional and EU level crisis management
Parliament called for the full implementation and enforcement of existing EU state aid, energy, environment and climate legislation, and for an
assessment of the implementation of the Third Energy Package and of the benefits generated for consumers, the removal of derogations from
the Third Energy Package and for a swift adoption and implementation of European network codes and guidelines.
According to Members, a properly designed future model of the electricity market in the EU is urgently needed and must aim at promoting
the necessary investment to guarantee supply in the long term and at a more market-based and from the point of view of network security
optimised integration of renewable energy sources.
Parliament called for the establishment of a pan-European electricity grid and gas network with the capacity to transmit power and gas across
EU countries from multiple sources. It reiterated its commitment to achieve the 10 % interconnectivity target in order to complete the Internal
Energy Market in EU, and welcomed the European Council's proposal for a minimum level of electricity interconnection between Member
States of 15 % by 2030.
The Energy Union should also contribute towards an "Energy Investment Union", ensuring that the more than EUR 1 trillion of investment
required in the coming years to revitalise Europe's economy comes from private and public investors.
Members also stressed the need to strengthen regional cooperation and policy coordination to achieve broader EU-wide energy market
integration.
Energy efficiency contributing to moderation of demand: gains in energy efficiency both reduce energy bills for households and industries and
have the potential to create two million jobs as a result of energy efficiency measures by 2020, in particular in the building sector, which
accounts for 40 % of total EU energy demand.
Parliament called on the Commission and Member States to apply the energy efficiency first principle and remove remaining barriers to energy
efficiency measures, and to develop a genuine market in energy efficiency.
It stressed the need to increase both the depth and the rate of building renovation and the use of sustainable energy sources in heating and
cooling, through the right incentives, in order to reduce energy demand. Parliament underlined that a revision of existing energy efficiency
legislation, including the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive and the Energy Efficiency Directive, alongside proper implementation of
such legislation by Member States.
Towards a sustainable economy: Members underlined the crucial role of renewables in the EU in attaining energy security and political and
economic independence by reducing the need for energy imports, as well as their vital role in improving air quality and creating growth and
jobs. They welcomed the commitment from the Commission to make the European Union "the world number one in renewables" and urged the
Commission to present an operational and workable strategy to this effect.
While recognising that the energy mix is primarily a Member State competence, Members believed that public concerns must be
properly addressed and that any hydraulic fracturing activities should comply with the highest climate, environmental and public health

standards. They asked those Member States which intend to pursue hydraulic fracturing to respect the 2014 Commission
recommendation on minimum principles for the exploration and production of hydrocarbons (such as shale gas) using high-volume
hydraulic fracturing.
Members also stated that decarbonisation technologies such as CCS and Carbon Capture and Use (CCU) would need to be further
developed and improved through considerable research and innovation efforts.
As regards nuclear energy which provided 27 % of the EUs electricity mix and over half of all EU low-carbon power in 2014-,
Parliament called on Member States that are phasing out nuclear power to make certain that it is replaced with a mode of energy
production that can contribute commensurately to the energy supply and to stabilising the common system for production and
distribution.
Delivering the Energy Union: citizens and cities: energy must be made affordable to all citizens of the EU. Members considered that avoiding
unnecessary consumption would enable many households to access a single, sustainable, competitive and secure energy market and escape
energy poverty, which in 2012 affected one in four EU citizens.
As part of any review of the retail energy markets, serious consideration should be given to further measures to protect consumers, such as
requiring energy bills to include comparisons with competitors based on historical consumption patterns, requiring suppliers to automatically
place their customers on the most advantageous tariff available, and ensuring a limited, easily comparable range of standardised tariffs.
The Commission is invited to present a communication on energy poverty in Europe, accompanied by an action plan to fight against it, which
contains a definition and indicators of energy poverty.
Transport: the sector represents over 30% of final energy consumption in Europe and that 94% of transport relies on oil products. Members
considered, therefore, that a cleaner energy system, with a clear link to the decarbonisation of the transport sector , should be at the core of a
framework strategy for a resilient Energy Union.
The Commission is called upon to: (i) put forward a comprehensive road transport strategy, as part of the decarbonisation of the transport
sector; (ii) revise the fuel consumption and CO2 labelling scheme for passenger cars.
Research: Parliament called on the Commission to intensify its research efforts regarding the better use of Europes energy resources and the
lessening of their environmental impact: in this regard, Members recommended that all the EU's funding options for boosting safe and
sustainable low-carbon energy technologies, energy efficiency, renewables, smart grids, decentralised production, flexible generation,
electrical storage and electrification of the transport system must be fully exploited.
Lastly, Parliament asked the Commission to take part in the commitment from 6 000 European cities to be leaders in the energy transition
notably through the Covenant of Mayors.

