Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2897(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2015 report on Bosnia and Herzegovina

Subject
8.20 Enlargement of the Union
Geographical area
Bosnia and Herzegovina

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
08/10/2015

PREDA Cristian Dan
Shadow rapporteur

KHAN Afzal

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

RADOŠ Jozo

COUSO PERMUY
Javier

ŠOLTES Igor

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

HAHN Johannes

Key events
12/10/2015

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

13/04/2016

Debate in Parliament

14/04/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

14/04/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/04/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

T8-0135/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2897(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Summary

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/04682

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE576.892

02/03/2016

EP

Motion for a resolution

B8-0441/2016

06/04/2016

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0135/2016

14/04/2016

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)484

20/09/2016

Summary

2015/2897(RSP) - 14/04/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the 2015 Progress Report on Bosnia and
Herzegovina (BiH).
It welcomed the first more positive Commission Report on BiH and the submission of the application for EU membership by BiH on 15
February 2016, and called on the Council to examine this application at the earliest opportunity. In this regard, Members welcomed the
adoption by the BiH Council of Ministers (CoM), on 26 January 2016, of a decision establishing a coordination mechanism on EU matters and,
on 9 February 2016, of the negotiation position on the adaptation of the Stablisation and Association Agreement (SAA) following the accession
of Croatia to the EU. These elements are necessary for the EU to consider the membership application as credible, alongside meaningful
progress in the implementation of the Reform Agenda.
Reforms: Parliament reiterated the need to continue also with constitutional, legal and political reforms that would transform BiH into a fully
effective, inclusive and functional state. The authorities must actively promote the principles of legitimate representation, federalism,
decentralisation and subsidiarity, as well as European values and the importance of the European perspective. Members felt that the EU
institutions should become actively involved in the efforts to find a sustainable solution to BiHs constitutional arrangements. They also urged
political and religious leaders to refrain from divisive nationalistic and secessionist rhetoric that polarises society and to continue with political
dialogue.
Parliament wen on to raise the following issues;
·

the fragmentation of public administration, its politicisation and weak policy coordination hamper institutional and legislative reforms
and BiH must develop a comprehensive and country-wide strategic framework for public administration reform and a public financial
management programme;

·

there are insufficient mechanisms for cooperation between government and civil society organisations (CSOs), including their limited
capacity to participate in policy dialogue on the Reform Agenda;

·

the legal and institutional framework for the observance of human rights requires substantial improvements, and the authorities must
develop of a country-wide anti-discrimination strategy in cooperation with CSOs.

Members were also concerned about backsliding in the area of freedom of expression, cases of political pressure on and intimidation of
journalists, and the continued polarisation of the media along political and ethnic lines.
Judiciary: Parliament was concerned about increased pressure on the judiciary by political actors and particularly about cases of political
interference in court proceedings, the politicisation of appointment procedures in the judiciary, the continued fragmentation into four different
legal systems and the lack of an effective system for assessing the professional qualities of judges. It stressed the urgent need to strengthen
the independence of the judiciary in BiH, welcoming the updated 2014-2018 Justice Sector Reform Strategy and called for an action plan for
its implementation. Members also remained concerned that access to free legal aid is very limited.
Referendum on the BiH State-level judiciary: Members took note of the announcement by the President of the Republika Srpska (RS) to
postpone the planned referendum in the RS on the BiH State-level judiciary. They regretted, however, that the RS National Assembly has not
passed this decision. Furthermore, they called for this idea of a referendum to be dropped altogether, as it challenges the cohesion,
sovereignty and integrity of the country and risks further progress towards EU integration. Any shortcomings in the BiH judiciary should be
addressed within the broadened Structured Dialogue on Justice, rather than through unilateral initiatives, Parliament added that it was deeply
concerned about statements made by the Interior Minister of the Republika Srpska about the future training of RS special police units in the
Russian Federation, and the intention to buy Russian military equipment.
Fight against corruption: Parliament deplored the fact that corruption continues to be widespread and that political commitments have not
translated into concrete results. It remained concerned about the weak legal and institutional framework to combat corruption, and about the
low number of final convictions in corruption cases. Commending the adoption of the 2015-2019 anti-corruption strategy and action plan, it
urged the allocation of a sufficient budget for implementation.
Organised crime: Members noted the uncoordinated implementation of the 2014-2016 strategy on combating organised crime, and welcomed
the adoption of the 2016-2019 Action Plan for Fighting Human Trafficking in BiH, including its emphasis on problems related to migrant
workers and the forced begging of children. They urged the adoption and implementation of a new strategy and action plan on money
laundering, and more to combat the uncontrolled proliferation and illicit trafficking of weapons, notably small and light weapons.
Radicalisation and terrorism: stressing that BiH has been seriously affected by the phenomenon of foreign fighters and radicalization,
especially among young people, a high number of whom compared to other countries in the region have joined Daesh, Parliament called for

the urgent development of effective de-radicalisation programmes and for urgent efforts to provide a better economic perspective for young
people in BiH.
Economic development: Members welcomed the rise in registered employment, as well as the first steps taken to strengthen policy
coordination and to improve the business climate> However, they remained concerned about state influence on the economy, the quality of
public finances, the high degree of dependence on funding from international loan investment, the unclear origin of international investment
and the difficult labour market conditions.
Regional cooperation: Parliament commended BiHs constructive role in promoting regional cooperation, welcoming the border agreement with
Montenegro. It called for further efforts to resolve outstanding bilateral issues, including on border demarcation matters with Serbia and
Croatia, and also welcomed the first joint session of the BiH Council of Ministers with the Serbian Government that took place on 4 November
2015 in Sarajevo.
Lastly, Members noted that while post-war rehabilitation and reconstruction in BiH has been largely successful and has brought the country
closer towards the EU, challenges still remain concerning the sustainability of the reconciliation process. They stressed, therefore, the
importance of education on reconciliation and mutual understanding in society.

