Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2893(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2015 report on Kosovo

Subject
8.20 Enlargement of the Union
Geographical area
Kosovo under UNSCR 1244/1999

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
08/10/2015

LUNACEK Ulrike
Shadow rapporteur

ADAKTUSSON Lars

PANZERI Pier Antonio

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

VAUTMANS Hilde

COUSO PERMUY
Javier

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

HAHN Johannes

Key events
28/01/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

03/02/2016

Debate in Parliament

04/02/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

04/02/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

04/02/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

T8-0047/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2893(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Summary

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/04678

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE574.991

11/01/2016

EP

Motion for a resolution

B8-0167/2016

27/01/2016

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0047/2016

04/02/2016

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)242

08/06/2016

Summary

2015/2893(RSP) - 04/02/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 403 votes to 130 with 104 abstentions, a resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on the
2015 Report on Kosovo.
Parliament noted that the EU has reiterated its willingness to assist in the economic and political development of Kosovo through a clear
European perspective, in line with the European perspective of the region. It welcomed the signing of the EU-Kosovo Stabilisation and
Association Agreement (SAA) on 27 October 2015, as the first contractual relationship, and the swift ratification by the Kosovo Assembly on 2
November 2015.
Members called on the Government of Kosovo to focus on implementing the comprehensive reforms necessary to meet its obligations under
the SAA. They underlined that the SAA is aimed at promoting European standards in areas such as competition, procurement, intellectual
property and consumer protection, and at establishing a free trade area as a tangible step towards the economic integration of Kosovo into the
EU;.
Relations with Serbia: Parliament welcomed the progress made in 2015 in reaching agreements in the framework of the process of
normalisation of relations between Kosovo and Serbia. It. supported the continued mediation efforts of the Vice-President of the
Commission/High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy (VP/HR) with a view to the normalisation of relations
between Serbia and Kosovo, which has yet to be fully achieved. It urged the VP/HR to identify shortfalls and to demand that the parties fulfil
their commitments.
The resolution took note of the Constitutional Courts decision on the implementation of the Association of Serb Municipalities. It called for the
complete and committed implementation of the agreements reached. Members considered full respect for the rules of democracy, political
dialogue and unhindered parliamentary business to be essential for the implementation of all aspects of Kosovos reform agenda. They
strongly condemned violent obstructions in the Assembly, calls for the prevention of further violent protests in the Assembly, and stressed that
in the Assembly elected Members of Parliament should meet and discuss issues with full respect for the institution. The Assembly needed to
become more efficient and to comply with its own rules of procedure under all circumstances and the government should respect these rules.
Recognition of Kosovo: Parliament took note that five Member States have not formally recognised Kosovo, and is of the opinion that further
recognitions would help to strengthen stability in the region.
Migration policy: Parliament was pleased to note the work undertaken by the Kosovo authorities to end the trend of irregular migration, which
peaked at the beginning of 2015. Citizens must be encouraged to stay in Kosovo and build a future in their country. Visa liberalisation
measures were also recommended.
Human rights: Parliament welcomed the adoption of the package of human rights laws which strengthen the institutional set-up for oversight of
the protection of, and respect for, human rights. It noted with concern that the authorities political will to genuinely engage with civil society is
still very weak.
It called on the authorities to implement in good faith the legal framework for cooperation with civil society and reinforce protection for LGBTI
and minority communities. Members also remained concerned about the under?representation of women in decision-making positions and the
extremely limited progress made in the area of freedom of expression and of the media. Further efforts are needed to protect and guarantee in
practice the rights of all ethnic minorities in Kosovo, including the Roma, Ashkali and Egyptian communities as well as the Gorani community.
Parliament reiterated its concern at the lack of any significant progress in fighting high-level corruption and organised crime, and against the
roots of violent extremism in Kosovo. It noted that, approximately 300 Kosovo nationals have joined the ranks of the jihadists in Syria and Iraq
and that many of them have already returned to Kosovo
It welcomed the measures taken by the government to provide for prison sentences for nationals who have engaged in terrorist undertakings.
Accession to UNESCO: Members deplored the rejection of Kosovos application for UNESCO membership, due to active obstruction by Serbia.
They welcomed the adoption of the law protecting the historical heritage of Prizren and called for its full implementation. In this connection,
they called on the interested parties, including the Kosovo authorities, the Serbian Government, the Serbian community in Kosovo and the
Serbian Orthodox Church, to find a system for the promotion, protection and conservation of Kosovos cultural and religious heritage.
Civil service: Parliament reiterated its call on Kosovo to complete the legislative framework for the civil service and to implement fully the
strategic framework for public administration and the action plan. The authorities were asked to stop the politicisation of public administration,
to promote merit-based professionalism in all public institutions, to ensure sound financial management of public institutions, and to ensure the
transparency of the Assemblys oversight of budget implementation. Members also stressed the importance of increasing project funding for
Kosovo NGOs that aim to step up efforts to protect and promote the rights of marginalised groups and ethnic minorities.

Labour market: Parliament stressed the need to provide Kosovos young people with prospects for the future, and called on Kosovo to focus on
closing the skills gap in the labour market. The Commission was asked to provide further assistance to young entrepreneurs as part of
Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA) funding, to improve the flexibility and competitiveness of Kosovos economy to speed up the
restructuring of public enterprises, to improve its bankruptcy and insolvency procedures and to reduce its reliance on customs duties.
Members stressed that labour market reforms, complemented by education reforms, are crucial in view of the high unemployment and low
labour participation rates.
Energy and transport: Parliament expressed its concern at Kosovos current precarious energy situation, pointing out that the current level of
electricity losses and related commercial damage are very high on account of grids wearing out. It called for major reforms to improve energy
efficiency and security of supply.

