Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2275(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Peace support operations - EU engagement with the UN and the African
Union

Subject
6.10.05 Peace preservation, humanitarian and rescue tasks, crisis
management

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

AFET Foreign Affairs
(Associated committee)

Appointed
15/09/2015

VAN ORDEN Geoffrey
Shadow rapporteur

ZDROJEWSKI Bogdan
Andrzej

PARGNEAUX Gilles

NART Javier

COUSO PERMUY
Javier

VALERO Bodil
Committee for opinion
DEVE Development
(Associated committee)

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed
29/10/2015

VÄYRYNEN Paavo

Key events
29/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

29/10/2015

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

19/04/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

28/04/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

06/06/2016

Debate in Parliament

07/06/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

07/06/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

07/06/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0158/2016

Summary

T8-0249/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2275(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/04818

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE575.014

25/01/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE578.460

25/02/2016

EP

PE575.372

16/03/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0158/2016

28/04/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0249/2016

07/06/2016

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

DEVE

2015/2275(INI) - 28/04/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Geoffrey VAN ORDEN (ECR, UK) on Peace Support Operations EU
engagement with the UN and the African Union.
The Committee on Development, exercising its prerogatives as an associated committee in accordance with Rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure
, also gave its opinion on the report.
Members recalled that Peace Support Operations (PSOs) are a form of crisis response, normally in support of an internationally recognised
organisation such as the UN or the African Union (AU), with a UN mandate, and designed to prevent armed conflict, restore, maintain or build
peace, enforce peace agreements and tackle the complex emergencies and challenges posed by failing or weak states. The aim of PSOs is
also to help create stable, secure and more prosperous environments for the longer term.
The committee also stressed that the security landscape in Africa in particular has changed dramatically in the last decade, with the
emergence of terrorist and insurgent groups in Somalia, Nigeria, and the Sahel-Sahara region, and with peace enforcement and
counter-terrorism operations becoming the rule rather than the exception in many areas. In this context, Members considered that coordinated
external actions that make use of diplomatic, security and development tools are necessary to restore confidence and tackle the challenges of
wars, internal conflicts, insecurity, fragility and transition.
The deployment of multiple UN-authorised missions in the same theatre of operations, with different actors and regional organisations, is
increasingly the reality of modern peace operations. However, managing these complex partnerships, while not duplicating work or missions,
is essential to successful operations. In this regard, Members called for the evaluation and rationalisation of the existing structures.
Better coordination: the committee urged the EU, given the scale of the challenges and the complex involvement of other organisations and
nations, to seek an appropriate division of labour and to focus on where it can best add value. It considered that UN and AU missions are in
need of a comprehensive approach under which, in addition to deploying military, diplomatic and development instruments, other essential
factors are a thorough knowledge of the security environment, exchanges of intelligence and information and modern technologies. It stressed
the importance of the other instruments of the EU in the security field and, in particular, of the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP)
missions and operations.
Provision of military forces: Members noted that the perceived legitimacy of a PSO is key to its success. They believed that the AU should
therefore contribute with support and military forces wherever possible. They welcomed the UN-EU Strategic Partnership on Peacekeeping
and Crisis Management and called on the EU to make further efforts to facilitate Member State contributions. They recalled that the EU has
engaged in crisis-management activities in Africa. However, only 11 of the 28 EU Member States made pledges at the 28 September 2015
Leaders Summit on Peacekeeping, while China pledged a standby force of 8 000 and Colombia 5 000 troops. Accordingly, Members called on
the EU Member States to significantly increase their military and police contributions to UN peacekeeping missions.
Prevention of conflicts: recalling the need for a rapid African response to crisis, Members emphasised the importance of investing more in
conflict prevention. They recognised the critical contribution of the African Peace Facility in developing the triangular partnership between the
UN, the EU and the AU, but considered it vital that the EU institutions and Member States remain closely engaged if the Facility is to be fully
utilised. They took the view that the Facility should focus on structural support rather than just bankrolling African forces' pay.
Military assistance for African states: Members observed that stepping up European military cooperation would increase the efficiency and
effectiveness of Europe's contribution to UN peace missions. They called on the EU and its Member States, as well as on other members of

the international community, to assist with training, including discipline, equipment, logistical support, financial assistance and development of
rules of engagement, to encourage and assist the African Standby Force.
Members also considered that the Official Development Assistance (ODA) needs to be redesigned under the OECD framework through peace
building lenses. Similarly, the EDF regulation should be reviewed in order to allow programming design that includes peace, security and
justice expenditures.
The committee insisted that neither the EU nor the Member States, in supporting PSOs, should act in isolation but that they should, rather,
take full account of the contributions of other international actors, improve coordination with them, improve rapidity of response, and focus their
efforts on certain priority countries.
A holistic EU approach: Members supported a holistic EU approach, which is the main instrument for mobilising the full potential of EU action
in the context of peacekeeping operations and the stabilisation process, as well as for mobilising various ways to support the development of
AU countries. They stressed that border management assistance should be a priority for EU engagement in Africa.
Targeted funds: Members recognised that the problem is often not the lack of funding but, rather, how funds are spent and what other
resources are utilised. They backed initiatives such as the Békou trust fund operating in the Central African Republic. They believed the
current funding programme is unsustainable, and that conditions should be attached to the African Peace Facility in order to encourage the AU
to increase its own contributions to PSOs.
Sexual abuse by United Nations personnel: lastly, Members took note of the UN Evaluation Report of 15 May 2015 on sexual exploitation and
abuse by United Nations personnel. They considered that the AU, the UN, the EU and Member States should exercise strong vigilance
concerning such criminal matters and urged the most rigorous disciplinary and judicial procedures and the utmost effort to prevent such
crimes.
It should be noted that in a minority report tabled by the GUE/NGL, Members pointed out that the report aims to increase EU contribution to
peace support operations. They felt that the responsibility-to-protect-mechanism should not be used as a pretext for military intervention. They
considered that NATO should leave the African continent, and stressed the need for a strict separation of EU from NATO in this context.

2015/2275(INI) - 07/06/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 491 votes 110 with 73 abstentions, a resolution on Peace Support Operations EU engagement with the
UN and the African Union.
Parliament recalled that Peace Support Operations (PSOs) are a form of crisis response, normally in support of an internationally recognised
organisation such as the UN or the African Union (AU), with a UN mandate, and designed to prevent armed conflict, restore, maintain or build
peace, enforce peace agreements and tackle the complex emergencies and challenges posed by failing or weak states. The aim of PSOs is
also to help create stable, secure and more prosperous environments for the longer term.
Parliament also stressed that the security landscape in Africa in particular has changed dramatically in the last decade, with the emergence of
terrorist and insurgent groups in Somalia, Nigeria, and the Sahel-Sahara region, and with peace enforcement and counter-terrorism operations
becoming the rule rather than the exception in many areas. In this context, it considered that coordinated external actions that make use of
diplomatic, security and development tools are necessary to restore confidence and tackle the challenges of wars, internal conflicts, insecurity,
fragility and transition.
The deployment of multiple UN-authorised missions in the same theatre of operations, with different actors and regional organisations, is
increasingly the reality of modern peace operations. However, managing these complex partnerships, while not duplicating work or missions,
is essential to successful operations. In this regard, Parliament called for the evaluation and rationalisation of the existing structures.
Better coordination: Parliament urged the EU, given the scale of the challenges and the complex involvement of other organisations and
nations, to seek an appropriate division of labour and to focus on where it can best add value. It considered that UN and AU missions are in
need of a comprehensive approach under which, in addition to deploying military, diplomatic and development instruments, other essential
factors are a thorough knowledge of the security environment, exchanges of intelligence and information and modern technologies. It stressed
the importance of the other instruments of the EU in the security field and, in particular, of the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP)
missions and operations.
Provision of military forces: Parliament noted that the perceived legitimacy of a PSO is key to its success. It believed that the AU should
therefore contribute with support and military forces wherever possible. It welcomed the UN-EU Strategic Partnership on Peacekeeping and
Crisis Management and called on the EU to make further efforts to facilitate Member State contributions. It recalled that the EU has engaged in
crisis-management activities in Africa. However, only 11 of the 28 EU Member States made pledges at the 28 September 2015 Leaders
Summit on Peacekeeping, while China pledged a standby force of 8 000 and Colombia 5 000 troops. Accordingly, Parliament called on the EU
Member States to significantly increase their military and police contributions to UN peacekeeping missions.
Prevention of conflicts: recalling the need for a rapid African response to crisis, the resolution emphasised the importance of investing more in
conflict prevention. It recognised the critical contribution of the African Peace Facility in developing the triangular partnership between the UN,
the EU and the AU, but considered it vital that the EU institutions and Member States remain closely engaged if the Facility is to be fully
utilised. It took the view that the Facility should focus on structural support rather than just bankrolling African forces' pay.
Military assistance for African states: Members observed that stepping up European military cooperation would increase the efficiency and
effectiveness of Europe's contribution to UN peace missions. They called on the EU and its Member States, as well as on other members of
the international community, to assist with training, including discipline, equipment, logistical support, financial assistance and development of
rules of engagement, to encourage and assist the African Standby Force.
European missions in Africa: Parliament noted the importance of Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) missions for Africas security,
in particular training and support missions for African forces, and especially EUTM Mali, EUCAP Sahel Mali and EUCAP Sahel Niger, EUTM
Somalia, and EUCAP Nestor. It called on the EU to step up the capabilities of those training missions, in particular by allowing African soldiers
who have been trained to be monitored on and after their return from theatres of operations.

Parliament also considered that the Official Development Assistance (ODA) needs to be redesigned under the OECD framework through
peace building lenses. Similarly, the EDF regulation should be reviewed in order to allow programming design that includes peace, security
and justice expenditures.
Parliament insisted that neither the EU nor the Member States, in supporting PSOs, should act in isolation but that they should, rather, take full
account of the contributions of other international actors, improve coordination with them, improve rapidity of response, and focus their efforts
on certain priority countries.
Member States contributions to the UN system: Parliament noted that the European countries and the EU itself are major contributors to the
UN system, and that France, Germany and the UK are the largest European contributors to the budget for UN Peacekeeping Operations. It
recalled that the EU Member States are collectively the largest contributor to the UNs peacekeeping budget, with about 37 %, and are
currently contributing troops to nine peacekeeping missions (in 2014 and 2015 EU financial commitments to the AU totalled EUR 717.9 million.
It indicated, however, that France, for example, trains 25 000 African soldiers each year and separately deploys over 4 000 personnel in
African peacekeeping operations.
Targeted funds: Parliament recognised that the problem is often not the lack of funding but, rather, how funds are spent and what other
resources are utilised. It backed initiatives such as the Békou trust fund operating in the Central African Republic. It believed the current
funding programme is unsustainable, and that conditions should be attached to the African Peace Facility in order to encourage the AU to
increase its own contributions to PSOs.
A holistic EU approach: Parliament supported a holistic EU approach, which is the main instrument for mobilising the full potential of EU action
in the context of peacekeeping operations and the stabilisation process, as well as for mobilising various ways to support the development of
AU countries. It stressed that border management assistance should be a priority for EU engagement in Africa.
Sexual abuse by United Nations personnel: lastly, Parliament took note of the UN Evaluation Report of 15 May 2015 on sexual exploitation
and abuse by United Nations personnel. It considered that the AU, the UN, the EU and Member States should exercise strong vigilance
concerning such criminal matters and urged the most rigorous disciplinary and judicial procedures and the utmost effort to prevent such
crimes.

