Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2181(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2014 discharge: European Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders (Frontex)

Subject
8.70.03.04 2014 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

CONT

Appointed
19/08/2015

VAUGHAN Derek
Shadow rapporteur

DEUTSCH Tamás

VISTISEN Anders
Primdahl

ALI Nedzhmi

DE JONG Dennis

JÁVOR Benedek

VALLI Marco
KAPPEL Barbara
Committee for opinion
Foreign Affairs

AFET

LIBE

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

19/11/2015
MACOVEI Monica

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
23/07/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

05/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

04/04/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

08/04/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

27/04/2016

Debate in Parliament

COM(2015)0377

Summary

A8-0115/2016

Summary

28/04/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

28/04/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

28/04/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

14/09/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0190/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2181(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/04201

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0377

23/07/2015

EC

Summary

N8-0151/2015
OJ C 409 09.12.2015, p. 0342

08/09/2015

CofA

Summary

Supplementary non-legislative basic
document

05584/2016

27/01/2016

CSL

Summary

Committee draft report

PE569.768

10/02/2016

EP

PE575.097

19/02/2016

EP

PE576.972

04/03/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0115/2016

08/04/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0190/2016

28/04/2016

EP

Summary

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

LIBE

Final act
Budget 2016/1576
OJ L 246 14.09.2016, p. 0375 Summary

2015/2181(DEC) - 23/07/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2014, as part of
the 2014 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Members
States (FRONTEX).
CONTENT: this Commission document sets out the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2014 as
prepared on the basis of the information presented by the institutions, organisations and bodies of the EU, in accordance with Article 148 (2) of
the Financial Regulation applicable to the EU's General Budget, including the European Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders of the Members States (FRONTEX).
The document contains the figures on which the discharge procedure is based.
On this basis, the Financial Controller of the European Commission ensures the certification of the consolidated accounts as declared by the
institutions, agencies and bodies of the European Union.
Discharge procedure of the EU agencies: the EU Budget finances a wide range of policies and programmes throughout the EU. In accordance
with the priorities set by the European Parliament and the Council in the multi-annual financial framework (MFF), the European Commission
carries out specific programmes, activities and projects in the field with the technical support of some specialised agencies.
The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide information on the activities of the institutions, agencies and other bodies of the EU from

a budgetary and accrual accounting perspective.
The consolidated reports on the implementation of the general budget of the EU include the budget implementation of all Institutions. Agencies
do not have a separate budget inside the EU budget; and they are partially financed by a Commission budget subsidy.
This document sets out how the Agencies spent and implemented their budget in 2014. Each agency is subject to its own discharge
procedure.
FRONTEX: in 2014, the tasks and budget of this agency were as follows:
description of the Agency's tasks: FRONTEX, which is located in Warsaw (PL), was established by Council Regulation (EC) No
2007/2004, amended by Regulation (EC) No 863/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council. Its main task is to coordinate
Member States' activities in the field of the management of external borders and to set up European Border Guard Teams (EBGT) to
be deployed during joint operations;
the Agencys budget for the 2014 financial year: the Agencys budget for 2014, as presented in the Commission document on the
consolidated annual accounts of the European Union, gives the following figures
Commitment appropriations :
- committed : EUR 99 million;
- paid : EUR 97 million;
- carried-over : 2 million.
Payment appropriations :
- committed : EUR 130 million;
- paid : EUR 94 million;
- carried-over : EUR 33 million.
Please refer also to the Report on budgetary and financial management 2014.

2015/2181(DEC) - 08/09/2015 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Court of Auditors report on the annual accounts of the European Agency for the Management of
Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States (Frontex) for the financial year 2014, together with the Agencys reply.
CONTENT: in accordance with the tasks conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the Court
presents to the European Parliament and to the Council, in the context of the discharge procedure, a Statement of Assurance as to the
reliability of the annual accounts of each institution, body or agency of the EU, and the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying
them, on the basis of an independent external audit.
This audit concerned, amongst others, the annual accounts of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the
External Borders of the Member States (Frontex).
Statement of Assurance: pursuant to the provisions of Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the Court
has audited:
the annual accounts of the Agency, which comprise the financial statements and the reports on the implementation of the budget for
the financial year ended 31 December 2014;
the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying those accounts.
Opinion on the reliability of the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the Agencys annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects, its
financial position as at 31 December 2014 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the
provisions of its Financial Regulation and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer.
Opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts: the Court considers that the transactions underlying the
annual accounts for the year ended 31 December 2014 are legal and regular in all material respects.
The report also makes a series of observations on the budgetary and financial management of the Agency, accompanied by the latters
response. The main observations may be summarised as follows:
The Courts observations:
legality and regularity of the transactions: the Court states that considerable improvements were noted in both ex ante and ex
post verifications of expenditure claimed by cooperating countries under grant agreements. However, documentation from cooperating
countries supporting the expenditure claimed is not always sufficient. Moreover, no audit certificates were requested, although the
rules of application of the EUs Financial Regulation recommend this for grants above specific thresholds. The Court considers that
audit certificates would add further assurance on the legality and regularity of grant transactions;
budgetary management: the level of carry-overs for committed appropriations was high for administrative and operational expenditure,
the main reason being year-end purchases related to the move to the Agencys new building in December 2014, and the multiannual
nature of the Agencys operations;
external contributions to Frontexs budget: the Court notes the high and constantly increasing number of grant agreements and the
magnitude of related expenditure to be verified and reimbursed by Frontex. The Court raises the question whether more efficient and
cost-effective alternative funding mechanisms could be used. Furthermore, it feels that there is a need to refine the calculation of
contributions from Schengen associated countries (Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Iceland and Norway) to better reflect the related legal
provisions. Lastly, contributions to the Agencys budget from the United Kingdom and Ireland (which are non-Schengen countries)

have remained stable for many years despite the considerably extended range of activities in which they are involved. The Court
considers that a review of their contributions is therefore overdue.
The Agencys replies:
legality and regularity of the transactions: the Agency welcomes the statement of the Court with regard to the significant improvements
in its verifications. With regard to the request for audit certificates, the Agency states such certificates were already made in
2010. Despite a briefing for beneficiaries, the audit certificates were not issued by independent audit bodies;
budgetary management: the Agency indicates that operational expenditure depends significantly on the timely submission of
reimbursement claims for grants by Member States (the delay between the final date of the deployment of an officer or aircraft/vessel
to a Frontex coordinated joint operation and the submission of the claim ranges on average between 4 to 6 months);
external contributions to Frontexs budget: the Agency fully shares the view of the Court that the grant mechanism is neither the
appropriate nor the most efficient instrument to finance Frontex coordinated operations. It will review the methodology for calculating
the contributions from the Schengen Associated Countries, while bearing that in the legal provision some wording such as budgeted
remains unclear. After this review, the methodology will be laid down in the proper legal format (including for the United Kingdom).
Lastly, the Court of Auditors report contains a summary of the Agencys activities in 2014. This is focused on the following:
Budget: EUR 97.8 million, of which the Union subsidy is EUR 86.6 million.
Activities:
work of the Risk Analysis Unit (essentially, producing reports: 60 strategic reports as well as 456 analytical products supporting the
planning, implementation and evaluation of Joint Operations);
work of the Joint Operations Unit which organised 21 joint operations: 2 271third-country nationals were returned, during 45 joint
operations coordinated by Frontex. The total number of operational days accumulated in all joint operations amounted to 4 499;
work of Frontex Situation Centre: situational reports; Frontex-One-Stop-Shop, the information exchange platform between Frontex and
external partners;
activities of the Pooled Resources Unit (organising events, developing the European Border Guards Teams and Technical Equipment
pools);
organising 189 training activities;
research and development with all countries of the Schengen area regarding best practice guidelines in the area of Automated Border
Control;
partnership and cooperation with third countries (intensifying work with partners and the signing of a cooperation plan between
Frontex and Turkey);
cooperation with EU Bodies and international organisations.

2015/2181(DEC) - 27/01/2016 Supplementary non-legislative basic document
Having examined the revenue and expenditure accounts for the financial year 2014 and the balance sheet at 31 December 2014 of the
European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States (FRONTEX), as well as the
Court of Auditors' report on the annual accounts of the Agency for the financial year 2014, accompanied by the Agency's replies to the Court's
observations, the Council recommended the European Parliament to give a discharge to the Executive Director of the Agency in respect of the
implementation of the budget for the financial year 2014.
The Council welcomed the Court's opinion that, in all material respects, the Agency's annual accounts present fairly its financial position as at
31 December 2014 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the provisions of the
Agency's Financial Regulation, and that the underlying transactions for 2014 are legal and regular in all material respects.
Nevertheless, the Council has made some observations which may be summarised as follows:
audit certificates: while welcoming the improvement in both ex-ante and ex-post verifications of expenditure under grant agreements,
the Council recommended the Agency to improve the documentation requested to cooperating countries, including the issuing of audit
certificates;
carry-overs: while acknowledging the multiannual nature of operations, the Council called upon the Agency to improve its financial
programming and monitoring of the budget implementation in order to reduce the number of budgetary transfers and the level of
commitments carried over to the next financial year to the strict minimum, in line with the budgetary principle of annuality;
grant agreements: the Council encouraged the Agency to examine during the upcoming review of its founding regulation, whether
more efficient and cost-effective funding mechanisms could be used to address the increasing number of grant agreements and the
magnitude of related expenditure to be verified by the Agency;
associated countries: the Council invited the Agency to refine the calculation of contributions from Schengen associated countries
(Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Iceland and Norway) and to update the contributions of non-Schengen countries.

2015/2181(DEC) - 08/04/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Derek VAUGHAN (S&D, UK) on discharge in respect of the implementation of the
budget of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the
European Union (Frontex) for the financial year 2014.
The parliamentary committee calls on the European Parliament to grant the Executive Director of the Agency discharge in respect of the
implementation of the Agencys budget for the financial year 2014.
Noting that the Court of Auditors issued a statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts and the legality and regularity of the
underlying transactions for the financial year 2014, Members call on Parliament to approve the closure of the Agencys accounts. They made,

however, a number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is granted, in addition to the general
recommendations that appear in the draft resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies:
·

Agencys financial statements: Members note that Frontexs final budget for the financial year 2014 was EUR 97 945 077,
representing an increase of 4.25 % compared to 2013.

·

Legality and regularity of transactions: Members note that considerable improvements were noted in both ex-ante and ex-post
verifications of expenditure claimed by cooperating countries under grant agreements. They acknowledge from the Agency that it
introduced in June 2013 a more comprehensive, risk-based system of ex-ante controls. They observe that the Court finds that the
documentation supporting the expenditure claimed by those countries is not always sufficient. They note that audit certificates would
add further assurance on the legality and regularity of grant transactions. They call on the Agency to keep the discharge authorities
informed of the solution they reach.

Members also made a series of observations regarding commitments and carryovers, the prevention and management of conflicts of interest,
as well as on internal audit procedures.
Members highlight the issue of third countries contributions to the Agencys budget. They take note from the Courts report that there is a need
to refine the calculation of contributions from the non-Union countries that are parties to the Schengen agreement (Switzerland, Liechtenstein,
Iceland and Norway), in order to better reflect the related legal provisions. They also take note that the contributions to the Agencys budget
from the United Kingdom and Ireland have remained stable for many years despite the considerably extended range of activities in which the
United Kingdom and Ireland are involved. They acknowledge from the Agency that its Management Board Working Group on budget and
accounts is reviewing this issue and is to submit to the Agencys Management Board a recommendation and way forward with regard to those
contributions.
Members note with concern the high and constantly increasing number of grant agreements, as well as the magnitude of related expenditure
to be verified and reimbursed by the Agency, which indicate that a more efficient and cost-effective alternative funding mechanism could be
used to finance Agencys operational activities. They note that contractual relationships between the Agency and the Member States
authorities could pave the way for more efficient and transparent financial management.
They also note that, when a Member State deploys officers and/or technical equipment to the Agencys coordinated operations, the Member
State signs the Operational Plan drafted by the Agency and the host Member State, which clearly indicates the terms of the operational
cooperation. They recall that no provision is laid down granting participating Member States the freedom to use different ways and means to
achieve a given policy objective, as the grant instrument suggests, because the Operational Plan needs to be implemented in the manner
agreed upon without deviation unless amended. They point out that the new proposal for establishing a Border and Coast Guard goes even
further and that it proposes a proactive role for joint operations and return activities, which does not go hand in hand with the features of a
grant as a financial instrument. Members urge the Commission to consider this when proposing founding regulations in future.
Lastly, Members note that, although the Agency became operational as long ago as 2005 and has pursued its operations since then, it has
only worked on the basis of correspondence and exchanges with the host Member State rather than on the basis of a comprehensive
headquarters agreement. They urge the Agency and the government of the host Member State to conclude a headquarters agreement as
soon as possible.

2015/2181(DEC) - 28/04/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament decided to grant discharge to the Executive Director of the European Agency for the Management of Operational
Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union (Frontex) in respect of the implementation of the Agencys
budget for the financial year 2014. The vote on the discharge decision covers the closure of the accounts (in accordance with Annex V, Article
5(1)(a) to its Rules of Procedure).
Noting that the Court of Auditors issued a statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts and the legality and regularity of the
underlying transactions for the financial year 2014, Parliament adopted by 494 votes to 123, with 16 abstentions, a resolution containing a
number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is granted, in addition to the general recommendations
that appear in the draft resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies:
Agencys financial statements: Parliament noted that Frontexs final budget for the financial year 2014 was EUR 97 945 077,
representing an increase of 4.25 % compared to 2013.
Legality and regularity of transactions: Parliament noted that considerable improvements were noted in both ex-ante and ex-post
verifications of expenditure claimed by cooperating countries under grant agreements. It acknowledged from the Agency that it
introduced in June 2013 a more comprehensive, risk-based system of ex-ante controls. It observed that the Court finds that the
documentation supporting the expenditure claimed by those countries is not always sufficient. It noted that audit certificates would add
further assurance on the legality and regularity of grant transactions. It called on the Agency to keep the discharge authorities
informed of the solution they reach. Parliament also made a series of observations regarding commitments and carryovers, the
prevention and management of conflicts of interest, as well as on internal audit procedures.
Third countries contributions to the Agencys budget: Parliament highlighted the issue of third countries contributions to the Agencys budget. It
took note from the Courts report that there is a need to refine the calculation of contributions from the non-Union countries that are parties to
the Schengen agreement (Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Iceland and Norway), in order to better reflect the related legal provisions. It also took
note that the contributions to the Agencys budget from the United Kingdom and Ireland have remained stable for many years despite the
considerably extended range of activities in which the United Kingdom and Ireland are involved. It acknowledged from the Agency that its
Management Board Working Group on budget and accounts is reviewing this issue and is to submit to the Agencys Management Board a
recommendation and way forward with regard to those contributions.
Parliament noted with concern the high and constantly increasing number of grant agreements, as well as the magnitude of related
expenditure to be verified and reimbursed by the Agency, which indicate that a more efficient and cost-effective alternative funding mechanism
could be used to finance Agencys operational activities. It noted that contractual relationships between the Agency and the Member States
authorities could pave the way for more efficient and transparent financial management.

Members also noted that, when a Member State deploys officers and/or technical equipment to the Agencys coordinated operations, the
Member State signs the Operational Plan drafted by the Agency and the host Member State, which clearly indicates the terms of the
operational cooperation. They recalled that no provision is laid down granting participating Member States the freedom to use different ways
and means to achieve a given policy objective, as the grant instrument suggests, because the Operational Plan needs to be implemented in
the manner agreed upon without deviation unless amended. Parliament pointed out that the new proposal for establishing a Border and Coast
Guard goes even further and that it proposes a proactive role for joint operations and return activities, which does not go hand in hand with the
features of a grant as a financial instrument. Members urge the Commission to consider this when proposing founding regulations in future.
Headquarters: lastly, Parliament noted that, although the Agency became operational as long ago as 2005 and has pursued its operations
since then, it has only worked on the basis of correspondence and exchanges with the host Member State rather than on the basis of a
comprehensive headquarters agreement. It stated that such an agreement would further promote transparency in respect of the conditions
under which the Agency and its staff operate. It recalled that the requirement to establish a headquarters agreement was introduced in the
Agencys amended regulation in 2011. Negotiations are still ongoing with the government of the host Member State. It urged the Agency and
the government of the host Member State to conclude a headquarters agreement as soon as possible.

2015/2181(DEC) - 28/04/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the
Member States of the European Union (FRONTEX) for the financial year 2014.
NON LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2016/1576 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of
FRONTEX for the financial year 2014.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the Executive Director of FRONTEX for the
implementation of its budget for the financial year 2014.
This decision is in line with the European Parliament's resolution adopted on 28 April 2016 and comprises a series of observations that form
an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 28 April 2016).
Amongst Parliaments main observations in the resolution accompanying the discharge decision, it noted that considerable improvements were
noted in both ex ante and ex post verifications of expenditure claimed by cooperating countries under grant agreements. It called on the
Agency to fully explore the possibility of cooperation with the audit authorities set up under the External Border Fund and the Internal Security
Fund and to report back to the discharge authority on the evaluation of such cooperation.

