Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2892(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2015 report on Serbia

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Serbia, from 06/2006

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
08/10/2015

MCALLISTER David
Shadow rapporteur

FAJON Tanja

TANNOCK Charles

VAJGL Ivo

ŠOLTES Igor

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

HAHN Johannes

Key events
15/12/2015

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

28/01/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

03/02/2016

Debate in Parliament

04/02/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

04/02/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

04/02/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0046/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2892(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Summary

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/04677

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE573.158

07/01/2016

EP

Motion for a resolution

B8-0166/2016

26/01/2016

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0046/2016

04/02/2016

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)242

08/06/2016

Summary

2015/2892(RSP) - 15/12/2015 Resolution/conclusions adopted by Council
Taking note of the communication from the Commission of 10 November 2015 on the EU Enlargement Strategy and the reports on Turkey,
Montenegro, Serbia, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo, the Council reaffirmed that
enlargement remains a key policy of the European Union and an investment in the peace, democracy, prosperity, security and stability of our
continent.
In this context, it reiterated the EU's unequivocal commitment to the European perspective of the Western Balkans.
It commended Turkey and the Western Balkans, at present in particular Serbia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, for their
efforts in addressing the refugee and migration crisis, which has seriously affected the region.
The Council welcomed the major steps Serbia has taken in the past year which led to the opening of the first chapters of the EU accession
negotiations at the Accession Conference on 14 December 2015. It took positive note of Serbia's submission of its Action Plans for chapters
23 - Judiciary and fundamental rights, and 24 - Justice, freedom and security, which should provide clear guidance for future reforms and for
developing a solid track record in these areas. The Council recalled that progress under these chapters will need to be made in parallel with
progress in negotiations overall.
Towards reforms: the Council encouraged Serbia to take this positive momentum forward and to intensify legislative reforms and their effective
implementation in the key areas of judicial reform, fight against corruption and organised crime, and freedom of expression and the media.
Particular attention needs to be paid to the full respect of fundamental rights, including protection of the most vulnerable groups, particularly
the Roma, as well as to the effective implementation of legislation on the protection of minorities, the non-discriminatory treatment of national
minorities throughout Serbia, and tackling discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity. Further progress is also required
in the areas of independence of democratic institutions, public administration, as well as in developing a functioning market economy and
improving the business environment.
The Council urged Serbia to swiftly implement its part of these agreements and to engage constructively with Kosovo. It would continue to
monitor closely Serbia's continued engagement towards visible and sustainable progress in the normalisation of relations with Kosovo,
including the implementation in good faith of all agreements reached so far. It recalled that progress in the process of normalisation of relations
with Kosovo under chapter 35 needs to be made in parallel with progress in Serbia's accession negotiations, in line with the negotiating
framework.
Regional cooperation: lastly, the Council considered that Serbia should continue strengthening good neighbourly relations. It called on Serbia
to progressively align with the EU Common Foreign and Security Policy in line with the negotiating framework.

2015/2892(RSP) - 04/02/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 498 votes to 66 with 70 abstentions, a resolution tabled by the Committee on Foreign Affair on the 2015
report on Serbia.
Parliament recalled that the European Council of 28 June 2013 decided to open accession negotiations with Serbia, and it welcomed the
opening of the negotiations, and called on Serbia to tackle decisively and head-on the systemic and socio-economic reforms.
Whilst welcoming Serbias progress, it encouraged the Serbian authorities to further improve the investment climate across Serbia and reduce
the economic and social disparities between its regions.
It noted the progress on economic reforms, which improved Serbias budgetary situation, and called on the Commission to continue supporting
the government in its plans to conduct further reforms
Migration crisis: Members commended Serbias constructive approach in dealing with the migration crisis, taking positive note of Serbias
substantial effort to ensure that third country nationals receive shelter and humanitarian supplies with EU and international support. They
called on Serbia to make greater efforts and to progressively align its foreign and security policy with that of the EU, including its policy on

Russia. In this context, they felt that conducting joint Serbia Russia military exercises was regrettable.
Rule of law: Parliament noted that, while some progress has been made in the area of judiciary, namely in adopting rules for evaluating judges
and prosecutors, political interference remains high. It called on the government to adopt a new law on free legal aid and to introduce legal
changes to address the quality and consistency of judicial practice and judicial education. The Serbian authorities were asked to amend and
implement the economic and corruption crimes section of the Criminal Code in order to provide a credible and predictable criminal law
framework. Parliament reiterated its deep concern at the provisions and implementation of Article 234 of the Criminal Code on abuse of
responsible positions, and it called once again for an independent and thorough review of the reclassified cases related to abuse of
responsible positions, so that longstanding unjust prosecutions can be dropped immediately. It also noted that more effort must be made in the
fight against organised crime.
Democracy: Parliament reiterated its call on the Serbian Government to address fully the recommendations of the OSCE/ODIHR election
observation missions, in particular those ensuring that campaign financing and the electoral processes should be transparent. It stressed the
importance of independent regulatory bodies, including the Ombudsman, in ensuring oversight and accountability of the executive.
Human rights: Members noted, the shortcomings with regard to preventing discrimination against vulnerable groups, including people with
disabilities, people with HIV/AIDS and LGBTI people. They called on the authorities to actively promote respect for human rights for all. They
also expressed concern that no progress has been made to improve the situation regarding freedom of expression and of the media.
Parliament was seriously concerned about repeated leaks to the media about ongoing criminal investigations, in breach of the presumption of
innocence. Respect for and protection of minorities: Parliament underlined the importance of National Minority Councils in their role of
promoting the rights of national minorities and their democratic nature. It expressed serious concern about the interruption of transmission of
programmes in minority languages following the announced privatisation of the media, and called on Serbia to step up its efforts with regard to
the effective and consistent implementation of legislation on protection of minorities and the non-discriminatory treatment of national minorities
throughout Serbia, including in relation to education, especially regarding the timely funding and translation of minority native language
textbooks. The resolution called on the Serbian authorities to implement concrete measures to improve the situation of the Roma, particularly
concerning the provision of personal documents, education, housing, health care and employment.
Regional cooperation and good-neighbourly relations: Members urged Serbia to continue to build on its good-neighbourly relations, and they
condemned all forms of hate speech or war-time rhetoric. They welcomed all initiatives focused on the future of the Western Balkans, in
particular the Brdo Process, which proves to be an important framework for cooperation in both political and technical fields. Parliament took
the view that concrete cooperation in areas of mutual interest can contribute to the stabilisation of the Western Balkans. It called on Serbia to
further promote the stabilisation and institutional strengthening of Bosnia and Herzegovina through its existing contacts and good-neighbourly
relations with the country. It also reiterated its call on the Serbian authorities to initiate further measures for cross-border cooperation with the
neighbouring EU Member States, including the Cross-border and Transnational Cooperation Programmes 2014-2020 and the EU Strategy for
the Danube Region.
Serbia was encouraged to further cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), in order to investigate
facts about war crimes and other serious violations of human rights committed in the former Yugoslavia. Parliament underlined the need to
strengthen and depoliticise Serbian institutions that deal with war crimes.
While welcoming Serbias continued engagement in the normalisation process with Kosovo, it urged Serbia to swiftly implement its part of
these agreements and to engage constructively with Kosovo in formulating and implementing future agreements. It called for continuous
efforts by both governments and the EU institutions to communicate and explain the provisions of the reached agreements, in order to bring
ethnic Albanian and Serbian communities in Kosovo closer together. Members encouraged Serbia and Kosovo to identify new areas of
discussion for the dialogue with the aim of improving peoples lives and comprehensively normalising relations.
Energy, environment and transport: Parliament stressed that Serbia, as a contracting party to the Energy Community, should remain active in
the work of the Energy Community institutions and continue to implement the acquis in order to build sustainable and secure energy systems.
It encouraged Serbia to develop competition in the gas market and to take measures to improve alignment with the acquis in the fields of
renewable energies and energy efficiency. Lastly, it encouraged Serbia to align itself with the average EU commitments on climate change and
the agreement reached in Paris at COP 21.

