Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2352(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Liability, compensation and financial security for offshore and gas operations

Subject
3.60.02 Oil industry, motor fuels
3.60.03 Gas, electricity, natural gas, biogas
3.70.16 Law and environment, liability

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
28/01/2016

CHRYSOGONOS
Kostas
Shadow rapporteur

RADEV Emil

GUTELAND Jytte

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

USPASKICH Viktor

ANDERSSON Max
Committee for opinion
ENVI

Rapporteur for opinion

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Appointed
15/12/2015

ANDROULAKIS Nikos
ITRE

European Commission

Industry, Research and Energy

Commission DG

Commissioner

Energy

ŠEFČOVIČ Maroš

Key events
14/09/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

21/01/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

13/10/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

19/10/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

30/11/2016

Debate in Parliament

01/12/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

01/12/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st

COM(2015)0422

Summary

A8-0308/2016

Summary

T8-0478/2016

Summary

reading/single reading
01/12/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2352(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/05388

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0422

14/09/2015

EC

Committee draft report

PE582.416

26/05/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE584.225

22/06/2016

EP

PE575.123

12/07/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0308/2016

19/10/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0478/2016

01/12/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)128

27/03/2017

Committee opinion

ENVI

Summary

2015/2352(INI) - 14/09/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to present an overview how liability for damage from offshore accidents in oil and gas prospection, exploration and production is
addressed in the EU.
CONTENT: the Commission presents a report on liability, compensation and financial security for offshore oil and gas operations pursuant to
Directive 2013/30/EU on the safety of offshore oil and gas operations (the Offshore Safety Directive or OSD). The OSD defines the elements
of such a comprehensive EU-wide framework for preventing major accidents and limiting their consequences.
The report analyses how Europe deals with a series of societal dilemmas arising in relation to offshore oil and gas:
who is liable for what kinds of damage and loss to whom;
how to ensure that liable parties have sufficient financial capacity to provide rightful compensation for the damage and loss they are
liable for;
how compensation should be disbursed so that it reaches legitimate claimants quickly and the risks of cascading impacts to the
broader economy are minimised.
Liability regimes: whilst there are national differences in the way liability regimes govern access to justice for victims of offshore accidents, the
Commission stated that no clear case can be made at the present time that any of the current approaches to civil liability in the Focal States is
less effective in reinforcing the OSD's aim of ensuring the safety of offshore oil and gas operations across the EU.
The report highlighted the following aspects:
the transposition of the OSD in national law will prompt Member States to explore in which ways their liability rules will best protect
general public interest in line with the compensation requirements of the OSD;
in certain cases, the Brussels I and Rome II Regulations prevent differences in national regimes from disadvantaging claimants from
other EU Member States;
in addition, some Member States may be reappraising their existing liability regimes for offshore accidents in tandem with other
changes introduced by the OSD.
The effects of the OSD, as implemented by Member States, will show in the coming years whether it is appropriate to bring certain conduct
leading to major offshore accidents within the scope of criminal law for further re-enforcing offshore safety. When appropriate, the Commission
will put forward a legislative proposal.

Broadening liability provisions through EU legislation does not appear appropriate at this juncture according to the Commission. However, the
Commission will be able to conclude on the need for further steps by the time of the OSD's first implementation report.
Notably, the Commission can:
continue to advance liability issues through structured EUOAG discussions;
focus on liability-related provisions in the OSD conformity checks;
use EUOAG meetings for systematic data gathering covering all liability-related aspects of newly transposed laws.
Financial security and compensation mechanisms: the report noted that there is broad variety of financial security products available to hedge
oil and gas companies operating risk. These range from self-insurance options, to third-party insurance, to mutual schemes such as the
Offshore Pollution Liability Association Ltd (OPOL), to alternative risk transfer mechanisms and others.
Whilst not all of these products may currently be in widespread use by the offshore industry, the marketplace for financial security instruments
appears to have the depth and innovation necessary to cater to all oil and gas companies operating under the current EEA liability obligations.
There is currently a lack of uptake of financial security instruments to fully cover the more infrequent and costly offshore accidents in the EEA.
In addition, there are just two compensation mechanisms currently in place specifically for oil and gas accidents in the Focal States.
However, provisions in the OSD should lead to significant improvements in both of these areas. Such anticipated changes should be seen
following the July 2015 implementation deadline for the OSD and the implementation of the Offshore Protocol of the Barcelona Convention.
Should the new national laws not improve the availability of financial security instruments and put in place procedures for ensuring prompt and
adequate handling of compensation claims, the Commission will reassess whether and what further EU action could achieve these objectives.
The Commission encourages Member States to share their experiences on financial security instruments, liability, compensation and criminal
penalties, first of all, in the framework of the European Offshore Authorities Group.
After the implementation of the Directive and based on experiences of Member States working with the new legal basis the Commission may
update its assessment as provided by this report.

2015/2352(INI) - 19/10/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Kostas CHRYSOGONOS (GUE/NGL, EL) on liability, compensation and
financial security for offshore oil and gas operations, following the Commission report on this issue.
Members recalled that offshore oil and gas operations are progressively taking place in increasingly extreme environments and could
potentially have major and devastating consequences for the environment and economy of the sea and coastal areas. A number of studies,
including one by the European Parliament Research Service and one by the Joint Research Centre, estimate in the thousands (more
precisely, 9 700 between 1990 and 2007), the number of incidents in the EU oil and gas sector.
Bringing up to date and extending the system of compensation and financial security: whilst welcoming the adoption of the Offshore Safety
Directive 2013/30/EU (OSD), which complements the Environmental Liability Directive 2004/35/EC (ELD), the report called on Member States
to guarantee the independence of the competent authorities, and called on the Commission to assess the appropriateness of introducing
further harmonised rules on liability, compensation and financial security with a view to preventing any further accidents with cross-border
implications.
Members stressed that the effective application of the polluter pays principle to offshore oil and gas operations should extend not only to the
costs of preventing and remedying environmental damage, but also to the costs of remedying traditional damage claims, in line with the
precautionary principle and the principle of sustainable development.
Liability to third parties: Members regretted that the OSD does not deal with liability for civil damage to either natural or legal persons, be it
bodily injury, property damage or economic loss, whether direct or indirect.
Stressing that the way civil liability is handled varies considerably from one Member State to another, Members believed that an European
framework is needed, which should be based on the legislation of the most advanced Member States, should cover not only bodily injury and
property damage but also pure economic loss, and should ensure effective compensation mechanisms for victims and for sectors that may be
severely affected (e.g. fisheries and coastal tourism). They called in this respect on the Commission to assess whether a horizontal European
framework of collective redress would be a possible solution.
Compensatory regimes: compensatory regimes must be able to address transboundary claims effectively, rapidly, within a reasonable
timeframe and without discrimination between claimants from different EEA countries.
The report recommended that they cover both primary and secondary damage caused in all the affected areas. It considered that strict civil
liability rules should be established for offshore accidents in order to facilitate access to justice for victims (both legal and natural persons) of
offshore accidents, and that financial liability caps should be avoided.
The Commission was asked to revisit the need to introduce common EU standards for remedial and compensatory claim systems.
Members regretted the over-reliance on insurance and the lack of uptake of financial security instruments in the EU to cover the damage
caused by the most costly offshore accidents. They asked the Commission to encourage Member States to develop financial security
instruments concerning compensation for traditional damage claims resulting from incidents linked to general offshore oil and gas activities or
to offshore oil and gas transport, including in cases of insolvency;
They also considered that in that context, the establishment of a fund based on fees paid by the offshore industry could also be assessed.
Lastly, the report noted it necessary to analyse to what extent the introduction of criminal liability at EU level will add a layer of deterrence
beyond civil penalties. It also called for harmonisation of the definitions of the criminal offences and of minimum sanctions when it comes to
offshore safety breaches.

2015/2352(INI) - 01/12/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 506 votes to 106, with 15 abstentions, a resolution on liability, compensation and financial security for
offshore oil and gas operations, following the Commission report on this issue.
Members recalled that offshore oil and gas operations are progressively taking place in increasingly extreme environments and could
potentially have major and devastating consequences for the environment and economy of the sea and coastal areas. A number of studies,
including one by the European Parliament Research Service and one by the Joint Research Centre, estimate in the thousands (more
precisely, 9 700 between 1990 and 2007), the number of incidents in the EU oil and gas sector.
Bringing up to date and extending the system of compensation and financial security: whilst welcoming the adoption of the Offshore Safety
Directive 2013/30/EU (OSD), which complements the Environmental Liability Directive 2004/35/EC (ELD), Parliament called on Member
States to guarantee the independence of the competent authorities, and called on the Commission to assess the appropriateness of
introducing further harmonised rules on liability, compensation and financial security with a view to preventing any further accidents with
cross-border implications.
Parliament stressed that the effective application of the polluter pays principle to offshore oil and gas operations should extend not only to the
costs of preventing and remedying environmental damage, but also to the costs of remedying traditional damage claims, in line with the
precautionary principle and the principle of sustainable development.
Liability to third parties: Members regretted that the OSD does not deal with liability for civil damage to either natural or legal persons, be it
bodily injury, property damage or economic loss, whether direct or indirect.
Stressing that the way civil liability is handled varies considerably from one Member State to another and that there is no regime in the vast
majority of Member States for compensation payments, Parliament stated that a European framework is needed, which should cover not only
bodily injury and property damage but also pure economic loss, and should ensure effective compensation mechanisms for victims and for
sectors that may be severely affected (e.g. fisheries and coastal tourism). It called in this respect on the Commission to assess whether a
horizontal European framework of collective redress would be a possible solution.
Compensatory regimes: compensatory regimes must be able to address transboundary claims effectively, rapidly, within a reasonable
timeframe and without discrimination between claimants from different EEA countries.
Parliament recommended:
that they cover both primary and secondary damage caused in all the affected areas;
that strict civil liability rules should be established for offshore accidents in order to facilitate access to justice for victims (both legal
and natural persons) of offshore accidents;
that financial liability caps should be avoided.
The Commission was asked to revisit the need to introduce common EU standards for remedial and compensatory claim systems.
Financial security instruments: Members regretted the over-reliance on insurance to cover the damage caused by the most costly offshore
accidents. They called for:
Member States to develop financial security instruments concerning compensation for traditional damage claims resulting from
incidents linked to general offshore oil and gas activities or to offshore oil and gas transport, including in cases of insolvency;
the assessment of the possibility of a fund to be established based on fees paid by the offshore industry.
Criminal liability: Parliament suggested analysing to what extent the introduction of criminal liability at EU level will add a layer of deterrence
beyond civil penalties. While welcoming the EUs introduction of the Environmental Crime Directive 2008/99/EC (ECD), it called for the
harmonisation of the definitions of the criminal offences and of minimum sanctions when it comes to offshore safety breaches.

