Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2277(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

New alliance for food security and nutrition

Subject
6.50 Emergency, food, humanitarian aid, aid to refugees, Emergency Aid
Reserve

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
DEVE

Rapporteur

Development

Appointed
06/11/2015

HEUBUCH Maria
Shadow rapporteur

ZÁBORSKÁ Anna

GUERRERO SALOM
Enrique

ZAHRADIL Jan

GOERENS Charles

KOULOGLOU Stelios

CORRAO Ignazio
Committee for opinion
AGRI

Rapporteur for opinion

Agriculture and Rural Development

Appointed
09/11/2015

SCOTT CATO Molly

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Health and Food Safety

ANDRIUKAITIS Vytenis Povilas

Key events
29/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

20/04/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

03/05/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

06/06/2016

Debate in Parliament

07/06/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

07/06/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading
End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0169/2016

Summary

T8-0247/2016

Summary

07/06/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2277(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

DEVE/8/04822

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE576.686

28/01/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE577.081

24/02/2016

EP

PE575.117

06/04/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0169/2016

03/05/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0247/2016

07/06/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)612

18/11/2016

Committee opinion

AGRI

2015/2277(INI) - 03/05/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Development adopted the own-initiative report by Maria HEUBUCH (Greens/EFA, ADE) on the New Alliance for Food
Security and Nutrition.
Members recalled that the New Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition in Africa (NAFSN) aims to improve food security and nutrition by
helping 50 million people in sub-Saharan Africa out of poverty by 2020. The participating countries have negotiated Country Cooperation
Frameworks (CCFs) setting out commitments to facilitate private investment in the agriculture sector in Africa.
Agricultural investment in Africa and fulfilment of the sustainable development goals (SDGs): Members observed that agricultural investment
policies mostly focus on large-scale land acquisitions and on export-oriented agriculture that is usually unrelated to local economies. They
stressed that under those circumstances the ability of mega-PPPs to contribute to poverty reduction and food security must be improved.
Agricultural investment policies should be linked to and should support the development of the local economy, including smallholders and
family farming. Members regret the fact that rural communities, farm workers, small farmers, fishermen and indigenous peoples, have not been
taken into account in the decision-making process. Local civil society needs to be closely involved in NAFSN monitoring and evaluation.
Members recalled that NAFSN has made a commitment to promoting inclusive, agriculture-based growth that supports small-scale farming
and helps reduce poverty, hunger and under-nutrition.
They called on governments and donors to suspend or review all policies, projects and consultancy arrangements that directly encourage and
facilitate land grabbing. They urged the EU Member States to strive to transform NAFSN into a genuine tool for sustainable development and
into an instrument of support for family farming and local economies in sub-Saharan Africa, recalling that family farmers and smallholders
produce about 80 % of the worlds food and provide over 60 % of employment in the region.
For their part, the EU and its Member States, which, taken together, are the biggest development aid donor in the world, were called upon to:
ensure that EU-based investors respect, the rights of local communities and the needs of small farms, in following a policy based on
social responsibility;
support local African enterprises and stakeholders as primary actors;
implement the recent WTO decision to eliminate agricultural export subsidies, which are distorting local markets and destroying
livelihoods in developing countries;
eliminate tariff barriers that act as a disincentive to African countries adding value to raw produce locally.
Participating countries were called upon to: (i) ensure a fair contribution to the tax base of participating countries; (ii) ensure that their
respective governments retain the right to protect their agricultural and food markets through appropriate tariff and tax regimes; (iii) adopt
policies that promote responsible trade.
Governance, ownership and accountability: Members stressed that NAFSN must step up good governance as regards natural resources, in

particular by guaranteeing that people have access to their own resources and by protecting their rights in the context of contracts on deals
relating to natural resources. In this context, they stressed the need for strong institutional and legal frameworks to ensure a fair sharing of
risks and benefits.
The committee noted that multinationals operating under NAFSN favour large-scale contract farming, which risks marginalising small-scale
producers. It was therefore necessary to strengthen farmers' organisations so as to improve the bargaining position of farmers.
Access to land and security of tenure: Members warned that a pure focus on land titling often leads to insecurity for small-scale food producers
and indigenous people, especially women. They underlined the need to have small-scale food producers in leading positions, allowing their
own independent organisations to support them. They highlighted the fact that 1.2 billion people still live either without permanent access to
land or else occupying property for which they have no formal claim. Members called on participating countries to enact binding national
measures against land-grabbing, corruption based on land transfer and the use of land for speculative investment. They wanted to ensure
legal certainty over land rights, including informal, indigenous and customary tenure rights.
Members called on the parties to NAFSN to put in place independent grievance mechanisms for those communities affected by land
dispossession as a result of large-scale investment projects.
Food security, nutrition and sustainable family farming: recalling that food security is based on healthy living soils and productive
agro-ecosystems, Members called for means of replacing over-reliance on imported food with resilient domestic food production, prioritising
local crops that meet nutritional requirements. They stressed the need for strategies to minimise food waste throughout the food chain, to
protect agricultural biodiversity, and invest in agro-ecological farming practices in developing countries.
Members also called on African governments to:
avoid making food production systems over-dependent on fossil fuels;
develop short food supply chains locally and regionally, as short supply chains are most effective in combating hunger and rural
poverty;
enable African farmers to access affordable, low-input technological solutions;
encourage a wide variety of nutritious, local and seasonal food crops
promote producer organisations such as cooperatives that strengthen small farmers bargaining positions.
Furthermore, the committee stressed the right to water and recognised the role of access to water for farming needs.
It cautioned against over-reliance on producing biofuel feed stocks, which can have a detrimental impact on food security.
Regulatory reform in the seed sector: Members recalled that farmers right to produce, exchange and sell seeds freely underpins 90 % of
agricultural livelihoods in Africa. However, a major challenge is the over-dependence of smallholders on seeds and plant protection products
manufactured by foreign companies. They deplored the corporate call to harmonise seed laws on the basis of the principles of distinctness,
uniformity and stability (DUS), in the African context via regional institutions, which will hamper the development and growth of farmer-based
seed systems at national and regional levels, since such systems usually do not breed or save seeds that fulfil the DUS criteria. They also
recalled that while commercial seed varieties may improve yields in the short term, traditional farmers' varieties, landraces and associated
knowledge are best suited for adaptation to specific agro-ecological environments.
Members urged the G8 member states not to support GMO crops in Africa.
At the same time, Members called on participating countries to give farmers the option of avoiding input dependency, and to support farmers
seed systems through maintaining local publically-owned seed banks.
Funding agricultural investment in Africa: Members called on donors to:
align Official Development Assistance (ODA) with the development effectiveness principles;
support education, training and technical counselling for farmers;
promote the forming of farmers organisations of a professional and economic nature.
They recalled that the purpose of development aid is to reduce, and ultimately to eradicate, poverty, and believed that ODA should focus on
direct support to small-scale farming.
Members stressed that G7 member states should guarantee African countries the right to protect their agricultural sectors through tariff and tax
regimes that favour family and smallholder farming, and called on the EU to address all the deficiencies of NAFSN, and to ensure that actions
taken under it are consistent with development policy goals.

2015/2277(INI) - 07/06/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 577 votes to 24 with 69 abstentions a resolution on the New Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition.
Parliament recalled that the New Alliance for Food Security and Nutrition in Africa (NAFSN) aims to improve food security and nutrition by
helping 50 million people in sub-Saharan Africa out of poverty by 2020. The participating countries have negotiated Country Cooperation
Frameworks (CCFs) setting out commitments to facilitate private investment in the agriculture sector in Africa.
Agricultural investment in Africa and fulfilment of the sustainable development goals (SDGs): Parliament observed that agricultural investment
policies mostly focus on large-scale land acquisitions and on export-oriented agriculture that is usually unrelated to local economies. Recalling
that large public-private partnerships (PPPs) risk creating dominant positions for large agricultural companies in African agriculture that crowd
out local businesses, Parliament also stressed that mega-PPPs could contribute to poverty reduction and food security Agricultural investment
policies should be linked to and should support the development of the local economy, including smallholders and family farming. Members
regretted the fact that rural communities, farm workers, small farmers, fishermen and indigenous peoples, have not been taken into account in
the decision-making process. Local civil society needs to be closely involved in NAFSN monitoring and evaluation.
Parliament recalled that NAFSN has made a commitment to promoting inclusive, agriculture-based growth that supports small-scale farming
and helps reduce poverty, hunger and under-nutrition.

It called on governments and donors to suspend or review all policies, projects and consultancy arrangements that directly encourage and
facilitate land grabbing. It urged the EU Member States to strive to transform NAFSN into a genuine tool for sustainable development and into
an instrument of support for family farming and local economies in sub-Saharan Africa, recalling that family farmers and smallholders produce
about 80 % of the worlds food and provide over 60 % of employment in the region.
For their part, the EU and its Member States, which, taken together, are the biggest development aid donor in the world, were called upon to:
ensure that EU-based investors respect, the rights of local communities and the needs of small farms, in following a policy based on
social responsibility;
support local African enterprises and stakeholders as primary actors;
implement the recent WTO decision to eliminate agricultural export subsidies, which are distorting local markets and destroying
livelihoods in developing countries;
eliminate tariff barriers that act as a disincentive to African countries adding value to raw produce locally.
Participating countries were called upon to: (i) ensure a fair contribution to the tax base of participating countries; (ii) ensure that their
respective governments retain the right to protect their agricultural and food markets through appropriate tariff and tax regimes; (iii) adopt
policies that promote responsible trade.
Governance, ownership and accountability: Parliament stressed that NAFSN must step up good governance as regards natural resources, in
particular by guaranteeing that people have access to their own resources and by protecting their rights in the context of contracts on deals
relating to natural resources. In this context, it stressed the need for strong institutional and legal frameworks to ensure a fair sharing of risks
and benefits. Parliament called for the EU to work with the UN towards the adoption by all countries, on a binding basis, of the Milan Charter
and the commitments it contains.
Parliament noted that multinationals operating under NAFSN favour large-scale contract farming, which risks marginalising small-scale
producers. It was therefore necessary to strengthen farmers' organisations so as to improve the bargaining position of farmers.
Access to land and security of tenure: Parliament warned that a pure focus on land titling often leads to insecurity for small-scale food
producers and indigenous people, especially women. It underlined the need to have small-scale food producers in leading positions, allowing
their own independent organisations to support them. It highlighted the fact that 1.2 billion people still live either without permanent access to
land or else occupying property for which they have no formal claim. Members called on participating countries to enact binding national
measures against land-grabbing, corruption based on land transfer and the use of land for speculative investment. They wanted to ensure
legal certainty over land rights, including informal, indigenous and customary tenure rights.
Parliament called on the parties to NAFSN to put in place independent grievance mechanisms for those communities affected by land
dispossession as a result of large-scale investment projects. It was also important to ensure that the principle of free, prior and informed
consent is observed for all communities affected by land grabbing and that consultations are held to ensure the equal participation of all local
community groups, in particular those that are most vulnerable and marginalised.
Food security, nutrition and sustainable family farming: recalling that food security is based on healthy living soils and productive
agro-ecosystems, Parliament called for means of replacing over-reliance on imported food with resilient domestic food production, prioritising
local crops that meet nutritional requirements. It stressed the need for strategies to minimise food waste throughout the food chain, to protect
agricultural biodiversity, and invest in agro-ecological farming practices in developing countries.
Parliament also called on African governments to:
avoid making food production systems over-dependent on fossil fuels;
develop short food supply chains locally and regionally, as short supply chains are most effective in combating hunger and rural
poverty;
enable African farmers to access affordable, low-input technological solutions;
encourage a wide variety of nutritious, local and seasonal food crops
promote producer organisations such as cooperatives that strengthen small farmers bargaining positions.
Furthermore, Parliament stressed the right to water and recognised the role of access to water for farming needs.
It cautioned against over-reliance on producing biofuel feed stocks, which can have a detrimental impact on food security.
Regulatory reform in the seed sector: Parliament recalled that farmers right to produce, exchange and sell seeds freely underpins 90 % of
agricultural livelihoods in Africa. However, a major challenge is the over-dependence of smallholders on seeds and plant protection products
manufactured by foreign companies. Members deplored the corporate call to harmonise seed laws on the basis of the principles of
distinctness, uniformity and stability (DUS), in the African context via regional institutions, which will hamper the development and growth of
farmer-based seed systems at national and regional levels, since such systems usually do not breed or save seeds that fulfil the DUS criteria.
They also recalled that while commercial seed varieties may improve yields in the short term, traditional farmers' varieties, landraces and
associated knowledge are best suited for adaptation to specific agro-ecological environments.
Parliament urged the G8 member states not to support GMO crops in Africa.
At the same time, it called on participating countries to give farmers the option of avoiding input dependency, and to support farmers seed
systems through maintaining local publically-owned seed banks.
Funding agricultural investment in Africa: Parliament called on donors to:
align Official Development Assistance (ODA) with the development effectiveness principles;
support education, training and technical counselling for farmers;
promote the forming of farmers organisations of a professional and economic nature.
It recalled that the purpose of development aid is to reduce, and ultimately to eradicate, poverty, and believed that ODA should focus on direct
support to small-scale farming.
Parliament believed that the funding provided by G8 member states to NAFSN contravenes the objective of supporting domestic local
companies which cannot compete with multinationals that already benefit from a dominant market position and are often granted business,

tariff and tax privileges. It stressed that G7 member states should guarantee African countries the right to protect their agricultural sectors
through tariff and tax regimes that favour family and smallholder farming.
Lastly, Parliament called on the EU to address all the deficiencies of NAFSN, and to ensure that actions taken under it are consistent with
development policy goals.

