Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2015/0009(COD)

Procedure completed

European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1316/2013 2011/0302(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1291/2013 2011/0401(COD)
See also 2015/2011(BUD)
Amended by 2016/0276(COD)
See also 2016/2064(INI)
Subject
2.50.03 Securities and financial markets, stock exchange, CIUTS,
investments
3.45.02 Small and medium-sized enterprises (SME), craft industries
4.70.01 Structural funds, investment funds in general, programmes
8.40.07 European Investment Bank

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

BUDG Budgets
(Associated committee)

Appointed
11/02/2015

FERNANDES José
Manuel

BULLMANN Udo
Shadow rapporteur

KARAS Othmar

GARDIAZABAL
RUBIAL Eider

ASHWORTH Richard

LOONES Sander

TORVALDS Nils

TREMOSA I
BALCELLS Ramon

DE MASI Fabio

NÍ RIADA Liadh

EICKHOUT Bas

MARAGALL Ernest

VALLI Marco

11/02/2015

ZANNI Marco
ECON Economic and Monetary Affairs
(Associated committee)

11/02/2015
FERNANDES José
Manuel

11/02/2015

BULLMANN Udo
Shadow rapporteur

KARAS Othmar

GARDIAZABAL
RUBIAL Eider

ASHWORTH Richard

LOONES Sander

TORVALDS Nils

TREMOSA I
BALCELLS Ramon

DE MASI Fabio

NÍ RIADA Liadh

EICKHOUT Bas

MARAGALL Ernest

VALLI Marco

ZANNI Marco
Committee for opinion
CONT

Rapporteur for opinion

Budgetary Control

Appointed
02/03/2015

THEURER Michael
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

28/01/2015
JAZŁOWIECKA Danuta

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

03/02/2015
DALLI Miriam

ITRE Industry, Research and Energy
(Associated committee)
IMCO

10/02/2015
VAN BREMPT Kathleen

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

24/02/2015
DURAND Pascal

TRAN Transport and Tourism
(Associated committee)

29/01/2015
AYALA SENDER Inés 29/01/2015

RIQUET Dominique
REGI

Regional Development

11/02/2015
VAN NISTELROOIJ
Lambert

AGRI

21/01/2015

Agriculture and Rural Development
DESS Albert

CULT

Culture and Education

05/02/2015
ZDROJEWSKI Bogdan
Andrzej

AFCO

Constitutional Affairs

17/03/2015
HÜBNER Danuta Maria

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Economic and Financial Affairs

Commissioner
MOSCOVICI Pierre

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the
Regions

Key events
13/01/2015

Legislative proposal published

27/01/2015

Debate in Council

28/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

17/02/2015

Debate in Council

09/03/2015

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

09/03/2015

Referral to joint committee announced in
Parliament

10/03/2015

Debate in Council

20/04/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

20/04/2015

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

23/04/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

12/05/2015

Debate in Council

16/06/2015

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

19/06/2015

Debate in Council

24/06/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

24/06/2015

Debate in Parliament

24/06/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

25/06/2015

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

25/06/2015

Final act signed

25/06/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

COM(2015)0010

Summary

Summary

Summary

A8-0139/2015

Summary

Summary
PE604.810

T8-0236/2015

Summary

01/07/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0009(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1316/2013 2011/0302(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1291/2013 2011/0401(COD)
See also 2015/2011(BUD)
Amended by 2016/0276(COD)
See also 2016/2064(INI)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 173-p3; Rules of Procedure of the
European Parliament EP 055; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU
175-p3; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 182-p1; Treaty on the
Functioning of the EU TFEU 172

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CJ16/8/02939

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0010

13/01/2015

EC

PE551.765

10/03/2015

EP

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

N8-0032/2015
OJ C 121 15.04.2015, p. 0001

12/03/2015

CofA

Amendments tabled in committee

PE551.965

23/03/2015

EP

Committee draft report

Committee opinion

CULT

PE549.112

24/03/2015

EP

Committee opinion

IMCO

PE551.771

24/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE552.025

25/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE552.026

25/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE552.027

25/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE552.028

25/03/2015

EP

Committee opinion

REGI

PE549.361

31/03/2015

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE549.263

01/04/2015

EP

Committee opinion

CONT

PE551.899

14/04/2015

EP

Committee opinion

ENVI

PE549.395

15/04/2015

EP

Committee opinion

AGRI

PE549.453

15/04/2015

EP

Committee opinion

TRAN

PE551.752

15/04/2015

EP

CDR0943/2015

16/04/2015

CofR

Committee of the Regions: opinion

Summary

Summary

Committee opinion

PE551.793

17/04/2015

EP

A8-0139/2015

23/04/2015

EP

PE549.399

27/04/2015

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0236/2015

24/06/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)531

15/09/2015

COM(2016)0353

31/05/2016

EC

Summary

N8-0019/2017
OJ L 128 19.05.2017, p. 0001

02/05/2017

EU

Follow-up document

COM(2017)0326

16/06/2017

EC

Follow-up document

SWD(2017)0235

16/06/2017

EC

AFCO

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Committee opinion

ITRE

Follow-up document
For information

Summary

Summary

Final act
Regulation 2015/1017
OJ L 169 01.07.2015, p. 0001 Summary
Corrigendum to final act 32015R1017R(01)
OJ L 096 12.04.2016, p. 0050
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

Delegated acts
2015/2825(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2015/0009(COD) - 13/01/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish the European Fund for Strategic Investments aiming to mobilise funding for projects of at least EUR 315 billion to help
promote growth and employment.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: as a consequence of the economic and financial crisis, the level of investment in the EU has dropped by about 15% since its
peak in 2007. General uncertainty about the economic situation, high levels of public and private debt in parts of the EU economy and their
impact on credit risk limit the room for manoeuvre. However, significant levels of savings and high levels of financial liquidity exist.
The President of the European Commission in his Political Guidelines for the Commission 2014-2019 identified the Investment Plan for Europe
as a key policy challenge, as did the European Council on 18 December 2014. The Plan is based on three mutually reinforcing strands:
1) the mobilisation of at least EUR 315 billion in additional investment over the next three years, maximising the impact of public resources and
unlocking private investment;
2) targeted initiatives to make sure that this extra investment meets the needs of the real economy;
3) measures to provide greater regulatory predictability and to remove barriers to investment, making Europe more attractive and thereby
multiplying the impact of the Plan.
The European Council also invited the Union legislators to agree on the necessary legal text by June, so that the new investments could be
activated as early as mid-2015.
CONTENT: the Commission proposes comprises the following elements :
Creation of a European Fund for Strategic Investments: the Commission shall conclude an agreement with the European Investment Bank
(EIB) in order to support investments in the Union and to ensure increased access to financing for companies having up to 3000 employees,
with a particular focus on small and medium enterprises, through the supply of risk bearing capacity to the EIB.
Participation in the EFSI should be open to third parties, including Member States, national promotional banks or public agencies owned or
controlled by Member States, private sector entities and entities outside the Union subject to the consent of existing contributors.

Governance of the EFSI:
a Steering Board shall determine the strategic orientation, the strategic asset allocation and operating policies and procedures,
including the investment policy of projects that EFSI can support and the risk profile of the EFSI;
an Investment Committee, consisting of independent professionals, shall be responsible for examining potential operations and
approving the support for operations irrespective of the geographic location of the project concerned.
European Investment Advisory Hub (EIAH): building on existing EIB and Commission advisory services, the EIAH shall provide advisory
support for investment project identification, preparation and development and act as a single technical advisory hub (including on legal
issues) for project financing within the EU.
Granting of an EU Guarantee and Establishment of an EU Guarantee Fund: the proposal creates an initial EU guarantee of EUR 16 billion for
EIB financing and investment operations. Those operations need to support:
development of infrastructure;
investment in education, health, research, development, information and communications technology and innovation;
expansion of renewable energy and energy efficiency; or infrastructure projects in the environmental, natural resources, urban
development and social fields;
SMEs and mid cap companies including by providing working capital risk financing.
The support can be provided directly from the EIB or through the European Investment Fund.
A transparent European investment project pipeline: a stumbling block to greater investment levels within the EU is a lack of knowledge of
ongoing and future investment projects within the Union. The proposal also provides for the creation of a European investment project pipeline
as a means to ensure that information on potential projects is transparent and available to investors.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the EU guarantee provided for the EFSI amounts to EUR 16 billion. The proposal establishes a guarantee fund
which is intended to provide a liquidity cushion for the Union budget against losses incurred by the EFSI in pursuit of its objectives.
However, for an initial period, EUR 8bn will be provided only via payments from the budget. From 2016 onwards, these payments from the
budget will gradually build up the endowment of the Fund and should reach an accumulated sum of EUR 8bn by 2020 (EUR 1.35 billion in
2015, EUR 2.03 billion in 2016, EUR 2.641 billion in 2017 and EUR 1.979 billion in 2018).
However, two actions will create costs for the EIB for which the beneficiaries cannot be charged:
The European Investment Advisory Hub will primarily be funded from existing envelopes for EIB technical assistance under existing EU
programmes (Connecting Europe Facility, Horizon 2020). However, additional funding of up to a maximum of EUR 20 million per year (EUR 10
million in 2015) may be necessary and will be budgeted in consequence. Any potential costs for the project
pipeline will also be covered;
The EIB will incur administrative expenses for increasing its financing via the European Investment Fund to small and medium enterprises .
This will require the payment of fees in the order of an accumulated total of EUR 105 million, around EUR 48 million of which until 2020 .
Operational appropriations required by this proposal are to be fully financed within the Multiannual Financial Framework 2014-2020.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2015/0009(COD) - 17/02/2015 Debate in Council
The Council discussed a proposal for a regulation on a European fund for strategic investments (EFSI) which is expected to mobilise EUR 315
billion in private and public investment.
The EFSI is one of the core elements of the Commission's "investment plan for Europe", published in November 2014.
The presidency confirmed its intention for the Council to reach agreement in March 2015 in accordance with the scheduled timeframe which
would allow for new investments as early as mid-2015.
The Council broadly supported the approach outlined by the presidency on certain key issues:
·

review clause: the presidency proposes that a review take place after the first few years of operation, on the basis of an independent
assessment, to determine whether the EFSI should be made a permanent instrument;

·

redeployment of EU funds to finance the EFSI: the presidency proposes that no change be made to the Commission's proposal on
this point;

·

governance structure: delegations supported a lean governance structure ensuring an independent decision-making process.

The presidency confirmed its objective for the Council to reach agreement in March 2015. In the light of the remarks made by the Ministers, a
draft proposal will be presented.

2015/0009(COD) - 10/03/2015 Debate in Council
The Council agreed its negotiating stance on a proposed regulation on a European fund for strategic investments (EFSI).
This will allow the presidency, on behalf of the Council, to start negotiations with the European Parliament as soon as the EP has agreed its
own negotiating stance. The aim is to reach an overall agreement by June, so that new investments can begin as early as mid-2015.

The EFSI is one of the core elements of the Commission's "investment plan for Europe", published in November 2014.
Main elements of the Councils negotiating position:
Financing: the Council agreed that the fund would be built on 16 billion in guarantees from the EU budget and 5 billion from the EIB .
To facilitate the payment of potential guarantee calls, a guarantee fund would be established that would gradually reach 8 billion (i.e. 50% of
total EU guarantee obligations) by 2020.
EU funding would mostly come from the redeployment of grants from the Horizon 2020 programme (research and innovation) and the
Connecting Europe Facility (transport, energy and digital networks), as well as unused margins in the budget.
The EFSI would enhance risk-bearing capacity. By taking on part of the risk of new projects through a first-loss liability, the fund would enable
private investors to join under more favourable conditions. As a result, the EFSI is estimated to reach an overall multiplier effect of 1:15 in real
investment.
Third parties, including member states' national promotional banks, would be able to co-finance projects together with the EFSI, either on a
project-by-project basis or through investment platforms.
The purpose of the EFSI should be: (i) to help resolve the difficulties in financing and implementing productive and strategic investments in the
Union; and (ii) to ensure increased access to financing for companies as well as other entities having up to 3000 employees, with a particular
focus on small and medium-sized enterprises(SMEs) as defined in this Regulation ().
Projects supported: the EFSI Agreement shall provide that EFSI is to support projects which: (a) are consistent with Union policies, (b) are
economically and technically viable, (c) provide additionality, and (d) maximise where possible the mobilisation of private sector capital. The
EFSI should support strategic investments with high economic and societal value added contributing to achieving Union policy objectives and
promote long-term growth and competitiveness.
In addition, the EFSI Agreement shall provide that the EFSI is to support projects pursuing any of the following general objectives:
·

development of infrastructure;

·

research and development and innovation;

·

investment in education and training, health, information and communications technology;

·

development of the energy sector;

·

provision of financial support for companies as well as other entities having up to 3000 employees, with a particular focus on SMEs.

Governance structure: under the compromise agreed by the Council, the EFSI would have a two-tier governance structure:
A steering board would set the overall strategy, investment policy and risk profile of the fund. It would adopt investment guidelines for the use
of the EU guarantee to be implemented by the investment committee. To ensure an impartial steering board and avoid political influence over
the selection of projects, the board's members would come from the Commission and the EIB only. Their numbers would reflect the
institutions' size of contributions in the form of cash or guarantees. The steering board would take decisions by consensus.
An independent investment committee would select projects to receive EFSI support. Accountable to the steering board, it would consist of
eight independent experts and a managing director. It would take decisions by simple majority. Any project supported by the EFSI would
require the approval of the EIB.
Identification of new projects: the proposed regulation would also set up:
·

a "European investment advisory hub" to provide advisory support for the identification, preparation and development of projects
across the EU;

·

a "European investment project directory" to improve investors' knowledge of existing and future projects.

2015/0009(COD) - 12/03/2015 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
Opinion No 4/2015 of the Court of Auditors concerning the proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the
European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) and amending Regulations (EU) No 1291/2013 and (EU) No 1316/2013.
The Court of Auditors made the following comments on the Commissions proposal.
EFSI Governance: while the proposal indicates that EIB financing and investment operations covered by the EU guarantee would carry a
non-negligible financial risk and the probability of a call upon the guarantee is tangible, the EU budget majority participation in EFSI is not
reflected in its governance structure.
Legislative framework: to avoid legislative loopholes, the management of EU financial instruments should be ruled by standardised provisions,
thus promoting instruments with a multi-policy consistency.
Derogations to the Financial Regulation provisions should be duly justified. Furthermore, although the Financial Regulation represents the
legal framework for implementing the EU budget and the latter would provide the majority of EFSI funds, the specific provisions of the
Financial Regulation will not apply to the EU guarantee to the EIB and the guarantee fund.
While these provisions have been introduced to address a number of weaknesses concerning the use of financial instruments, no adequate
explanation is provided for such exclusion. It would have been useful to know whether the Financial Regulation is considered to be an obstacle
for attracting private investment. In this case, broader consequences should be drawn for other similar schemes.
Moreover, in accordance with Article 290 TFEU, essential elements of the legislative act should remain in the hands of the legislator and be
covered in the Regulation itself. If a delegation of power to the Commission is necessary, such a delegation should be limited to non-essential
elements. Its objectives, content, scope and duration should be explicitly defined in the Regulation, with a view to ensuring the necessary

transparency.
Accountability by the Commission: according to the Court, several reasons for concern exist in this respect: (1) the accountability set-up seems
focused, so far, on outputs rather than outcomes and impacts; (2) the Commissions proposal does not clearly state whether the Commission
intends to complement the EIB reporting with its own assessment; and to what extent the Commission will include the EFSI in the annual
evaluation report on the Union's finances based on the results achieved; (3) lastly, the main decision makers (the EFSI Steering Board and the
EIB governing bodies) do not seem to be subject to any public accountability procedure before the budgetary authorities. To recall, the EFSI
governance is built into a dual scheme. However, this choice should not undermine the Commission's full responsibility in implementing the EU
budget. A diffused accountability framework would also inevitably undermine the significance of the EU budget discharge procedure.
Audit mandate of the European Court of Auditors: the Commissions proposal would limit the Court's audit rights, in that its wording seems to
include only payments and recoveries under the EU guarantee and excludes the audit of the operations carried out under the EFSI, of the
instruments/entities/facilities which will be set up according to the draft EFSI Regulation, such as the European Investment Advisory Hub
(EIAH) and the EU Guarantee Fund, and of the management by the EIB and EIF of financing and investment operations carried out using the
EU guarantee.
In addition, the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union confers on the Court the mandate to audit the legality, regularity and sound
financial management of all revenue and expenditure of the European Union.
To fulfil its mandate, the Court enjoys unrestricted access to any document or information it considers necessary to carry out its task , including
on the premises of any natural or legal person in receipt of payments from the budget. The Court should define the extent of its audits. In this
context, the Commission should ensure that all parties concerned by activities undertaken in accordance with the EFSI Regulation and the
EFSI agreement are made aware of the right of the Court, to have access to all the information it needs to carry out its audits.
Financial liabilities for public finances: the proposal does not explicitly exclude contingent liabilities for the EU budget beyond the committed
funds and does not set a ceiling for EIB expenses.
So that the Commission is not liable beyond the EU guarantee (funded by the EU budget) there should be a general immunity and waivers
against legal claims by EFSI beneficiaries. In addition, EIB expenses incurred on behalf of EFSI should be unconditionally capped.
The Court stated that it is also of the utmost importance that due consideration is given to the overall impact of EFSI on public debt and deficits
and that this is assessed according to transparent and consistent criteria.
Mid-term review/revision of the Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF): the upcoming mid-term review/revision of MFF should provide the
opportunity for the Legislator to assess the progress achieved by EFSI and for taking any corrective measure needed. On this occasion the
Commission should also report on the progress of a first set of actions adopted in December 2014 to address the regulatory environment and
the removal of barriers to investment.
The Court also provided that:
a definition of risk bearing capacity should be given;
the legal form of EIAH and its operational structure should be specified;
the issue of EIB expenses and ESIF co-funding should be addressed;
provisions on the legal status and functioning of the EU guarantee fund should also be addressed;
evaluations should be provided by independent external partners;
transparency and publication of information in case of agreement between the Commission and the EIB should be improved.

2015/0009(COD) - 23/04/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the report by José Manuel FERNANDES (EPP,
PT) and Udo BULLMANN (S&D, DE) on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Fund for
Strategic Investments and amending Regulations (EU) No 1291/2013 and (EU) No 1316/2013.
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy and the Committee on Transport and Tourism, exercising their prerogatives as associated
committees under Article 54 of the Parliaments internal Rules of Procedure, were also consulted for an opinion on the report.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI): the EFSI should be part of a comprehensive approach to address uncertainty surrounding
public and private investments and to reduce the investment gaps in the Union. The strategy should boost competitiveness and economic
recovery and should be complementary to the objective of economic, social and territorial cohesion across the Union.
The EFSI, strengthened by Member State contributions, must be a complement to an overall strategy to improve Union competitiveness and
attract investment.
The Commission shall negotiate a draft agreement with the European Investment Bank (EIB) on the establishment of a European Fund for
Strategic Investments ('EFSI') in line with the requirements of this Regulation.
The purpose of the EFSI shall be to support investments in the Union and to ensure increased access to financing for companies having up to
3000 employees, giving priority to small and medium enterprises and small mid-cap companies, through the supply of risk bearing capacity to
the EIB.
The EFSI Agreement shall be open to accession by Member States and third parties, including national and regional promotional banks or
public agencies owned or controlled by Member States, regional authorities, dedicated investments platforms, and private sector entities.
Neither Member States nor third parties shall be entitled to be a member of the Steering Board.
The EFSI Agreement shall contain, inter alia:
detailed requirements for EIB financing and investment operations and EIB funding to the EIF which are eligible for the EU guarantee;

a scoreboard of the key performance indicators to be used for assessing the macroeconomic impact of EFSI investments;
the procedure for project selection;
provisions on the intellectual property of the funded projects.
Governance of the EFSI: The EFSI Agreement shall provide that the EFSI shall be governed by a Steering Board, which shall determine the
strategic orientation in line with the Europe 2020 objectives and giving particular regard to where the impact on growth and jobs is highest, in
order to ensure the additionality of the investments supported by the EFSI guarantee.
The Steering Committee: (i) shall specify the investment policy regarding eligible investment platforms; (ii) shall determine the EU guarantee
pricing policies; (iii) shall adopt investment guidelines for the use of the EU guarantee to be implemented by the Investment Committee.
The Investment Committee shall be composed of eight independent experts and the Managing Director. It shall be appointed by the Steering
Board for a renewable fixed term of three years and not exceeding six years in total. It shall have a pluridisciplinary composition encompassing
a broad range of expertise in various sectors and of geographic markets within the Union.
EU Guarantee: the Union shall provide an irrevocable and unconditional guarantee to the EIB for financing or investment operations covered
by this Regulation and the EFSI Agreement and carried out within the Union. The operations concerned shall be consistent with Union policies
and support any of the following general objectives:
development of new, existing or missing transport infrastructure and innovative technologies, in accordance with the connecting
Europe facility and TEN-T Guidelines;
development of smart and sustainable urban mobility projects;
development and modernisation of energy infrastructure in particular interconnections, smart grids at distribution level, energy storage
and the synchronisation of markets;
energy efficiency and energy savings, with a particular focus on reducing demand through demand-side management and the
refurbishment of buildings;
development of information and communication technologies, of digital and telecom infrastructures and of broadband networks across
the entire Union;
investment in: (i) innovation, research and development; (ii) education, training, entrepreneurial skills; (iii) innovative health solutions,
such as eHealth and new effective medicines, and in the social sector; (iv) cultural and creative industries; (v) investment in projects
and infrastructure in the field of environmental protection and management;
financial support, including the provision of working capital risk financing for SMEs and start-ups.
The EFSI should target projects with a higher risk-return profile than existing EIB and Union instruments. It shall support projects which are
viable from an economic perspective, according to a cost benefit analysis following European standards.
EU Guarantee Fund: the target amount shall initially be met by 2022 at the latest through the gradual payment of resources. The necessary
appropriations to meet the initial target amount shall be gradually authorised by the European Parliament and the Council in the framework of
the annual budgetary procedure.
In this context, the European Parliament and the Council shall explore ways to finance the EU Guarantee Fund using any unforeseen revenue
arising during the course of each financial year.
European Investment Advisory Hub: the EFSI Agreement shall provide for the creation of the EIAH within the EIB. The EIAH shall have as its
objective to build upon existing EIB and Commission advisory services in order to provide advisory support for investment project identification,
preparation and development, and to act as a single technical advisory hub for project financing within the Union.
The EIAH shall be partially financed by the Union up to a maximum amount of EUR 20 million per year during the period ending on 31
December 2020 for the additional services provided for by the EIAH over existing EIB technical assistance.
The Commission and the EIB shall create a transparent directory of current and potential future investment projects in the Union.
Accountability: at the request of the European Parliament, the Chairperson of the Steering Board and the Managing Director shall participate in
a hearing of the European Parliament on the performance of the EFSI. The President of the EIB shall participate in a hearing of the European
Parliament that concerns EIB financing and investment operations under this Regulation. An agreement shall be concluded between the
European Parliament and the EIB on the detailed arrangements for the exchange of information between the European Parliament and the
EIB.

2015/0009(COD) - 12/05/2015 Debate in Council
The Council discussed progress in negotiations with the European Parliament on a proposal for a regulation establishing a European fund for
strategic investments (EFSI).
The creation of the EFSI is part of the European Investment Plan, more commonly known as the Juncker Plan.
At the first trilogue the European Parliament and the Council Presidency shared their ambition to deal with this file as a matter of priority with
the aim of reaching a political agreement before June 2015 in order to allow the regulation to be adopted as soon as possible afterwards.
The discussions between the European Parliament and the Council have been organised in 8 building blocks, namely:
lifetime of the fund;
governance;
financing;
use of the guarantee;
European Investment Advisory Hub (EIAH) and Project directory/pipeline;
EFSI Agreement;
additionality, general objectives, eligibility criteria, investment guidelines;
reporting, accounting, accountability, transparency.

The first 6 of these topics (lifetime, governance, financing, use of the guarantee, EIAH & project pipeline, and EFSI Agreement) were
addressed at the second trilogue on 29 April 2015. Particular progress was made with respect to the use of the guarantee and EIAH and the
project pipeline.
On 7 May, the third trilogue explored further the issue of financing and covered additionality, general objectives, eligibility criteria, investment
guidelines as well as some of the outstanding items from the second trilogue. Discussion on reporting, accounting, accountability and
transparency was postponed due to lack of time.
The last three trilogues are scheduled for 13, 18 and 27 May.
COREPER is invited to take note of the state of play.

2015/0009(COD) - 24/06/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 464 votes to 131, with 19 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the European Fund for Strategic Investments and amending Regulations (EU) No 1291/2013 and
(EU) No 1316/2013.
The European Parliament adopted its position at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amending the Commission proposal
as follows:
Subject matter: this Regulation establishes a European fund for strategic investments (EFSI), an EU guarantee and an EU guarantee fund. In
addition, this Regulation establishes a European investment advisory hub (EIAH) and a European investment project portal (EIPP).
The EFSI should be part of a comprehensive strategy designed to address uncertainty surrounding public and private investments and to
reduce the investment gaps in the Union.
It is expected that when the EU guarantee is combined with EUR 5 billion to be provided by the EIB, the EFSI support should generate EUR
60.8 billion of additional investment by the EIB and the EIF. The amount of EUR 60.8 billion supported by the EFSI is expected to further
generate a total of EUR 315 billion.
The Commission and the EIB should conclude an agreement that specifies the conditions laid down in this Regulation for their management of
the EFSI.
Purpose: the Commission shall conclude an agreement with the EIB on the management of the EFSI and on the granting of the EU guarantee,
in accordance with the requirements of this Regulation.
The purpose of the EFSI shall be to support investments in the Union and to ensure increased access to financing for companies having up to
3000 employees, giving priority to small and medium enterprises and small mid-cap companies, through the supply of risk bearing capacity to
the EIB.
Eligibility criteria for the use of the EU guarantee: the EFSI Agreement shall provide that the EFSI is to support projects which:
are economically viable according to a cost-benefit analysis following Union standards;
are consistent with Union policies, including the objective of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth, quality job creation, and
economic, social and territorial cohesion;
provide additionality by targeting projects that have a higher risk profile than projects supported by EIB and the Union;
maximise where possible the mobilisation of private sector capital;
are technically viable.
Governance of the EFSI: the governance structure should be composed of a steering board, a managing director and an investment
committee:
the Steering Board - comprising four members, three appointed by the Commission and one by the EIB, should in particular set the
strategic orientations of the EFSI and the rules necessary for its functioning. The Steering Board shall elect a Chairperson from among
its members for a fixed term of three years, renewable once;
the Managing Director should be responsible for the daily management of the EFSI and should carry out the preparatory work of the
meetings of the Investment Committee. Following an open and transparent selection process in line with EIB procedures, the Steering
Board shall select a candidate for each of the positions of Managing Director and Deputy Managing Director. The candidates should
be approved by the European Parliament;
the investment committee: it should take decisions on the use of the EU guarantee for potential projects and for the operations with
national promotional banks or institutions or investment platforms in a transparent and independent manner. It should be composed of
eight independent experts, representing a broad range of expertise as outlined in this Regulation, and the Managing Director.
Decisions approving the use of the EU guarantee shall be public and accessible.
Strategic and productive investments: the purpose of the EFSI should be to help resolve the difficulties in financing and implementing strategic,
transformative and productive investments with high economic, environmental and societal added value.
The EFSI should therefore support strategic investments such as projects of common interest which aim to:
complete the internal market in the transport, telecommunications and energy infrastructure sectors, including transport and energy
interconnections, and digital infrastructure;
expand renewable energy and energy and resource efficiency;
develop and modernise the energy sector in accordance with the Energy Union priorities, including security of energy supply;
contribute to the sustainable development of those sectors and exploit potential synergies between them.
Those investments should also include:
projects of common interest in the urban and rural development and social fields and in the environmental and natural resources

fields;
projects which strengthen the Union's scientific and technological base and foster benefits for society as well as better exploitation of
the economic and industrial potential of policies of innovation,
research and technological development, including research infrastructure, and pilot and demonstration facilities;
projects relating to human capital, culture and health;
environmentally sound projects and benefit industries and technologies with high growth potential and contribute to the transformation
into a green, sustainable and resource-efficient economy.
Finance the contribution from the general budget of the Union: in order to partly finance the contribution from the general budget of the Union,
the available envelopes of Horizon 2020 and of the Connecting Europe Facility, provided for in Regulation (EU) No 1316/2013, should be
reduced by 2.2 billion and 2.8 billion respectively.
The financial envelope for the implementation of Horizon 2020 is set at EUR 74 828,3 million in current prices, of which a maximum of EUR 72
445,3 million shall be allocated to activities under Title XIX TFEU;
The financial envelope for the implementation of the CEF for the period 2014 to 2020 is set at EUR 30 442 259 000 in current prices.
European Investment Advisory Hub: a European investment advisory hub (EIAH) should be created. It should provide strengthened support for
project development and preparation across the Union, by building on the expertise of the Commission, the EIB, national promotional banks or
institutions and the managing authorities of the European Structural and Investment Funds. A single point of entry for questions relating to
technical assistance for investments within the Union should be established.
European Investment Project Portal: the Commission, with the support of the EIB, shall create a transparent European investment project
portal (EIPP) gathering current and future investment projects in the Union. It shall constitute a publicly accessible and user-friendly project
database, providing relevant information for each project.
Accountability: the Commission shall, by 31 May of each year, submit to the European Parliament, to the Council and to the Court of Auditors
an annual report on the management of the guarantee fund in the previous calendar year.
At the request of the European Parliament or of the Council, the Chairperson of the Steering Board and the Managing Director shall report on
the performance of the EFSI to the requesting institution, including by participating in a hearing before the European Parliament.
At the request of the European Parliament, the President of the EIB shall participate in a hearing of the European Parliament that concerns
EIB financing and investment operations covered by this Regulation.

2015/0009(COD) - 25/06/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to adopt a Regulation on the European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI), which aims to stimulate the economy by supporting
investment in the Union.
LEGISLATIVE ACT : Regulation (EU) 2015/1017 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Fund for Strategic
Investments, the European Investment Advisory Hub and the European Investment Project Portal and amending Regulations (EU) No
1291/2013 and (EU) No 1316/2013 the European Fund for Strategic Investments.
CONTENT: the Regulation establishes a European fund for strategic investments (EFSI), an EU guarantee and an EU guarantee fund. In
addition, it establishes a European investment advisory hub (EIAH) and a European investment project portal (EIPP).
Purpose: the EFSI will be established within the EIB by an agreement between the EIB and the Commission. It will operate for an initial
investment period of four years (until July 2019). The EFSI is part of a comprehensive strategy designed to address uncertainty surrounding
public and private investments and to reduce the investment gaps in the Union.
Through the supply of risk-bearing capacity to the EIB, the EFSIs purpose shall be to support, in the Union: (a) investments; (b) increased
access to financing for entities having up to 3 000 employees, with a particular focus on SMEs and small mid-cap companies.
EU guarantee: in order to ensure the EFSI to support investment, the Union will provide a EU guarantee that will not exceed EUR 16 billion.
According to the text, when the EU guarantee is combined with EUR 5 billion to be provided by the EIB, the EFSI support should generate
EUR 60. 80 billion of additional investment by the EIB and the EIF. This amount of EUR 60. 80 supported by the EFSI is expected to further
generate a total of EUR 315 billion in investment in the Union within three years of the date of entry into force of this Regulation.
Guarantee Fund: in order to cover the risks relating to the EU guarantee to the EIB, a guarantee fund is established. This will be constituted by
a gradual payment from the general budget of the Union. The guarantee fund is intended to provide a liquidity cushion for the general budget
of the Union against losses incurred by the EFSI in pursuit of its objectives. Experience on the nature of investments to be supported by the
EFSI indicates that the level of resources in the guarantee fund should represent a ratio of 50 % of the total EU guarantee obligations.
Eligibility criteria for the use of the EU guarantee: the EFSI is to support projects which:
are economically viable according to a cost-benefit analysis following Union standards;
are consistent with Union policies, including the objective of smart, sustainable and inclusive growth, quality job creation, and
economic, social and territorial cohesion;
provide additionality, and typically target projects with a higher risk profile than projects supported by EIB normal operations.
maximise where possible the mobilisation of private sector capital; and
are technically viable.
Governance of the EFSI: the governance structure of the EFSI is comprised of the Steering Board, the Investment Committee and the
Managing Director:
-

the Steering Board: comprising four members: three appointed by the Commission and one by the EIB, this will set the strategic
orientations of the EFSI, its risk profile and the rules necessary for its functioning. It is to take decisions by consensus and regularly
consult stakeholders. The Steering Board elects a Chairperson from among its members for a fixed term of three years, renewable

once.
-

Managing Director (assisted by a Deputy Managing Director) will be responsible for the daily management of the EFSI and should
carry out the preparatory work of the meetings of the Investment Committee. The Steering Board will select a candidate for each of
the positions of Managing Director and Deputy Managing Director. The European Parliament must approve candidates.

-

the Investment Committee will take decisions on the use of the EU guarantee for potential projects and for the operations with
national promotional banks or institutions or investment platforms. It will be composed of eight independent experts, representing a
broad range of expertise, and the Managing Director. Decisions of the Investment Committee shall be taken by simple majority.
Decisions approving the use of the EU guarantee shall be public and accessible.

Productive and strategic investments: the purpose of the EFSI should be to help resolve the difficulties in financing and implementing strategic,
transformative and productive investments with high economic, environmental and societal added value. The EFSI will therefore support
strategic investments such as, but not limited to, projects of common interest which aim to:
complete the internal market in the transport, telecommunications and energy infrastructure sectors, including transport and energy
interconnections, and digital infrastructure;
expand renewable energy and energy and resource efficiency;
develop and modernise the energy sector in accordance with the Energy Union priorities, including security of energy supply,
contribute to the sustainable development of those sectors and exploit potential synergies between them.
The investments will also include:
projects of common interest in the urban and rural development and social fields and in the environmental and natural resources
fields;
projects which strengthen the Union's scientific and technological base and foster benefits for society as well as better exploitation of
the economic and industrial potential of policies of innovation, research and technological development, including research
infrastructure, and pilot and demonstration facilities;
projects relating to human capital, culture and health;
environmentally sound projects that benefit industries and technologies with high growth potential and contribute to the transformation
into a green, sustainable and resource-efficient economy.
Financing the Guarantee Funds from the EU budget: EU funding will come from redeploying grants from the Connecting Europe facility
(transport, energy and digital networks) and the Horizon 2020 programme (research and innovation), as well as unused margins in the EU's
annual budget.
Redeployment will amount to EUR 5 billion, of which EUR 2.8 billion from the Connection Europe Facility and EUR 2.2 billion from Horizon
2020. Funding from unused margins will amount to EUR 3 billion over the 2016-20 period.
European investment advisory hub (EIAH): this will have as its objective to build upon existing EIB and Commission advisory services in order
to provide advisory support for the identification, preparation and development of investment projects and to act as a single technical advisory
hub for project financing within the Union.
European Investment Project Portal: the Commission, with the support of the EIB, shall create a transparent European investment project
portal (EIPP) gathering current and future investment projects in the Union. It will constitute a publicly accessible and user-friendly project
database, providing relevant information for each project.
Reporting and accountability: by 31 May of each year, the Commission will submit to the European Parliament, to the Council and to the Court
of Auditors an annual report on the management of the guarantee fund in the previous calendar year, including an assessment of the
adequacy of the target amount and the level of the guarantee fund and of the need for its replenishment.
At the request of the European Parliament or of the Council, the Chairperson of the Steering Board and the Managing Director will report on
the performance of the EFSI to the requesting institution, including by participating in a hearing before the European Parliament.
Evaluation and Review: by 5 July 2018, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and the Council a report containing an
independent evaluation of the application of the Regulation. In the event that the report concludes that the EFSI is achieving its objectives, the
Commission shall where appropriate submit a legislative proposal to amend the Regulation with a view to setting the new investment period.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 4.7.2015.
DELEGATED ACT: the Commission may adopt delegated acts in order to (i) facilitate a prompt and flexible adaptation of non-essential
elements of the investment guidelines; (ii) the establishment of a scoreboard of indicators to be used by the Investment Committee to ensure
an independent and transparent assessment of the potential and actual use of the EU guarantee.
The power to adopt such acts is conferred on the Commission for a period of three years from 4 July 2015. The European Parliament or the
Council may raise objections with regard to a delegated act within one month from the date of notification (this may be extended by one
month.) The delegated act that first establishes the scoreboard will enter into force only if no objection has been expressed within a period of
three weeks of notification. If Parliament or council raise objections, the delegated act will not enter into force.

2015/0009(COD) - 31/05/2016 Follow-up document
In accordance with Regulation (EU) 2015/1017 of the European Parliament and of the Council, the Commission presents its annual report on
the management of the Guarantee Fund of the European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) in 2015.
The report contains the presentation of the financial position of the EFSIGF at the end of the previous calendar year, the financial flows during
the previous calendar year as well as the significant transactions and any relevant information on the financial accounts. It also includes
information about the financial management, the performance and the risk of the EFSIGF at the end of the previous calendar year.
To recall, the agreement on the management of the EFSI and on the granting of the EU guarantee was signed by the European Commission

and the European Investment Bank (the EIB) on 22 July 2015.
The Guarantee Fund constitutes a liquidity cushion from which the EIB shall be paid in the event of a call on the EU guarantee. It is
provisioned progressively taking into account the increase in exposure borne by the EU Guarantee. The resources of the Fund are directly
managed by the Commission and invested in accordance with the principle of sound financial management following appropriate prudential
rules.
The main findings of the report are as follows:
Financial accounts: there were no funds in the EFSIGF as at 31 December 2015. Consequently, the 2015 consolidated financial statements of
the European Union do not contain the EFSIGF.
A receivable of EUR 1,399,423 corresponding to the net EU revenue stemming from the 2015 EFSI guaranteed operations was recorded in
the 2015 financial statements of the EU and credited to the EFSI Account in January 2016.
The guarantee exposure of the EU in relation to disbursed outstanding EFSI operations amounted to EUR 201,899,614 as at 31 December
2015, out of the overall maximum amount of EUR 16,000,000,000 guaranteed by the EU . The amount of EUR 201,899,614 is recorded as a
contingent liability in the notes to the 2015 financial statements of the EU.
Significant transactions: a budgetary appropriation of EUR 1.35 billion was committed in 2015 relating to the provisioning of the EFSIGF in
2016 and 2017.
Management of the Guarantee Fund: there were no funds in the EFSIGF at any time in 2015. The first report on the financial management,
performance and risk of the assets of the EFSIGF will therefore be presented in 2017 for the year 2016.
Assessment of the level of the Fund: in 2015, total signatures under EFSI amounted to EUR 3 billion covering 19 Member States.
·

As of end 2015, 10 operations benefitting from the EFSI guarantee were signed by the EIB, for a total amount of EUR 1155 million,
of which EUR 202 million was disbursed. Should there be any losses due to these operations, these will be covered by the EU
Guarantee in accordance with the terms set out in the EFSI Agreement.

·

EIF operations signed in 2015 under EFSI guarantee coverage amount to around EUR 398 million; should there be any losses due
to these operations, those would be covered primarily by the contributions of the InnovFin SME Guarantee Facility and the COSME
Loan Guarantee Facility.

Target amount: given the relatively limited level of signatures and disbursements until the end of 2015, there are not sufficient elements
allowing an assessment of the adequacy of the target amount based on actual operations . The first report on the assessment of the adequacy
of the target amount and the level of the EFSI Guarantee Fund will therefore be presented by 31 May 2017 for the year 2016.
It is presently envisaged in the EU budget that around EUR 500 million will be paid into the EFSIGF during the course of 2016.

2015/0009(COD) - 16/06/2017 Follow-up document
In accordance with Regulation (EU) 2015/1017 of the European Parliament and of the Council, the Commission presents its annual report on
the management of the Guarantee Fund of the European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI) in 2016.
The report contains the presentation of the financial position of the EFSI GF at the end of the previous calendar year, the financial flows during
the previous calendar year as well as the significant transactions and any relevant information on the financial accounts. It also includes
information about the financial management, the performance and the risks to the EFSI Guarantee Fund.
To recall, the EU Guarantee covers (up to EUR 16 billion) financing and investment operations signed by the EIB under the Infrastructure and
Innovation Window and by the EIF under the SME Window. Part of the overall EFSI operations is covered by the EU Guarantee while a part is
carried out at the own risk of the EIB Group (at least EUR 5 billion).
The main observations in the report are as follows:
Financial accounts:
·

the net assets of the Guarantee Fund stood at EUR 1,020 million as at 31 December 2016. The assets were composed of the
investment portfolio, classified as: (i) assets available-for-sale (EUR 948 million), (ii) short term bank deposits (EUR 45 million) and
(iii) cash and cash equivalents (EUR 26 million). The Guarantee Fund ended the year with an economic result of EUR 0.9 million;

·

as at 31 December 2016, the guarantee exposure of the EU in relation to disbursed outstanding EFSI operations by the EIB Group
amounted to EUR 4,392 million, out of the legal commitment of EUR 16 billion guaranteed by the EU. EFSI operations managed by
the EIB under the Infrastructure and Innovation Window generated revenue of EUR 16.1 million for the EU. For the EFSI operations
managed by the EIF under the SME Window, the EU incurred in 2016 an amount of EUR 0.945 million concerning EIF administrative
fees. The amount is payable to the EIF on 30 June 2017;

·

in 2016, a budgetary appropriation of EUR 2,100 million was committed relating to the provisioning of the EFSI Guarantee Fund A
total amount of approximately EUR 1,018 million was effectively paid into the Guarantee Fund during the year.

Financial management: investment and risk management strategies were adopted reflecting the investment objectives and outlook for market
conditions. The investment approach aimed at enhanced diversification across various fixed income asset classes.
An amount of EUR 500 million in payment appropriations was initially made available to the Fund for 2016. During December 2016, an
additional EUR 518 million was paid into the Fund. It is presently provided in the EU budget that around EUR 2.3 billion will be paid into the
Guarantee Fund during the course of 2017 bringing its total assets to an expected level of EUR 3.3 billion.
At the end of December 2016, the portfolio was made up predominantly of securities issued by sovereigns (42% of Guarantee Fund market
value) as well as by sub-sovereigns, supranationals and agencies (23%).

Target amount: as of end-2016, total cumulated signatures under EFSI amounted to EUR 21.3 billion covering 28 Member States , which
represents a significant increase compared to 2015, at the end of which total signatures amounted to EUR 1.2 billion.
The overall outstanding disbursed exposure covered by the EU Guarantee amounted to nearly EUR 4.4 billion (EUR 4.02 billion under the
Infrastructure and Innovation Window and EUR 369.7 under the SME Window) up from EUR 0.2 billion in 2015.
The target amount of the EFSI GF is set at 50% of the total EU guarantee obligations, which currently stand at EUR 16 billion.
The risk assessment of the different products supported by the EU Guarantee shows that overall the Union budget would be adequately
shielded from potential calls under the EU Guarantee with an adjusted target rate for provisioning the Guarantee Fund of 35% (as proposed by
the Commission in the EFSI 2.0 proposal). The Court of Auditors has confirmed this assessment.

