Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2234(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU/Philippines Framework Agreement on Partnership and Cooperation
See also 2013/0441(NLE)
Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.40.08 Relations with Asian countries
Geographical area
Philippines

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
22/06/2015

BROK Elmar
Shadow rapporteur

BETTINI Goffredo Maria

TANNOCK Charles

KYUCHYUK Ilhan

HADJIGEORGIOU
Takis

BÜTIKOFER Reinhard

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Trade

MALMSTRÖM Cecilia

Key events
19/04/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

21/04/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

07/06/2016

Debate in Parliament

08/06/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

08/06/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

08/06/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2234(INI)

A8-0143/2016

Summary

T8-0263/2016

Summary

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure
See also 2013/0441(NLE)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 099-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/04406

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE567.752

06/10/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE577.014

29/02/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0143/2016

21/04/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0263/2016

08/06/2016

EP

Summary

2015/2234(INI) - 21/04/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Elmar BROK (EPP, DE) containing a motion for a non-legislative
resolution on the draft Council decision on the conclusion, on behalf of the Union, of the Framework Agreement on Partnership and
Cooperation between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of the Philippines, of the other part.
Members recalled that in terms of international and national human rights legislation, the Philippines are a role model for other countries in the
region, having ratified the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in 2011. They also recalled that the EU is the Philippines' fourth
largest trading partner and fourth largest export market, accounting for 11.56 % of all Philippine exports.
Whilst welcoming the conclusion of the Framework Agreement on Partnership and Cooperation with the Philippines, Members called on the
EU to continue providing financial support and capacity-building assistance to the Philippines for poverty alleviation and the implementation of
policies to tackle climate change.
At the same time, they called on the Philippines to foster further progress in the elimination of corruption and the promotion of human rights.
Fight against terrorism: Members commended the Philippines for having been part of the international counterterrorism coalition since 200, but
expressed concern over the continued reports of severe human rights violations by the Philippine military in the conduct of counter-insurgency
measures. They pointed out that the Abu Sayyaf group is accused of carrying out the worst acts of terrorism committed in the Philippines,
including deadly bombings such as the attack on a ferry in Manila in 2004 in which more than 100 people were killed.
They also stressed that there are growing concerns that ISIS will win over affiliated groups in South-East Asia. At the same time, they
condemned the massacre of 24 December 2015 of Christian farmers by separatist rebels in Mindanao.
Human trafficking: the committee called on the EU and its Member States to support the government, and notably the Inter-Agency Council
against Trafficking (IACAT), in the efforts being made to enhance assistance and support for victims, to put into place efficient law enforcement
measures, and improve the legal avenues of work labour migration. The EU and its Member States were asked to engage with the Philippines
and provide support for the government's capacity- building.
South China Sea: Members noted that the Philippines are strategically located in the proximity of major international shipping and air traffic
routes in the South China Sea. They recalled their serious concerns over the tension in the South China Sea . Members were particularly
concerned at the massive scale of China?s current activities in the area, including building military facilities, ports, and at least one airstrip.
They urged all parties in the disputed area to refrain from unilateral and provocative actions and to resolve the disputes peacefully. Members
supported all steps that will enable the South China Sea to become a ?sea of peace and cooperation ?and all endeavours to ensure that the
parties agree on a code of conduct for the peaceful exploitation of the maritime areas in question.
GSP+: the committee called on the Philippines, as one of the countries having been granted GSP+ status by the EU, to ensure effective
implementation of all the core international conventions relating to human and labour rights, the environment and good governance.
Recognising that the Philippines have strengthened their human rights legislation, Members recalled that under the GSP+ beneficiaries will
have to prove that they are implementing their obligations concerning human rights, labour, environmental and governance standards. They
took note of the GSP+ country assessment of the Philippines, particularly as regards the ratification of all seven UN human rights conventions
relevant to the EU's GSP+. However, they highlighted the work that still needs to be done for implementation.
Free Trade Agreement: Members welcomed the agreement of 22 December 2015 to open negotiations on a Free Trade Agreement with the
Philippines, and recalled, at the same time, that the Commission and the Philippine authorities should ensure high standards on human rights,
labour and the environment. Such an FTA should serve as a building block towards a region-to-region EU-ASEAN agreement on trade and
investment.
Filipino seamen: Members took note that 800 000 Filipinos are living in the EU and that Filipino seamen working on EU-registered ships send
remittances to the Philippines amounting to EUR 3 billion per annum. They recalled that the majority of the crew on many non-Community
flagged vessels calling at European ports are Filipino and noted as well the harsh and inhuman working conditions in which many of these
seafarers live. They called on Member States not to allow these vessels to be received in European ports when the working conditions on

board contravene the labour rights and principles enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. Lastly, they wanted
non-Community flagged vessels to guarantee their crews? working conditions in accordance with international legislation and the rules laid
down by the ILO and the International Maritime Organisation.

2015/2234(INI) - 08/06/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 556 votes to 62 with 59 abstentions, a non legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion, on behalf of the Union, of the Framework Agreement on Partnership and Cooperation between the European Union and its
Member States, of the one part, and the Republic of the Philippines, of the other part.
Parliament recalled that in terms of national human rights legislation, the Philippines are a role model for other countries in the region, having
ratified the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court in 2011. It also recalled that the EU is the Philippines' fourth largest trading partner
and fourth largest export market, accounting for 11.56 % of all Philippine exports.
Whilst welcoming the conclusion of the Framework Agreement on Partnership and Cooperation with the Philippines, Parliament called on the
EU to continue providing financial support and capacity-building assistance to the Philippines for poverty alleviation and the implementation of
policies to tackle climate change.
At the same time, it called on the Philippines to foster further progress in the elimination of corruption and the promotion of human rights.
Fight against terrorism: Parliament commended the Philippines for having been part of the international counterterrorism coalition since 2001,
but expressed concern over the continued reports of severe human rights violations by the Philippine military in the conduct of
counter-insurgency measures. It pointed out that the Abu Sayyaf group is accused of carrying out the worst acts of terrorism committed in the
Philippines, including deadly bombings such as the attack on a ferry in Manila in 2004 in which more than 100 people were killed. It also
stressed that there are growing concerns that ISIS will win over affiliated groups in South-East Asia. At the same time, it condemned the
massacre of 24 December 2015 of Christian farmers by separatist rebels in Mindanao.
Parliament appreciated the commitments made by the Philippine Government to achieve a peace process for Mindanao but deeply regretted
the fact that the Mindanao Peace Agreement was not adopted by the Philippine Congress. It also welcomed the initiative by the Philippine
NGO PeaceTech of putting Christian and Muslim schoolchildren in touch with each other via Skype in an effort to foster contact between the
two communities. Members called for the EU and its Member States to engage with the Philippines in order to exchange intelligence,
cooperate and provide support for the governments capacity- building in the international fight against terrorism and extremism in relation to
fundamental rights and the rule of law.
Human trafficking: Parliament called on the EU and its Member States to support the government, and notably the Inter-Agency Council
against Trafficking (IACAT), in the efforts being made to enhance assistance and support for victims, to put into place efficient law enforcement
measures, and improve the legal avenues of work labour migration. The EU and its Member States were asked to engage with the Philippines
and provide support for the government's capacity- building.
South China Sea: Parliament noted that the Philippines are strategically located in the proximity of major international shipping and air traffic
routes in the South China Sea. They recalled their serious concerns over the tension in the South China Sea . Members were particularly
concerned at the massive scale of Chinas current activities in the area, including building military facilities, ports, and at least one airstrip. They
urged all parties in the disputed area to refrain from unilateral and provocative actions and to resolve the disputes peacefully. Members
supported all steps that will enable the South China Sea to become a sea of peace and cooperation and all endeavours to ensure that the
parties agree on a code of conduct for the peaceful exploitation of the maritime areas in question.
GSP+: Parliament called on the Philippines, as one of the countries having been granted GSP+ status by the EU, to ensure effective
implementation of all the core international conventions relating to human and labour rights, the environment and good governance.
Recognising that the Philippines have strengthened their human rights legislation, Members recalled that under the GSP+ beneficiaries will
have to prove that they are implementing their obligations concerning human rights, labour, environmental and governance standards.
Parliament took note of the GSP+ country assessment of the Philippines, particularly as regards the ratification of all seven UN human rights
conventions relevant to the EU's GSP+. However, it highlighted the work that still needs to be done for implementation.
Free Trade Agreement: Parliament welcomed the agreement of 22 December 2015 to open negotiations on a Free Trade Agreement with the
Philippines, and recalled, at the same time, that the Commission and the Philippine authorities should ensure high standards on human rights,
labour and the environment. Such an FTA should serve as a building block towards a region-to-region EU-ASEAN agreement on trade and
investment. It encouraged the Philippines to continue improving the investment climate, including the FDI environment, by increasing
transparency and good governance and implementing the UN guiding principles on business and human rights.
Filipino seamen: Parliament took note that 800 000 Filipinos are living in the EU and that Filipino seamen working on EU-registered ships send
remittances to the Philippines amounting to EUR 3 billion per annum. It recalled that the majority of the crew on many non-Community flagged
vessels calling at European ports are Filipino and noted as well the harsh and inhuman working conditions in which many of these seafarers
live. It called on Member States not to allow these vessels to be received in European ports when the working conditions on board contravene
the labour rights and principles enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. It wanted non-Community flagged
vessels to guarantee their crews working conditions in accordance with international legislation and the rules laid down by the ILO and the
International Maritime Organisation.
Follow-up and transparency: lastly, Parliament called for regular exchanges between the European External Action Service (EEAS) and
Parliament, to allow Parliament to follow up on the implementation of the Framework Agreement and the achievement of its objectives.

