Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2231(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Activities of the European Ombudsman in 2014

Subject
1.20.04 European Ombudsman

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
PETI

Rapporteur

Petitions

Appointed
26/02/2015

CABEZÓN RUIZ
Soledad
Shadow rapporteur

WAŁĘSA Jarosław

MARIAS Notis

WIKSTRÖM Cecilia

VALLINA Ángela

AUKEN Margrete

EVI Eleonora

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Secretariat-General

TIMMERMANS Frans

Key events
10/09/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

28/01/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/02/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

25/02/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

25/02/2016

Debate in Parliament

25/02/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

25/02/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information

A8-0020/2016

Summary

T8-0062/2016

Summary

Procedure reference

2015/2231(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 220-p2-a2; Rules of
Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

PETI/8/04391

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE567.774

07/10/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE567.775

10/11/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0020/2016

02/02/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0062/2016

25/02/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)269

22/06/2016

2015/2231(INI) - 02/02/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Petitions adopted the report by Soledad CABEZÓN RUIZ (S&D, ES) on the annual report on the activities of the European
Ombudsman in 2014.
It recalled that Emily OReilly was re-elected European Ombudsman by Parliament at its plenary session in Strasbourg on 16 December 2014
and that the main priority of the European Ombudsman is to ensure that citizens' rights are fully respected and the right to good administration
reflects the highest standards as expected of the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union.
Members approved the annual report for 2014 presented by the European Ombudsman and fully supported the fact that the Ombudsman is
making greater use of the power to open strategic investigations on her own initiative. Members also welcomed the adoption of the new
five-year strategy Towards 2019, which introduces a more strategic approach to tackling systemic issues and promoting good administration.
Investigations: Members welcomed the inquiries initiated by the Ombudsman in 2014, in which the following key topics may be identified:
transparency within the EU institutions,
transparency in lobbying and clinical trials,
fundamental rights,
ethical issues,
participation of citizens in EU decision-making,
EU-funded projects and programmes and EU competition policy.
The report recalled that, over the years, 20-30 % of complaints have concerned transparency and that the most common transparency issues
raised are the institutions refusal to grant access to documents and/or information. Members considered that openness and access to
documents are an essential part of the system of institutional checks and balances. They support any initiative by the Commission and the
other EU institutions to ensure fair, swift and simple access for all to EU documentation. There is still much room for improvement in the field of
transparency on the part of the Commission, particularly concerning the availability, in terms of quantity and quality, of the information provided
to individual citizens and civil society organisations upon their request to access to documents. They invited the Ombudsman to conduct an
investigation on these matters.
Members also welcomed the Ombudsmans investigations into "revolving door" cases concerning high-ranking EU officials called on it to
prevent conflicts of interest at any level of the EU's institutions.
Concerning the lack of transparency in the TTIP negotiations, Members welcomed the progress in openness in the ongoing TTIP negotiations
following the Ombudsmans inquiries into transparency in these talks. They noted that the Council has since published the directives the EU is
using to negotiate the TTIP.
Lobbying: Members wondered whether the long delays in the decision-making of some legislative initiatives in the Council (such as the
horizontal anti-discrimination directive) do not fall within the category of maladministration, since they create a lot of frustration on the
concerned citizens towards the EU institutions. They urged the Council, and particularly the blocking minorities therein, to take the steps
necessary to address these unbearable situations. They welcomed the Ombudsman's increased and necessary focus on transparency in
lobbying activities, and her work towards a mandatory Transparency Register, to ensure that citizens may know who is trying to influence EU
decision makers. In this regard, Members welcomed her inquiry into the composition and transparency of expert groups at the Commission.
The report noted that more than 7000 institutions have voluntarily registered in the Transparency Register, reflecting the variety of public and
private stakeholders that the European institutions are working with. They welcomed that the Register should include information on the
human and financial resources available to lobby organisations, in greater compliance with existing rules and provisions on openness and

good governance in the EU institutions. They continued to urge the Commission to deliver full transparency on the members and meetings of
all expert groups, technology platforms and agencies.
Clinical trials: Members noted that the Ombudsman in 2014 played a key role in the area of clinical trials data transparency by helping to
shape the proactive transparency policy of the European Medicines Agency (EMA). They noted that the EMA decided to publish proactively its
clinical study reports. They welcomed the new EU Clinical Trials Regulation, which requires that information on clinical trials be made
available.
At the same time, Members called on the Member States to be more diligent in their mandatory collaboration with the Ombudsman.
Malfunctioning of the institutions: Members highlighted various malfunctions brought to light by the Ombudsman investigations: (i) the
protection of fundamental rights in all cases of implementation of the EU's cohesion policy; (ii) lack of transparency as regards Horizon 2020
and its budget of nearly EUR 80 000 million; (iii) Frontex to ensure respect for the welfare of returnees during return flights.
In addition, Members welcomed the Ombudsman's investigation into whether the EU institutions are living up to their obligation of introducing
internal whistleblowing rules.
Members are concerned about at the persisting 20 % non-compliance rate. They are aware that the Ombudsmans suggestions are not legally
binding and urged the institutions, bodies and agencies to react promptly, effectively and responsibly to the Ombudsman's critical remarks and
draft recommendations.
European Network of Ombudsmen: Members encouraged the Ombudsman to continue to promote the European Network of Ombudsmen with
a view to informing EU citizens in a better way about the allocation of responsibilities between the European Ombudsman, national and
regional ombudsmen and Parliaments Committee on Petitions. They called on its Committee on Petitions to be a more active member of the
Network and to reinforce its collaboration with the Network on common policies which fall within the field of activities of the European Union.
They agreed with the Ombudsman that the EU institutions should ensure that their services are accessible to persons with disabilities and that
such persons have access to information and means of communication.
Lastly, Members called for the annual budget of the Office of the Ombudsman to be increased.

2015/2231(INI) - 25/02/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 526 votes to 46, with 55 abstentions, a resolution on the annual report on the activities of the European
Ombudsman in 2014.
Parliament recalled that Emily OReilly was re-elected European Ombudsman by Parliament on 16 December 2014 and that the main priority of
the European Ombudsman is to ensure that citizens' rights are fully respected and the right to good administration reflects the highest
standards as expected of the institutions, bodies, offices and agencies of the Union.
Parliament approved the annual report for 2014 presented by the European Ombudsman and fully supported the fact that the Ombudsman is
making greater use of the power to open strategic investigations on her own initiative. It also welcomed the adoption of the new five-year
strategy Towards 2019, which introduces a more strategic approach to tackling systemic issues and promoting good administration.
Investigations: Parliament welcomed the inquiries initiated by the Ombudsman in 2014, in which the following key topics may be identified:
transparency within the EU institutions,
transparency in lobbying and clinical trials,
fundamental rights,
ethical issues,
participation of citizens in EU decision-making,
EU-funded projects and programmes and EU competition policy.
The resolution recalled that, over the years, 20-30 % of complaints have concerned transparency and that the most common transparency
issues raised are the institutions refusal to grant access to documents and/or information. It considered that openness and access to
documents are an essential part of the system of institutional checks and balances. It supported any initiative by the Commission and the other
EU institutions to ensure fair, swift and simple access for all to EU documentation.
Parliament called on the Ombudsman to investigate on the transparency issues regarding Parliaments timely access to the Commissions
relevant documents on infringements and EU Pilot procedures, especially when these are related to existing petitions.
Parliament also welcomed the Ombudsmans investigations into "revolving door" cases concerning high-ranking EU officials called on it to
prevent conflicts of interest at any level of the EU's institutions.
Concerning the lack of transparency in the TTIP negotiations, Parliament welcomed the progress in openness in the ongoing TTIP
negotiations following the Ombudsmans inquiries into transparency in these talks. It noted that the Council has since published the directives
the EU is using to negotiate the TTIP.
Lobbying: Parliament wondered whether the long delays in the decision-making of some legislative initiatives in the Council (such as the
horizontal anti-discrimination directive) do not fall within the category of maladministration, since they create a lot of frustration on the
concerned citizens towards the EU institutions. It urged the Council, and particularly the blocking minorities therein, to take the steps
necessary to address these unbearable situations. It welcomed the Ombudsman's increased and necessary focus on transparency in lobbying
activities, and her work towards a mandatory Transparency Register, to ensure that citizens may know who is trying to influence EU decision
makers. In this regard, Members welcomed her inquiry into the composition and transparency of expert groups at the Commission.
The resolution noted that more than 7000 institutions have voluntarily registered in the Transparency Register, reflecting the variety of public
and private stakeholders that the European institutions are working with. Members welcomed that the Register should include information on
the human and financial resources available to lobby organisations, in greater compliance with existing rules and provisions on openness and
good governance in the EU institutions. They continued to urge the Commission to deliver full transparency on the members and meetings of
all expert groups, technology platforms and agencies.

Clinical trials: Parliament noted that the Ombudsman in 2014 played a key role in the area of clinical trials data transparency by helping to
shape the proactive transparency policy of the European Medicines Agency (EMA). It noted that the EMA decided to publish proactively its
clinical study reports. It welcomed the new EU Clinical Trials Regulation, which requires that information on clinical trials be made available.
At the same time, Member States were called upon to be more diligent in their mandatory collaboration with the Ombudsman.
Malfunctioning of the institutions: Parliament highlighted various malfunctions brought to light by the Ombudsman investigations: (i) the
protection of fundamental rights in all cases of implementation of the EU's cohesion policy; (ii) lack of transparency as regards Horizon 2020
and its budget of nearly EUR 80 000 million; (iii) Frontex to ensure respect for the welfare of returnees during return flights.
In addition, it welcomed the Ombudsman's investigation into whether the EU institutions are living up to their obligation of introducing internal
whistleblowing rules.
Parliament welcomed the EU institutions 80% compliance rate with regard to the Ombudsmans suggestions. It stated its concern at the
persisting 20% non-compliance. It urged the institutions, bodies and agencies to react promptly, effectively and responsibly to the
Ombudsmans critical remarks and draft recommendations. It supported the Ombudsman in future inquiries within her remit to identify possible
transparency loopholes in the execution of the EU budget, cooperating when necessary with the Court of Auditors, OLAF and Parliaments
Committee on Budgetary Control.
In an amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament recalled that the Ombudsman also has the capacity, and therefore the duty, to scrutinise
Parliament within the scope of pursuing good administration for EU citizens.
In parallel, it commended the Ombudsman on her initiative, taken in the run-up to the European elections, to host an interactive event, Your
wish list for Europe, in an effort to put citizens at the heart of decision-making.
European Network of Ombudsmen: Parliament encouraged the Ombudsman to continue to promote the European Network of Ombudsmen
with a view to informing EU citizens in a better way about the allocation of responsibilities between the European Ombudsman, national and
regional ombudsmen and Parliaments Committee on Petitions. It called on its Committee on Petitions to be a more active member of the
Network and to reinforce its collaboration with the Network on common policies which fall within the field of activities of the European Union. It
agreed with the Ombudsman that the EU institutions should ensure that their services are accessible to persons with disabilities and that such
persons have access to information and means of communication.
Lastly, Parliament called for the annual budget of the Office of the Ombudsman to be increased.

