Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2015/0149(COD)

Procedure completed

Energy efficiency labelling
Repealing Directive 2010/30/EU 2008/0222(COD)
Subject
2.10.03 Standardisation, EC/EU standards and trade mark, certification,
compliance
3.60.08 Energy efficiency
4.60.02 Consumer information, advertising, labelling

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ITRE

Rapporteur

Industry, Research and Energy

Appointed
20/10/2015

TAMBURRANO Dario
Shadow rapporteur

REUL Herbert

WERNER Martina

FOX Ashley

WIERINCK Lieve

SYLIKIOTIS Neoklis

RIVASI Michèle
KAPPEL Barbara
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

BUDG

Budgets

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

25/09/2015
PATRICIELLO Aldo

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

IMCO

JURI

Legal Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Energy

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
ŠEFČOVIČ Maroš

Regions

Key events
15/07/2015

Legislative proposal published

07/09/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

14/06/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

14/06/2016

Rejection by committee to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

21/06/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

04/07/2016

Debate in Parliament

06/07/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

06/07/2016

Matter referred back to the committee
responsible

05/12/2016

Debate in Council

27/02/2017

Debate in Council

25/04/2017

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

13/06/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

13/06/2017

Debate in Parliament

13/06/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

26/06/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

04/07/2017

Final act signed

05/07/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

28/07/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

COM(2015)0341

Summary

A8-0213/2016

Summary

T8-0304/2016

Summary

PE615.191 GEDA/A/(2017)004117

T8-0251/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0149(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Repealing Directive 2010/30/EU 2008/0222(COD)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 059-p4

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Summary

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ITRE/8/03966

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0341

15/07/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2015)0139

16/07/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2015)0140

16/07/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0032

09/02/2016

EC

Amendments tabled in committee

PE578.669

08/03/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE578.725

08/03/2016

EP

Committee draft report

PE575.138

09/03/2016

EP

PE573.039

28/04/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0213/2016

21/06/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at
1st reading/single reading

T8-0304/2016

06/07/2016

EP

Summary

Coreper letter confirming interinstitutional
agreement

GEDA/A/(2017)004117

12/04/2017

CSL

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0251/2017

13/06/2017

EP

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)477

12/07/2017

Committee opinion

ENVI

Summary

Summary

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

Research document

Briefing

Research document

Briefing

Final act
Regulation 2017/1369
OJ L 198 28.07.2017, p. 0001 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2015/0149(COD) - 15/07/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to update and make more effective the existing acquis on energy labelling.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: energy labelling enables customers to obtain accurate, relevant and comparable information on the energy efficiency and
consumption of energy related products wherever they are in the Union allowing them to take informed cost-effective and environmentally
friendly purchasing decisions that are both good for the environment and save money.
On 25 February 2015, the Commission announced in its Framework Strategy for a Resilient Energy Union a review of Directive 2010/30/EU on
the Energy Labelling Directive in order to further exploit the potential of energy efficiency for the moderation of energy demand and
consequent reduction of the energy dependency of the European Union.

Directive 2010/30/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council was evaluated for its effectiveness. The evaluation identified the need to
update the Energy Labelling framework to improve its effectiveness.
For 2030 the European Council set in October 2014 an indicative target at EU level of at least 27% for improving energy efficiency which will
be reviewed by 2020, having in mind an EU level of 30%. IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the impact assessment looks at both a number of issues
with the current Directive and some specific items concerning the Ecodesign Directive. The two most important issues concerning the Energy
Labelling Directive were:
reduced effectiveness of the energy label and non-compliance due to weak enforcement;
long rulemaking processes, leading to outdated technical and preparatory work.
The final option chosen was to: (i) improve the existing regulatory framework on energy labelling, (ii) require labelled products to be registered
in a new database,(iii) improve the legal structure by changing the current Energy Labelling Directive to a Regulation, to align it with the market
surveillance regulation, and to, (iv) fund EU joint market surveillance actions.
CONTENT: this proposal follows up on the Energy Union Framework Strategy and intends to replace Directive 2010/30/EU on the indication
by labelling and standard product information of the consumption of energy and other resources by energy-related products by a Regulation.
In the proposal, the objectives and main principles of the current Energy Labelling Directive are retained but the proposal clarifies, strengthens
and extends the scope of the current Directive's provisions by:
(1) Updating the label and allowing for rescaling: the success of energy labelling means that the label is running into its limits. Although A+ to
A+++ energy efficiency classes were added in 2010, for some product groups, all models are already in those new classes and there are no
longer any models in the lower classes.
There is a systematic need to 'rescale' products and to go back to the original A to G energy label scale, which studies suggest is the one best
understood by consumers. Although the current Directive allows for the possible reclassification of products through specific delegated acts,
the current proposal deals with the need to rescale the energy labels in a much more systematic manner. It also makes clear the obligations
on suppliers and dealers during the rescaling and replacement phase.
The existing labels will be reviewed by the Commission within five years of the entry into force of the Regulation, with a view to rescaling them.
The delegated act would contain a specific date by which the 'old' labels would have to be replaced with the rescaled label (the "replacement
date").
During a transitional period, dealers would be required to replace the old label with the new one on all products on display in shops. They
would have one week to replace all labels with the new ones. Member States would be required to run promotional information campaigns to
inform consumers of the rescaling exercise.
(2) Creating a database of products covered by energy labelling obligations: overall non-compliance in the market is estimated at 20%, leading
to some 10% of envisaged energy savings being lost. The new product registration database: (i) will allow market surveillance authorities
much quicker access to the necessary information; (ii) will provide up-to-date market data and energy efficiency information which will
accelerate the preparatory/review studies and subsequent regulatory process.
The proposal also updates the Directive's requirements in terms of providing for electronic supply of labels or for suppliers to make them
available on their websites.
The administrative burden for registering products is estimated at EUR 1.5 million per year for the entire industry; about 0.5 eurocent per
product sold.
(3) Making clearer the obligations of the various parties: the proposal regroups the respective obligations on Member States, suppliers and
dealers in order to make these more coherent and simpler. The replacement of the Directive with a Regulation means less administrative
burden for Member States and directly applicable requirements for suppliers and dealers which will ensure a complete harmonisation across
the EU.
(4) Improving the link between energy labelling and measurement standards: the proposal makes clear that a product which complies with the
measurement and calculation methods set out in the relevant harmonised standard will be presumed to comply with the relevant provisions of
the applicable delegated act.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: this initiative does not require additional EU budgetary resources. The costs concern:
setting up a products database (1.500.000 EUR in 2016 and 150.000 EUR yearly maintenance cost in subsequent years);
consumer understanding studies for labels for specific product groups (300.000 EUR per year from 2017).
These are financed through reprioritisation of existing budget for the implementation of the policy on energy efficiency of products.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2015/0149(COD) - 21/06/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Industry, Research and Energy adopted the report by Dario TAMBURRANO (EFDD, IT) on the proposal for a regulation of
the European Parliament and of the Council setting a framework for energy efficiency labelling and repealing Directive 2010/30/EU.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should adopt its position at first reading subject to the following amendments:
Scope: the amended text stipulates that this Regulation lays down a framework that applies to energy-related products and provides them with
a label regarding energy efficiency, absolute consumption of energy and other environmental and performance characteristics. It allows
customers to choose more energy-efficient products in order to reduce their energy consumption.

This Regulation does not apply to:
second hand products (i.e. all those that have been put into service before being made available on the market for a second or
additional time);
means of transport for persons or goods in which the motor stays in the same location while it is operated, for example elevators,
escalators and conveyor belts.
Definition of label and rescaling: the amended text seeks to clarify the term label. It shall mean a graphic diagram, in printed or electronic form,
including a closed scale using only letters from A to G, each class corresponding to significant energy savings, in seven different colours from
dark green to red, in order to inform customers about energy efficiency and energy consumption.
There is a need for an initial rescaling of existing labels, in order to ensure a homogeneous A to G scale, adapting them to the requirements of
this Regulation. The report stated that Member States shall ensure that the introduction and rescaling of labels is accompanied by educational
and promotional information campaigns on energy labelling. The Commission shall coordinate those campaigns, supporting close cooperation
with suppliers and dealers and the exchange of best practices.
In order to ensure a homogenous A to G scale, it is proposed that the Commission should introduce rescaled labels for existing product groups
within 5 years after the entry into force of this Regulation,
Any future rescale should aim for a validity period of at least 10 years, according to the Members, who laid down the following trigger criteria
for future rescales:
when 25% of the products sold within the EU market fall into the top energy efficiency class A; or
when 50% of the products sold within the EU market fall into the top two energy efficiency classes A+B.
Since the post-rescaling distribution of product models in the A-G energy classes will have significant implications on the market, a flexible
approach is kept for steering it, proposing three options of decreasing rescaling intensity:
C-G (with two empty classes at the top),
B-G (one empty class),
A-G (no empty classes).
Clear and legible label: the amended text stipulates that the label should contain information about the energy efficiency class of the product
model, and its absolute consumption in kWh, displayed per year or per any relevant period of time. Suppliers and dealers would have to refer
to the energy efficiency class of the product in any visual advertisement or technical promotional material for a specific model of product.
Product database: the product database shall be established in order to collect data concerning the energy-related products covered by this
Regulation. It shall be arranged in a systematic manner and consisting of a public interface, organised as a consumer-oriented website, where
information is individually accessible by electronic means, and a compliance interface, structured as an electronic platform supporting the
activities of national market surveillance authorities, with clearly specified accessibility and security requirements.
Easy direct access to the public interface of the product database should be facilitated by a dynamic quick response code (QR) or other
user-oriented tools included on the printed label. The database should be subject to strict data protection rules.
Market surveillance: given that the current system of market surveillance is often criticised, Members have proposed to strengthen market
surveillance and Union safeguard procedures. National market surveillance authorities should perform compliance monitoring also through
physical product testing, and the Information and Communication System on Market Surveillance (ICSMS) to exchange information about
planned and completed product testing, to make available testing protocols and to share the outcome of their tests, thus avoiding double
testing and paving the way for regional centres of excellence for physical testing. It is proposed that the Commission should set up and
maintain an online portal that provides market surveillance authorities access to detailed product information on the servers of suppliers.
By 1 January 2018, Member States shall establish and implement a market surveillance plan for monitoring the enforcement of the
requirements of this Regulation. Member States shall review their market surveillance plans at least every three years.

2015/0149(COD) - 06/07/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st reading/single
reading
The European Parliament adopted (by 580 votes to 52, with 79 abstentions) amendments to the proposal for a regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council setting a framework for energy efficiency labelling and repealing Directive 2010/30/EU.
The matter has been referred back to the committee responsible. The vote on the legislative resolution has been postponed to a subsequent
sitting.
The main elements adopted in plenary are as follows:
Scope: the text stipulates that this Regulation lays down a framework that applies to energy-related products and provides them with a label
regarding energy efficiency, absolute consumption of energy and other environmental and performance characteristics. It allows customers to
choose more energy-efficient products in order to reduce their energy consumption.
This Regulation does not apply to:
second hand products (i.e. all those that have been put into service before being made available on the market for a second or
additional time);
means of transport for persons or goods in which the motor stays in the same location while it is operated, for example elevators,
escalators and conveyor belts.
Definition of label: the amended text clarifies the term label to mean a graphic diagram, in printed or electronic form, including a closed scale
using only letters from A to G, each class corresponding to significant energy savings, in seven different colours from dark green to red, in
order to inform customers about energy efficiency and energy consumption.

Procedure for the introduction and rescaling of labels: the Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in order to supplement this
Regulation by introducing or rescaling labels. There is a need for an initial rescaling of existing labels, in order to ensure a homogeneous A to
G scale, adapting them to the requirements of this Regulation. The text stated that Member States shall ensure that the introduction and
rescaling of labels is accompanied by educational and promotional information campaigns on energy labelling. The Commission shall
coordinate those campaigns, supporting close cooperation with suppliers and dealers and the exchange of best practices.
In order to ensure a homogenous A to G scale, it is proposed that the Commission shall introduce rescaled labels for existing product groups
within 5 years after the entry into force of this Regulation,
According to the Parliament, any future rescale shall aim for a validity period of at least 10 years, the following trigger criteria for future
rescales are as follows:
when 25% of the products sold within the EU market fall into the top energy efficiency class A; or
when 50% of the products sold within the EU market fall into the top two energy efficiency classes A+B.
It should be noted that before any rescaling, the Commission shall carry out a thorough preparatory study. Depending on the product group
and based on a detailed assessment of its potential, a newly rescaled label shall have empty space at the top of the scale to encourage
technological progress and enable ever more efficient product models to be developed and recognised.
When a label is rescaled, confusion to customers shall be avoided by replacing all energy labels within a short and feasible timeframe, and by
making the visual appearance of the rescaled label easily distinguishable from the old label, together with adequate consumer information
campaigns clearly indicating that a new version has been introduced resulting in an improved appliance classification.
When, for a given product group, no models belonging to energy classes F or G are allowed to be placed on the market anymore because of
an Ecodesign implementing measure adopted under Directive 2009/125/EC, the class or classes in question shall be shown on the label in
grey as specified in the relevant delegated act. The standard dark green to red spectrum of the label shall be retained for the remaining upper
classes.
Dealers shall be permitted to sell energy-related products without a label or a rescaled label, only where a (rescaled) label has never been
produced for a given product and the supplier of the product is no longer active on the market.
Clear and legible label: the amended text stipulates that the label should contain information about the energy efficiency class of the product
model, and its absolute consumption in kWh, displayed per year or per any relevant period of time. Suppliers and dealers would have to refer
to the energy efficiency class of the product in any visual advertisement or technical promotional material for a specific model of product.
Product database: the product database shall be established in order to collect data concerning the energy-related products covered by this
Regulation. It shall be arranged in a systematic manner and consisting of a public interface, organised as a consumer-oriented website, where
information is individually accessible by electronic means, and a compliance interface, structured as an electronic platform supporting the
activities of national market surveillance authorities, with clearly specified accessibility and security requirements.
Easy direct access to the public interface of the product database should be facilitated by a dynamic quick response code (QR) or other
user-oriented tools included on the printed label. The database should be subject to strict data protection rules.
Market surveillance: in order to strengthen market surveillance and Union safeguard procedures, national market surveillance authorities
should perform compliance monitoring also through physical product testing which shall cover at least one product group per year. Market
surveillance authorities shall inform the other Member States and the Commission of their planned and completed physical tests, through the
compliance interface of the product database. They shall use reliable, accurate and reproducible measurement procedures, aiming to simulate
real-life conditions of use and excluding intentional or unintentional manipulation or alteration of the test results.
The Commission shall endeavour to set up and maintain an online portal that provides market surveillance authorities access to detailed
product information on the servers of suppliers.
By 1 January 2018, Member States shall establish and implement a market surveillance plan for monitoring the enforcement of the
requirements of this Regulation. Member States shall review their market surveillance plans at least every three years.

2015/0149(COD) - 13/06/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 535 votes to 46, with 79 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council setting a framework for energy efficiency labelling and repealing Directive 2010/30/EU.
The European Parliaments position adopted at first reading, following the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal
as follows:
Subject matter and scope: this Regulation lays down a framework that applies to energy-related products and provides for the labelling of
those products and the provision of standard product information regarding energy efficiency, the consumption of energy and of other
resources by products during use and supplementary information concerning products, thereby enabling customers to choose more efficient
products in order to reduce their energy consumption.
This Regulation shall not apply to: (i) second-hand products, unless they are imported from a third country; (ii) means of transport for persons
or goods.
Labelling: the term "label" shall mean a graphic diagram, either in printed or electronic form, including a closed scale using only letters from A
to G, each letter representing a class and each class corresponding to energy savings, in seven different colours from dark green to red, in
order to inform customers about energy efficiency and energy consumption.
In addition to the scale, the label shall also indicate the absolute energy consumption, where appropriate, to allow customers to predict the
direct impact of their choices on their energy bills.
Obligations of suppliers and dealers: where a supplier places a product on the market, each unit of the product should be accompanied by a

label in paper form. The label displayed shall be clearly visible and identifiable as the label belonging to the product in question and should
attract the attention of the customer browsing through the product displayed.
The dealer shall display, in a visible manner, including for online distance selling. It shall be able to print or download one for electronic display
from the product database.
Customers shall be offered software or firmware updates of their products after the products have been placed on the market and put into use.
The supplier and the dealer shall make reference to the energy efficiency class of the product and the range of the efficiency classes available
on the label in visual advertisements or technical promotional material for a specific model.
Procedure for the introduction and rescaling of labels: the Commission may adopt delegated acts to supplement the Regulation by introducing
labels or rescaling.
In order to ensure a homogenous A to G scale, this Regulation provides, as a first step, an initial rescaling of existing labels, in order to ensure
a homogeneous A to G scale for three categories of products pursuant to this Regulation. The rescaled label shall be displayed both in shops
and online, 18 months after the entry into force of the delegated acts.
In order to keep up with the progress made in the area of energy efficiency, any further redesign of labels shall be undertaken if it is estimated
that:
30 % of the units of models belonging to a product group sold within the Union market fall into the top energy efficiency class A;
50 % of the units of models belonging to a product group sold within the Union market fall into the top two energy efficiency classes A
and B.
In order to avoid over burdening suppliers and dealers, and, in particular, small businesses, the frequency of further rescaling should be
around 10 years. Before rescaling, the Commission shall carry out an appropriate preparatory study.
The introduction of labels and rescaling of labels shall be accompanied by educational and promotional information campaigns on energy
labelling. The Commission shall support cooperation and the exchange of best practices in relation to those campaigns, including through the
recommendation of common key messages.
Product database: the Commission shall establish and maintain a product database consisting of a public part, a compliance part and an
online portal to provide the public with information about products.
As from 1 January 2019, the supplier shall, before placing on the market a unit of a new model covered by a delegated act, enter in the public
and compliance parts of the product database the information for that model, as set out in Annex I.

2015/0149(COD) - 04/07/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to update existing legislation on energy labelling to achieve better energy efficiency.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2017/1369 of the European Parliament and of the Council setting a framework for energy labelling and
repealing Directive 2010/30/EU.
CONTENT: this Regulation replaces the legislation in force (Directive 2010/30/EU). It provides for the labelling of energy-related products and
the provision of standard product information regarding energy efficiency of products, the consumption of energy and of other resources by
products during use.
Energy efficiency is a key element of the EU climate and energy framework for 2030. The new Regulation shall enable customers to choose
more efficient products to reduce their energy consumption. It seeks to contribute to energy savings and reduction of energy bills, while
encouraging innovation and investment in the production of more energy efficient products.
The main elements of the new regulation are as follows:
Updating labels: the Regulation sets deadlines to replace the current efficiency classes A +, A ++ and A +++ with a scale from A to G. Each
letter representing a class and each class corresponding to energy savings, in seven different colours from dark green to red, in order to inform
customers about energy efficiency and energy consumption.
Obligations of suppliers and dealers: where a supplier places a product on the market, each unit of the product must be accompanied by a
paper label. The displayed label shall be clearly visible and identifiable as pertaining to the product in question without the customer having to
read the name of the mark and the model number on the label and shall draw the customer's attention to the product.
The reseller shall display in a visible manner, including in the case of online distance selling, the label received from the supplier. He will be
able to download the product information sheet from the product database.
The supplier shall inform the consumer in the event of updates affecting the energy efficiency of a product already placed on the market and
used.
Procedure for the introduction and rescaling of labels: the Regulation establishes a procedure for the rescaling of labels in accordance with
technological developments.
With a view to establishing a homogeneous A to G scale, the Regulation provides for an initial rescaling of existing labels for certain categories
of products.
The Commission shall adopt:
by 2 August 2023 at the latest, delegated acts introducing revised labels for product groups covered by delegated acts adopted under
Directive 2010/30/EU. Rescaled labels shall be displayed, both in stores and online, 18 months after the entry into force of the
delegated acts adopted for that purpose;
by 2 November 2018 at the latest, delegated acts introducing rescaled labels for products such as dishwashers, refrigerators, washing

machines, televisions and electrical lamps, with an additional period of 12 months for displaying the rescaled labels in shops;
no later than 2 August 2026, delegated acts introducing rescaled labels for water heaters and boilers, as the technology of these
product groups evolves at a relatively slow pace.
In any event, the delegated acts introducing A to G rescaled labels shall be adopted by 2 August 2030 at the latest.
In order to keep pace with progress on energy efficiency, rescaling of labels shall be undertaken if the Commission estimates that:
30 % of the units of models belonging to a product group sold within the Union market fall into the top energy efficiency class A; or
50 % of the units of models belonging to a product group sold within the Union market fall into the top two energy efficiency classes A
and B.
In order to avoid over burdening suppliers and dealers, and, in particular, small businesses, the timescale of approximately 10 years would be
desirable for the frequency of rescaling. Member States shall ensure that the introduction of labels and rescaling of labels is accompanied by
educational and promotional information campaigns on energy labelling, if appropriate in cooperation with suppliers and dealers.
Product database: the Commission shall establish and maintain a product database consisting of a public and a compliance part, which should
be accessible via an online portal.
Operational from January 2019 onwards, it will enable market surveillance authorities in the Member States to monitor the application of
labelling requirements and to ensure that the calculations performed to determine the efficiency label correspond to those declared by the
manufacturers.
ENTRY INTO FORCE AND APPLICATION: as from 1.8.2017. The provisions relating to the obligations of suppliers in relation to the product
database shall apply from 1.1.2019.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission may adopt delegated acts in order to establish specific product groups for energy-related products on
the basis of a set of criteria and to design specific information labels for each product. The power to adopt such acts shall be conferred on the
Commission for a period of six years (renewable) from 1 August 2017. The European Parliament or the Council shall have the right to object to
a delegated act within a period of two months (extendable two months) from the notification of the act.

