Procedure file
Basic information
2015/0068(CNS)

CNS - Consultation procedure
Directive

Procedure completed

Taxation: mandatory automatic exchange of information
Amending Directive 2011/16/EU 2009/0004(CNS)
Subject
2.70 Taxation
2.80 Cooperation between administrations
3.45.04 Company taxation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
28/04/2015

FERBER Markus
Shadow rapporteur

BAYET Hugues

LOONES Sander

JEŽEK Petr

MATIAS Marisa

SCOTT CATO Molly

ZANNI Marco
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

CONT

Budgetary Control

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI

Legal Affairs

Appointed

31/08/2015
DZHAMBAZKI Angel

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Taxation and Customs Union

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
MOSCOVICI Pierre

Key events
18/03/2015

Legislative proposal published

15/04/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

13/10/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single

COM(2015)0135

Summary

reading
20/10/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

26/10/2015

Debate in Parliament

27/10/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

27/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

08/12/2015

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

08/12/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

18/12/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0306/2015

Summary

T8-0369/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0068(CNS)

Procedure type

CNS - Consultation procedure

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Directive
Amending Directive 2011/16/EU 2009/0004(CNS)

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/03107

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0135

18/03/2015

EC

Document attached to the
procedure

SWD(2015)0060

18/03/2015

EC

Economic and Social
Committee: opinion, report

CES1828/2015

27/05/2015

ESC

PE560.592

04/06/2015

NP

Committee draft report

PE560.586

14/07/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in
committee

PE565.165

29/09/2015

EP

PE565.191

14/10/2015

EP

Committee of the Regions:
opinion

CDR2697/2015

14/10/2015

CofR

Committee report tabled for
plenary, 1st reading/single
reading

A8-0306/2015

20/10/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament,
1st reading/single reading

T8-0369/2015

27/10/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text
adopted in plenary

SP(2015)750

10/12/2015

Reasoned opinion

Committee opinion

SE_PARLIAMENT

JURI

Summary

Final act
Directive 2015/2376
OJ L 332 18.12.2015, p. 0001 Summary

2015/0068(CNS) - 18/03/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to ensure the mandatory automatic exchange of information between tax administrations regarding advance cross-border rulings
and advance pricing arrangements.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Directive.
ROLEOF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the Council adopts the act after consulting the European Parliament but without being obliged to
follow its opinion.
BACKGROUND: the challenge posed by cross-border tax avoidance, aggressive tax planning and harmful tax competition has increased
considerably and has become a major focus of concern within the Union and at global level. In particular, rulings concerning tax-driven
structures lead to a low level of taxation of artificially high amounts of income in the country giving the advance ruling and may leave artificially
low amounts of income to be taxed in any other countries involved. An increase in transparency is therefore urgently required. The tools and
mechanisms established by Council Directive 2011/16/EU need to be enhanced in order to achieve this.
In its resolution of 21 May 2013, the European Parliament emphasised that the EU should take a leading role in global discussions on the fight
against tax fraud, tax avoidance and tax havens, in particular in relation to promoting the exchange of information.
The European Council, in its conclusions of 18 December 2014, underlined the urgent need to advance efforts in the fight against tax
avoidance and aggressive tax planning, both at the global and Union levels.
The Commission work programme for 2015 lists among its priorities that of a fairer approach to taxation including by ensuring automatic
exchange of information on tax ruling which is precisely the purpose of this proposal.
CONTENT: the draft directive amends Directive 2011/16/EU on administrative cooperation, as amended by Directive 2014/107/EU, so as to
ensure the mandatory automatic exchange of information regarding advance cross-border rulings and advance pricing arrangements, under
certain conditions.
A new Article is inserted into the existing Directive, setting out the scope and conditions for the mandatory automatic exchange of information
on types of tax rulings and transfer pricing arrangements. The new Article provides that the competent authorities of a Member State shall, by
automatic exchange, communicate information about defined tax rulings that they issue or amend to the competent authorities of all other
Member States. This obligation is extended to rulings issued in the ten years before the date on which the proposed Directive takes effect that
are still valid on the date of entry into force of the Directive.
The proposed Directive also enables the possible creation by the Commission of a secure central directory concerning information
communicated in the framework of this proposal. This central directory would both facilitate the exchange of information and support Member
States in their job of studying and reacting to rulings exchanged between Member States.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the impact on expenditure (operational appropriations) is estimated at EUR 2,100 million for the period
2016-2020. The costs of the additional IT tools and the possible central directory that the Commission may develop in the future to facilitate
the communication of information between Member States as well as to provide for its storage would be funded out of the FISCALIS 2020
programme which provides financial support for activities to improve administrative cooperation between tax authorities in the EU.

2015/0068(CNS) - 20/10/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted, in the framework of a special legislative procedure (Parliaments consultation), the
report by Markus FERBER (EPP, DE) on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2011/16/EU as regards mandatory automatic
exchange of information in the field of taxation.
The committee called on the European Parliament to approve the Commission proposal as amended.
The report noted that following the LuxLeaks scandal and by means of this report, the European Parliament expresses its strong determination
not to tolerate tax fraud and tax avoidance as well as to advocate for a fair distribution of the tax burden between citizens and companies.
The main amendments made to the proposal concern the following issues:
Limited scope of the exchange of information: Members rejected the limited the scope of mandatory exchange of information to cross-border
tax rulings and transfer pricing arrangements. They considered that the Directive should apply to all tax rulings and not just cross border
rulings and advance pricing arrangements, given that purely national transactions can also have cross-border effects. That is particularly true
of cascade transactions, where the advance tax ruling or price arrangement concerns the first national transactions, without taking into
consideration the next (cross-border) transactions.
Quicker exchanges: Members proposed that information should be exchanged immediately, and at the latest one month after the advance
rulings or advance pricing arrangements have been issued or amended.
Secure central directory and transparency: on 31 December 2016 at the latest, the Commission shall develop a secure central directory where
information to be communicated in the framework of this Directive must be recorded in order to satisfy the automatic exchange of information.

Member States shall ensure that all information communicated during the transitional period where the secure central directory is not yet
developed is uploaded into the secure central directory by 1 April 2017. The Commission and the Member States shall have access to the
information recorded in this directory.
In order to enhance transparency for citizens, the Commission should publish, before 1 October 2017, and on an annual basis thereafter, a
summary of the main tax rulings agreed in the previous year, based on information contained in the secure central directory and in compliance
with the confidentiality provisions.
Penalties: the Commission shall examine all penalties to be established in the event of refusal or omission of information exchange.
Further action of Member States: this Directive shall not preclude Member States from taking further action to develop domestic or
agreement-based provisions for the prevention of tax avoidance.
Reporting: every three years after entry into force, the Commission shall submit a report on the application of this Directive.

2015/0068(CNS) - 27/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 572 votes to 90, with 30 abstentions, in the framework of a special legislative procedure (Parliaments
consultation), a legislative resolution on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 2011/16/EU as regards mandatory automatic
exchange of information in the field of taxation.
Following the LuxLeaks scandal, the European Parliament expressed its strong determination not to tolerate tax fraud and tax avoidance as
well as to advocate for a fair distribution of the tax burden between citizens and companies.
Parliament approved the Commission proposal subject to the following amendments:
Limited scope of the exchange of information: Members rejected the proposal from the Commission to limit the scope of mandatory exchange
of information to cross-border tax rulings and transfer pricing arrangements. Members considered that the Directive should apply to all tax
rulings and not just cross border rulings and advance pricing arrangements, given that purely national transactions can also have cross-border
effects. That is particularly true of cascade transactions, where the advance tax ruling or price arrangement concerns the first national
transactions, without taking into consideration the next (cross-border) transactions.
Moreover, the definitions of advance rulings and advance pricing arrangements should cover tax arrangements regardless of the formal or
informal manner in which they were issued, and irrespective of their binding or non-binding nature.
Quicker exchanges: Members proposed that information should be exchanged immediately, and at the latest one month after the advance
rulings or advance pricing arrangements have been issued or amended.
No retroactive effect: the Commission proposed that the mandatory exchange mechanism should apply to tax rulings issued in the ten years
before it enters into force. Parliament called for mechanism to apply to all rulings that are still valid on the day the directive enters into force.
Member States shall:
notify the Commission and other Member States at an early stage about any relevant change in their tax ruling practice (application
formalities, decision process, etc.).
notify the Commission and other Member States about any relevant changes to their domestic laws on corporate taxation (introduction
of a new allowance, relief, exception, incentive or similar measure etc.) that could have an impact on their effective tax rates or on any
other Member State's tax revenue.
Secure central directory and transparency: on 31 December 2016 at the latest, the Commission shall develop a secure central directory where
information to be communicated in the framework of this Directive must be recorded in order to satisfy the automatic exchange of information.
Member States shall ensure that all information communicated during the transitional period where the secure central directory is not yet
developed is uploaded into the secure central directory by 1 April 2017 . The Commission and the Member States shall have access to the
information recorded in this directory.
In order to enhance transparency for citizens, the Commission should publish, before 1 October 2017, and on an annual basis thereafter, a
summary of the main tax rulings agreed in the previous year, based on information contained in the secure central directory and in compliance
with the confidentiality provisions.
That report should include at least: (i) a description of the issues addressed in the tax ruling, (ii) a description of the criteria used to determine
an advance pricing arrangement and, (ii) the identification of the Member State(s) most likely to be affected.
The personal data should be processed for specific, explicit and legitimate purposes and only if adequate, relevant and not excessive in
relation to the purposes.
Parliament also suggested that by 26 June 2017, a Union-wide register for beneficial ownership should be operational, which will aid in
tracking down possible tax avoidance and profit shifting.
Penalties: the Commission shall examine all penalties to be established in the event of refusal or omission of information exchange.
OECD developments: this Directive shall be compatible with OECD developments and shall take into consideration the OECD comprehensive
set of rules contained in the Standard for Automatic Exchange of Financial Account.
Further action of Member States: this Directive shall not preclude Member States from taking further action to develop domestic or
agreement-based provisions for the prevention of tax avoidance.
The resolution recalled that the fundamental principle of the Member States sovereignty in tax matters should be upheld where direct taxes are
concerned and that the current proposal does not jeopardise the subsidiarity principle.
Reporting: every three years after entry into force, the Commission shall submit a report on the application of this Directive.

2015/0068(CNS) - 08/12/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to ensure the mandatory automatic exchange of information between tax administrations regarding advance cross-border rulings
and advance pricing arrangements, in order to prevent corporate tax evasion.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Directive (EU) 2015/2376 amending Directive 2011/16/EU as regards mandatory automatic exchange of
information in the field of taxation.
CONTENT: this Directive amends Directive 2011/16/EU on administrative cooperation, so as to ensure the mandatory automatic exchange of
information between Member States regarding advance cross-border rulings and advance pricing arrangements.
The challenge posed by cross-border tax avoidance, aggressive tax planning and harmful tax competition has increased considerably and has
become a major focus of concern within the Union and at global level. Rulings concerning tax-driven structures have, in certain cases, led to a
low level of taxation of artificially high amounts of income in the country issuing, amending or renewing the advance ruling and left artificially
low amounts of income to be taxed in any other countries involved.
The Directive will improve transparency regarding advance cross-border rulings made by Member States concerning the manner in which
taxation will be dealt with.
Scope: the Amending directive provides that the competent authorities of a Member States communicate to the competent authorities of all
Member States, by automatic exchange, a defined set of basic information on tax rulings issued or amended.
A new Article is inserted into the existing Directive, setting out the scope and conditions for the mandatory automatic exchange of information,
which is sufficiently broad to cover a wide range of situations, these being:
unilateral advance pricing arrangements and/or decisions;
bilateral or multilateral advance pricing arrangements and decisions;
arrangements or decisions determining existence or absence of a permanent establishment, and of facts with a potential impact on the
tax base of a permanent establishment;
arrangements or decisions determining tax status of a hybrid entity in one Member State which relates to a resident of another
jurisdiction;
arrangements or decisions on assessment basis for depreciation of an asset in one Member State that is acquired from a group
company in another jurisdiction.
Under a set of very strict conditions, the Directive excludes from the mandatory automatic exchange bilateral or multilateral advance pricing
arrangements with third countries following the framework of existing international treaties with those countries, where the provisions of those
treaties do not permit disclosure of the information received under that treaty to a third party country.
Conditions and arrangements for the exchange of information: the Directive establishes regular intervals for the communication of the
information. It also provide for the mandatory automatic exchange of advance cross-border rulings and advance pricing arrangements that
were issued, amended or renewed within a period beginning five years before 1 January 2017 and which are still valid on 1 January 2014.
However, particular persons or groups of persons with a group wide annual net turnover of less than EUR 40 000 000 could be excluded,
under certain conditions, from such mandatory automatic exchange.
Standard form: in order that the mandatory automatic exchange of information should in each case include the communication of a defined set
of basic information that would be accessible to all Member States, the Commission is empowered to adopt practical arrangements necessary
to standardise the communication by establishing a standard form to be used for the exchange of information.
In developing such a standard form for the mandatory automatic exchange of information, it should take account of work performed at the
OECD's Forum on Harmful Tax Practices, where a standard form for information exchange is being developed, in the context of the Action
Plan on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting.
Statistics on automatic exchanges: before 1 January 2018, Member States must provide the Commission on an annual basis with statistics on
the volume of automatic exchanges and, to the extent possible, with information on the administrative and other relevant costs and benefits
relating to exchanges that have taken place and any potential changes, for both tax administrations and third parties.
Secure central directory: in order to facilitate the exchange of information, specific provision is made for the establishment of a central
directory, accessible to all Member States and the Commission, to which Member States would upload and store information, instead of
exchanging that information by secured email.
Confidentiality: information communicated to the Commission will l be kept confidential by the Commission and may not be used for any
purposes other than those required to determine whether and to what extent Member States comply with this Directive. The provision of
information should not lead to the disclosure of a commercial, industrial or professional secret or of a commercial process, or disclosure of
information which would be contrary to public policy.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 18.12.2015.
TRANSPOSITION: by 31.12.2016.
APPLICATION: from 01.01.2017.

