Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2283(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Annual report 2014 on subsidiarity and proportionality

Subject
8.40.10 Interinstitutional relations, democratic deficit, subsidiarity, comitology

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
13/07/2015

KARIM Sajjad
Shadow rapporteur

ZWIEFKA Tadeusz

DELVAUX Mady

MARINHO E PINTO
António

CHRYSOGONOS
Kostas

ANDERSSON Max

BERGERON Joëlle
BOUTONNET
Marie-Christine
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

INTA

International Trade

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

AFCO

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
D'ORNANO Mireille

Constitutional Affairs

09/11/2015

03/09/2015
UJAZDOWSKI
Kazimierz Michał

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Secretariat-General

TIMMERMANS Frans

Key events
02/07/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

29/10/2015

Committee referral announced in

COM(2015)0315

Summary

Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
23/03/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

29/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

16/05/2017

Debate in Parliament

17/05/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

17/05/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

17/05/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0114/2017

Summary

T8-0210/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2283(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/04836

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0315

02/07/2015

EC

PE571.437

22/04/2016

EP

Committee draft report

PE587.620

05/08/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.191

13/10/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0114/2017

29/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0210/2017

17/05/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)511

26/09/2017

Committee opinion

AFCO

Summary

2015/2283(INI) - 02/07/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation of the 22nd annual report on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality in EU law-making in
2014.
CONTENT: this report looks at how the EU institutions and bodies have implemented these two principles and how the practice has evolved in
comparison with previous years. It also provides an analysis of several Commission proposals which were the subject of reasoned opinions
from national parliaments in 2014.
Follow-up to reasoned opinions: 2014 saw a significant reduction in the number of reasoned opinions compared to previous years.
In 2014, the Commission received 21 reasoned opinions from national Parliaments regarding the principle of subsidiarity, which represented a
decrease of 76 % compared to the number of reasoned opinions received in the previous year (88 in 2013). The reasoned opinions received in
2014 accounted for a considerably lower proportion (4 %) of the overall number of opinions received by the Commission in the same year in
the context of the political dialogue (506).
While no new yellow card procedure was triggered in 2014, the yellow card procedure triggered in 2013 in respect of the proposal on the
European Public Prosecutor's Office continued to fuel discussions within the political dialogue.

The report stated that the considerably lower number of reasoned opinions should be seen in the context of a decrease in the overall number
of proposals made by the Commission towards the end of its term of office and not as an indication of diminishing interest of national
Parliaments in subsidiarity matters.
Between January and May 2014, the Danish Folketing, Dutch Tweede Kamer and UK House of Lords submitted reports with detailed
proposals on how to strengthen the role of national Parliaments in the decision-making process. Discussions between national Parliaments on
these subjects are continuing in different fora.
Application by the institutions: in 2014, as in previous years, all institutions involved in the legislative process were active in ensuring control of
the principle of subsidiarity.
1) The Commission monitored compliance of its proposals with the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality by providing various
assessments (roadmaps, impact assessments) before adoption of the legislative acts and by examining and replying extensively to reasoned
opinions received from national Parliaments expressing subsidiarity concerns.
In 2014, 25 impact assessments were conducted. After scrutiny by the independent quality control body, the Impact Assessment Board, eight
of these impact assessments were judged to be in need of improvements as regards subsidiarity or proportionality, or both. This was the case,
for example, as regards a proposal for a Decision on enhancing EU cooperation in the prevention and deterrence of undeclared work. This
rate of 32% is similar to that of previous years.
On 19 May 2015, the Commission adopted in line with President Juncker's political priorities a package of better regulation measures with
new integrated Better Regulation Guidelines, including updated guidance for assessing subsidiarity and proportionality in the context of impact
assessment of new initiatives.
The Commission is committed to 'evaluate first', analysing past performance before considering potential legislative changes. By gathering
evidence and identifying lessons which can feed into decision-making, the EU is making evaluation an integral and permanent part of its
policy-making along with assessments of subsidiarity and proportionality.
2) The European Parliament continued to deal with subsidiarity and proportionality issues in the context of its work on legislative proposals,
taking into account reasoned opinions received from national Parliaments. It also initiated a new, more general approach to assessing the EU
added value by drawing up a Cost of Non-Europe report and produced numerous appraisals of the Commissions impact assessments.
Despite the break in parliamentary activity in 2014, an election year, the European Parliament produced 32 initial appraisals and two detailed
appraisals of Commission impact assessments, three complementary impact assessments, one impact assessment of substantive
parliamentary amendments and one ex-post impact assessment in 2014. In addition, five reports on the cost of non-Europe were completed.
The Committee on Legal Affairs is the parliamentary committee which has overall responsibility for dealing with the principle of subsidiarity. A
report is also regularly drawn up by the Committee on Legal Affairs on the Annual Report by the Commission on subsidiarity and
proportionality. A resolution was adopted by the European Parliament on 4 February 2014 on the 19th report from the Commission on
subsidiarity and proportionality.
3) The Committee of the Regions continued its work on subsidiarity issues, in particular by adopting and implementing its second Subsidiarity
Work Programme and organising a number of workshops and conferences devoted to the principle of subsidiarity and issues related to the
implementation of the subsidiarity control mechanism.
The proposals that gave rise to the most reasoned opinions however only generated three reasoned opinions, namely:
the proposal for a Directive on the Union legal framework for customs infringements and sanctions;
the proposed Directive on waste legislation in the framework of a package to create a more circular economy with the objective of making
Europe more competitive and reducing demand for costly scarce resource. The proposal suggests recycling 70 % of municipal waste and 80
% of packaging waste by 2030, and also suggests a ban on burying recyclable waste in landfill as of 2025. The proposal sets ambitious
targets and adds key provisions on the instruments needed to achieve and to monitor them;
the proposal for a Regulation on organic production and labelling of organic products, amending the Regulation on Official controls and
repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 834/2007.

2015/2283(INI) - 29/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Sajjad KARIM (ECR, UK) on the Annual Report 2014 on subsidiarity and
proportionality.
The annual report on subsidiarity and proportionality 2014 shows that in 2014 the Commission received 21 reasoned opinions from national
parliaments concerning 15 proposals, which represented a decrease compared to previous year. This result may be due to a decrease in the
overall number of legislative proposals made by the Commission. No yellow or orange card procedure was triggered in 2014.
Respecting the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality: Members welcomed the continued consideration of the principles of subsidiarity
and proportionality which are among the guiding principles of the European Union when it chooses to act and should be considered integral
parts of the EUs policy-making process. They stressed that national parliaments have a significant role to play in ensuring that decisions are
taken at the level that is most effective and as closely as possible to the citizen.
The Commission is called upon to improve its explanatory statements by always providing a detailed, comprehensive and factually
substantiated analysis of its proposals in terms of subsidiarity and proportionality, which would assist national parliaments in carrying out a
more effective examination of those proposals.
Members stressed the crucial importance of impact assessments as tools for aiding decision-making in the legislative process, and stresses
the need, in this context, for proper consideration to be given to issues relating to subsidiarity and proportionality and welcomed, in this regard,
the package of better regulation measures adopted by the Commission on 19 May 2015.
Extension of the scope of reasoned opinions: in 2014, three national chambers (the Danish Folketing, the Dutch Tweede Kamer and the UK

House of Lords) suggested that reasoned opinions should go beyond its current scope to include also the principle of proportionality and the
legal basis for the proposal. Members noted, however, that the practicality of these proposals requires careful evaluation and a revision of the
relevant Treaties and protocols.
Members also took note of the request from some national parliaments to extend the eight-week period in which they can issue a reasoned
opinion. Such a period should be the result of striking a fair balance between the right of national parliaments to raise objections on
subsidiarity grounds and the efficiency with which the Union should respond to the demands of its citizens.
Green card: Members stated that the introduction of this green card mechanism, which would afford national parliaments the opportunity to
suggest to the Commission a legislative initiative for its examination, should be considered. They suggested, in this connection, that
consideration could be given to the number of national parliaments needed in order to trigger such a procedure, and to the extent of its impact.
The introduction of such a mechanism should not undermine the EU institutions and the ordinary legislative procedure.
Proportionality: the Commission is called upon to systematically carry out enhanced proportionality assessments for each legislative proposal,
which should include an appropriate analysis of the different legislative options at its disposal and a substantial explanation of the
environmental, social and economic impacts expected from the alternative chosen, and of its potential effects on competitiveness and on
SMEs.
Lastly, the report recommended: (i) support national and regional parliaments through tools permitting information exchange, such as the
creation of an IT platform that can be accessed by EU citizens; (ii) the use of interparliamentary cooperation to reinforce the role of national
parliaments in the EU legislative process; (iii) promoting further the use of the platform for EU Interparliamentary Exchange (IPEX), which
facilitates information exchange.

2015/2283(INI) - 17/05/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 545 votes to 25, with 90 abstentions, a resolution on the Annual Report 2014 on subsidiarity and
proportionality.
The annual report on subsidiarity and proportionality 2014 shows that in 2014 the Commission received 21 reasoned opinions from national
parliaments concerning 15 proposals, which represented a decrease compared to previous year. This result may be due to a decrease in the
overall number of legislative proposals made by the Commission. No yellow or orange card procedure was triggered in 2014.
Respecting the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality: Parliament welcomed the continued consideration of the principles of subsidiarity
and proportionality which are among the guiding principles of the European Union when it chooses to act and should be considered integral
parts of the EUs policy-making process. It stressed that national parliaments have a significant role to play in ensuring that decisions are taken
at the level that is most effective and as closely as possible to the citizen.
Noting that a majority of the opinions submitted by national parliaments come from only a few national chambers, Members encouraged the
other chambers to become more involved in the European debate.
The Commission is called upon to improve its explanatory statements by always providing a detailed analysis of its proposals which would
assist national parliaments in carrying out a more effective examination of those proposals. Members stressed the crucial importance of impact
assessments as tools for aiding decision-making in the legislative process, noting that approximately 32 % of impact assessments reviewed by
it in 2014 included an unsatisfactory analysis of the principles of subsidiarity or proportionality or both.
Extension of the scope of reasoned opinions: in 2014, three national chambers (the Danish Folketing, the Dutch Tweede Kamer and the UK
House of Lords) suggested that reasoned opinions should go beyond its current scope to include also the principle of proportionality. Members
noted, however, that the practicality of these proposals requires careful evaluation and a revision of the relevant Treaties and protocols.
Parliament also took note of the request from some national parliaments to extend the eight-week period in which they can issue a reasoned
opinion. Such a period should be the result of striking a fair balance between the right of national parliaments to raise objections on
subsidiarity grounds and the efficiency with which the Union should respond to the demands of its citizens. If the Member States agree to
extend the period allowed to national parliaments to issue a reasoned opinion, it should be included in a forthcoming Treaty revision.
Green card: Members stated that the introduction of this green card mechanism, which would afford national parliaments the opportunity to
suggest to the Commission a legislative initiative for its examination, should be considered. They suggested, in this connection, that
consideration could be given to the number of national parliaments needed in order to trigger such a procedure, and to the extent of its impact.
The introduction of such a mechanism should not undermine the EU institutions and the ordinary legislative procedure.
Proportionality: the Commission is called upon to systematically carry out enhanced proportionality assessments for each legislative proposal,
which should include an appropriate analysis of the different legislative options at its disposal and a substantial explanation of the
environmental, social and economic impacts expected from the alternative chosen, and of its potential effects on competitiveness and on
SMEs.
Enhanced cooperation: Parliament encouraged other national parliaments to share their views on the role that national parliaments should play
in the EU decision-making process.
Lastly, Members recommended: (i) support national and regional parliaments through tools permitting information exchange, such as the
creation of an IT platform that can be accessed by EU citizens; (ii) the use of interparliamentary cooperation to reinforce the role of national
parliaments in the EU legislative process; (iii) promoting further the use of the platform for EU Interparliamentary Exchange (IPEX), which
facilitates information exchange.

