Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2895(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2015 report on the former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
08/10/2015

VAJGL Ivo
Shadow rapporteur

KELAM Tunne

HOWITT Richard

TANNOCK Charles

SAKORAFA Sofia

MESZERICS Tamás

CORRAO Ignazio

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

HAHN Johannes

Key events
29/02/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

09/03/2016

Debate in Parliament

10/03/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

10/03/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

10/03/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

T8-0091/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2895(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Summary

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/04680

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE573.037

18/01/2016

EP

Motion for a resolution

B8-0310/2016

02/03/2016

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0091/2016

10/03/2016

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)349

04/07/2016

Summary

2015/2895(RSP) - 10/03/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 404 votes to 76, with 29 abstentions, a resolution drafted by its Committee on Foreign Affairs on the
2015 Report on the 2015 Report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM).
Members recall that the prospect of EU membership is a major incentive for further reforms. They also recall that opinion polls show
considerable public support for EU membership in FYROM.
Political dialogue: Members call for the strengthening of political dialogue and the restoring of public trust in institutions. They insist that all the
political parties make efforts to create the conditions for credible early elections and underlined the paramount importance of these elections
being free, fair, and in full compliance with international standards.
Parliament considers it of strategic importance to ensure continuity of support to FYROMs progress towards EU membership and that the
recommendation to open accession negotiations should be conditional upon the full implementation of the June/July 2015 political agreement.
It considers it essential for the democratic process that the systemic reforms on the rule of law and fundamental rights be implemented without
delay. It invites the Commission to report back to Parliament and the Council on the implementation of the political agreement and the Urgent
Reform Priorities after the early parliamentary elections.
Administrative capacity: Parliament is concerned that FYROMs public administration remains subject to political influence. It supports the
governments plans to increase accessibility to public services by prioritising the development of e-services. It calls once again for political will
to depoliticise the appointment and promotion of judges and prosecutors and to ensure the professionalism and independence of the Judicial
Council. Concerned about the difficult climate surrounding civil society organisations (CSOs), Parliament urges the government acknowledge
their added value.
Corruption: Parliament remains concerned about widespread corruption, particularly in state and local administration, public procurement and
political party financing. It urges the government to fight corruption in a non-selective manner and to ensure that all law enforcement and
supervisory bodies have sufficient autonomy to act independently.
Combating terrorism: Parliament notes the important contribution to regional efforts to fight Islamic radicalism. It encourages the development
of a comprehensive strategy and action plan to prevent and counter radicalisation, in close cooperation with religious leaders and
communities. It reiterates the need for the government to define a common proactive strategy of foreign, security and defence policy, bearing
in mind the current international terrorist threat.
Minorities: Parliament condemns the use of any kind of violence against the LGBTI community and reiterates its request that those responsible
for such acts of violence be brought to justice. It underlines the need to combat prejudices and discrimination on any grounds against the
Roma, and to facilitate their integration and their access to the educational system and the labour market. It reaffirms that the
Anti-Discrimination Law should be amended to bring it into line with the EUs acquis.
Parliament calls on all political parties and CSOs to actively promote an inclusive and tolerant multi-ethnic and multi-religious society. It calls
for measures to promote integration in the education of all interested parties.
Freedom of expression: Parliament deplores the further deterioration of freedom of expression and media freedom, political pressure, hate
speech, the continued polarisation, lack of independence and pluralism in the media, the widespread illegal wiretapping of journalists, the
cases of violence and threats against journalists. It urges that steps be taken to enhance media freedom.
Market economy: Parliament stresses the need to further strengthen legal certainty for foreign investors as well as domestic companies and to
strengthen administrative capacities and regulatory and supervisory agencies. It is concerned about the high level of public debt; calls for
improved fiscal discipline and encourages the principle of balanced budget and calls for budgetary implementation and transparency to be
improved. Although Parliament welcomes the GDP increase of 3.9 % in real terms in the first quarter of 2015, it is concerned that
unemployment remains high at 27.4 % and that labour market participation is very low, especially among young people and women.
Migrants: Parliament notes that the country has been facing an unprecedented migratory flow, with over 500 000 persons transiting through
FYROM in 2015. It is aware of the increasingly tense situation at the border with Greece, and calls on the authorities to continue cooperation
and coordination with the EU on migration issues. It encourages the stepping-up of measures related to border management to combat illegal
migration and human trafficking. It calls on the Commission to enhance support for border management capacity and allow access to the
relevant EU instruments and programmes.

Parliament calls upon the competent authorities to avoid and refrain from any kind of actions, including violence and the use of force, which
might discriminate against, and put at risk the lives of, refugees and migrants. It encourages the competent authorities to enhance, with the
EUs help, reception and accommodation facilities, regional coordination and information exchange and effective border management.
Parliament urges the country to do everything possible to ensure facilities for refugees and migrants, uphold humane conditions, refrain from
violent pushbacks and ensure strict respect for the countrys own law and for international law on refugees and asylum.
Relations with Greece: Parliament commends the agreement with Greece on 11 confidence-building measures and welcomes the high-level
consultations of the two Foreign Ministers in their respective capitals. It invites both sides to build upon the outcome of these meetings and
engage in further constructive discussion at a high political level. In particular, encourages both governments to take concrete steps towards
further enhancing mutual trust, including with regard to the name issue.
Regional cooperation: Parliament underlines the importance of regional cooperation and believes that it is an essential element in the EU
accession process. In this regard, it reiterates its concern over the use of historical arguments in the current debate with neighbours, and
welcomes any efforts towards joint celebrations of common historical events with neighbouring EU Member States.
Lastly, Parliament is of the opinion that FYROMs membership of NATO could contribute to achieving greater security and political stability in
South-East Europe. It recalls, however, that the EU and NATO accession processes are independent of each other.

