Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Directive

2015/0278(COD)

Awaiting Parliament 1st reading / single reading / budget 1st
stage

Accessibility requirements for products and services

Subject
2.10 Free movement of goods
2.10.03 Standardisation, EC/EU standards and trade mark, certification,
compliance
2.40 Free movement of services, freedom to provide
4.10.06 People with disabilities
4.10.07 The elderly
Legislative priorities
Joint Declaration 2017

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO Internal Market and Consumer Protection
(Associated committee)

Rapporteur

Appointed
02/02/2016

LØKKEGAARD Morten
Shadow rapporteur

VERHEYEN Sabine

SEHNALOVÁ Olga

VAN BOSSUYT
Anneleen

MAŠTÁLKA Jiří

ŠOLTES Igor

ZULLO Marco
PRETZELL Marcus
Committee for opinion
ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

EMPL Employment and Social Affairs
(Associated committee)
ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

TRAN Transport and Tourism
(Associated committee)
REGI

Regional Development

CULT

Culture and Education

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
08/06/2016
KÓSA Ádám
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
25/02/2016
TAYLOR Keith
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
02/02/2016
KAMMEREVERT Petra

JURI

Legal Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

FEMM

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

18/02/2016
ESTARÀS FERRAGUT
Rosa

PETI

Petitions

23/02/2016
KUNEVA Kostadinka

Council of the European Union Council configuration

Meeting

Employment, Social Policy, Health and Consumer Affairs3583

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

THYSSEN Marianne

Date
08/12/2017

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
02/12/2015

Legislative proposal published

18/01/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

16/06/2016

Debate in Council

15/12/2016

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

25/04/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

08/05/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

15/06/2017

Debate in Council

13/09/2017

Debate in Parliament

14/09/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/09/2017

Matter referred back to the committee
responsible

COM(2015)0615

Summary

A8-0188/2017

Summary

T8-0347/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0278(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Directive

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 059-p4; Treaty on the
Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Awaiting Parliament 1st reading / single reading / budget 1st stage

Committee dossier

IMCO/8/05279

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0615

02/12/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2015)0264

03/12/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2015)0265

03/12/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2015)0266

03/12/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2016)0233

08/07/2016

EC

PE582.315

14/07/2016

EP

PE597.391

06/01/2017

EP

PE583.968

06/02/2017

EP

PE599.675

14/02/2017

EP

PE592.148

23/03/2017

EP

PE599.726

27/03/2017

EP

PE594.023

06/04/2017

EP

A8-0188/2017

08/05/2017

EP

PE595.734

09/05/2017

EP

T8-0347/2017

14/09/2017

EP

Committee opinion

CULT

Committee draft report
Committee opinion

PETI

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

FEMM

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

EMPL

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Committee opinion

TRAN

Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at
1st reading/single reading

Summary

Summary

Summary

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

2015/0278(COD) - 02/12/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to improve the proper functioning of the internal market and remove and prevent barriers for the free movement of accessible
products and services, including for disabled people.
PROPOSED ACT: Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with Council.
BACKGROUND: the Commission notes that the demand for accessible products and services is high and the number of citizens with
disabilities and/or functional limitations will increase significantly with the ageing of the European Union's population. Taking into account
demographic ageing, it is expected that in 2020 approximately 120 million persons in the European Union will have multiple and/or minor
disabilities. An environment where products and services are more accessible allows for more inclusion and facilitates autonomy.
Accessibility is at the heart of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities, to which the EU is a party together with
25 of its Member States. It is one of the priorities of the European Disability Strategy 2010-2020 that sets actions for the implementation of the
UNCRPD at EU level. Accessibility prevents or removes barriers to the use of mainstream products and services. It allows the perception,
operation and understanding of those products and services by persons with functional limitations, on an equal basis with others.
Differences in legislation, standards and guidelines on accessibility exist and are very likely to increase as Member States develop new
accessibility rules. National authorities, manufacturers and service providers face uncertainties concerning the accessibility requirements for
potential cross-border services, and concerning the policy framework applicable for accessibility. Harmonisation of national measures on
accessibility is being proposed as a necessary condition to put an end to the legislative divergence.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: a preliminary screening showed that this EU initiative should only cover selected priority areas, where obstacles to
the functioning of the single market were most visible and likely to increase or where action at European level would add more value.
Regulatory intervention appeared to be the most efficient form of EU intervention for tackling current and expected problems in the functioning
of the single market.
CONTENT: the proposed Directive will provide for a common EU definition and implementation framework for accessibility requirements of
certain products and services, so that the latter might benefit from free circulation on the internal market and ensure the full participation of
persons with disabilities in society.

The proposal is complementary to existing EU law addressing assistance to persons with disabilities or with reduced mobility like the
regulation of passenger rights in all modes of transport (air, rail, waterborne, bus and coach). It also complements the proposal for a web
accessibility Directive that covers in its scope only certain public sector websites.
The main aspects of the proposal are as follows:
Scope: the proposed directive aims to:
harmonise accessibility requirements for a list of products and services, selected on the basis of the needs of industry and people with
disabilities. It concerns particularly transport ticket machines and check-in machines, banking services, consumer terminal equipment,
telephony and audio visual services, passenger transport services, e-books and e-commerce;
use the same accessibility requirements to define and give content to the already existing, but undefined obligation of accessibility
laid down in EU law, such as in the area of public procurement and the structural and investment Funds.
Accessibility requirements and free movement: the proposed Directive ensures that all products and services complying with the accessibility
requirements will benefit from free circulation on the internal market. It supports industry to address accessibility issues by using the same
functional accessibility requirements to render operational the obligation to buy/fund accessible products and services as laid down in EU law.
In line with the 'think small first' principle, light conformity assessment and safeguard clauses are introduced to protect economic operators
from carrying a disproportionate burden or avoiding (the costs imposed by) the fundamental alteration of their products and services
Implementation by Member States: the proposed directive:
harmonises accessibility requirements at EU level for a number of products and services but does not prescribe in detail how the
obligation to render a product or service accessible by complying with the defined accessibility requirements has to be achieved in
practice. In case this still leads to obstacles in the internal market, the Commission can consider other options in the future to provide
guidance to Member States such as standardisation or implementing measures;
includes the option of using voluntary harmonised standards to provide presumption of conformity with the accessibility requirements;
provides that Member States must transpose the Directive within two years after its entry into force at the latest;
requires Member States to apply all measures, within six years after the entry into force of the Directive.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the proposal has very limited budgetary implications. The only operational costs relate to the preparation of the
report on the application of this Directive, i.e. operational appropriation of EUR 0.2 million under the existing budget line, as well as
administrative expenditure of around EUR 0.182 million per year after the adoption of the Directive for running the related committee meetings.
This expenditure will be borne by internal redeployment and not entail an increase in funds.

2015/0278(COD) - 08/05/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted the report by Morten LØKKEGAARD (ADLE, DK) on the proposal for
a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the
Member States as regards the accessibility requirements for products and services.
The committee recommended that the position of the European Parliament adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Consistency with the international context: Members recommended restricting the scope of application of the directive to persons with
disabilities only and not to extend the scope to persons with permanent or temporary functional limitations, in order to align the directive with
the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRD),
A new recital explains, however, that the legislation will have a positive effect on people with permanent or temporary functional limitations
such as elderly people or pregnant women or people traveling with luggage.
Objective and scope: the Directive aims to eliminate and prevent barriers arising from divergent requirements for accessibility to the free
movement of products and services covered by this Directive in the Member States, and to contribute to the proper functioning of the internal
market.
It applies to products and services placed on the market after the date of application of the Directive. To the list of services and products
covered, Members have added: payment terminals; e-book readers; consumer banking services; websites and mobile device-based services
of audiovisual media services; existing Regulations dealing with transport services. Some content from websites and mobile applications will
be excluded.
The Directive does not apply to microenterprises that manufacture, import or distribute products and services that fall within its scope.
A coherent European legal framework: transport services should comply with the requirements of the directive when they are not already
covered by Union legislation on rail transport, bus and coach transport, sea transport, inland waterway transport or flights by air.
Member States should include the built environment used by clients of passenger services, ensuring compliance with the accessibility
requirements However, Member States that have already adopted national law covering adequately the built environment only need to comply
with the requirements set out in the directive to the extent that the services in questions are not covered by this legislation.
Obligations of economic operators: manufacturers shall ensure that products placed on the market have been designed and manufactured in
accordance with the applicable accessibility requirements, unless those requirements are not achievable because the adaptation of the
product concerned would require a fundamental alteration of the basic nature of that product or would impose a disproportionate burden for
the manufacturer.
The EU declaration of conformity shall clearly indicate that the product is accessible.
Structured dialogue: a structured dialogue shall be established between relevant stakeholders, including persons with disabilities and their
representative organisations, and the market surveillance authorities to ensure that adequate principles for the assessment of the exceptions

are established in order to ensure that they are coherent.
Presumption of conformity: the Commission shall request one or more European standardisation organisations to draft harmonised standards
for each of the accessibility requirements of products set out in the directive. It may adopt implementing acts establishing technical
specifications that meet the accessibility requirements, only if certain conditions are met for example, no reference to harmonised standards
has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union.
National database: each Member State shall establish a publicly accessible database to register non-accessible products. Consumers shall be
able to consult and log information about such products. They shall be informed of the possibility of lodging complaints. An interactive system
between national databases shall be envisaged so that information on non-accessible products can be disseminated across the Union.
Procedure applicable to products that present a risk regarding accessibility: Members recommended that where, following notification that the
product does not comply with the requirements of the directive, the relevant economic operator fails to take any adequate corrective action, the
market surveillance authorities shall require that economic operator to withdraw the product from the market within a reasonable period.
Working group: members proposed that the Commission establish a working group consisting of the representatives of the national market
surveillance authorities and the relevant stakeholders, including persons with disabilities. The working group shall: (i) facilitate the exchange of
information and best practices among the market surveillance authorities; (ii) ensure coherence in the application of the accessibility
requirements; (iii) express an opinion on exceptions from the accessibility requirements.
Implementing measures: the means of ensuring compliance with the directive should include the possibility, for the consumer directly affected
by the non-conformity of a product or service, of taking action under national law before the courts or having recourse to a complaint
mechanism. Prior to an action being brought before the courts or before the competent administrative bodies, alternative dispute resolution
mechanisms should be in place.
Application and transitional period: the provisions of the directive should apply five years after its entry into force. In order to give service
providers enough time to comply with the requirements of the directive, Members provided for a transition period during which products used
for the provision of a service do not need to comply with the accessibility requirements.

2015/0278(COD) - 14/09/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st reading/single
reading
The European Parliament adopted by 537 votes to 12, with 89 abstentions, amendments to the proposal for a directive of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States as regards the
accessibility requirements for products and services
The matter was referred back to the committee responsible for interinstitutional negotiations.
The main amendments adopted in plenary concerned the following issues:
Purpose and scope: Parliament clarified that the Directive should aim to eliminate and prevent barriers arising from divergent requirements for
accessibility to the free movement of products and services covered by this Directive in the Member States and contribute to the proper
functioning of the internal market.
Members called for the Directive to include persons with disabilities and persons with permanent or temporary functional limitations, such as
elderly persons, pregnant women and persons travelling with luggage.
Products and services covered: the Directive would apply to products and services placed on the Union market after the date of application of
the Directive. Among the products and services covered, Members added:
payment terminals;
e-book readers;
consumer banking;
websites and mobile device-based services of audiovisual media services;
transport, including urban public transport such as the metro, train, tram, trolley bus and bus, as well as related services;
tourism services, including the provision of accommodation and catering.
The Directive would not apply to microenterprises that manufacture, import or distribute products and services falling within its scope.
Built environment: accessibility requirements shall also cover the built environment from which the service is provided, including transport
services. However, these accessibility requirements shall apply when building new infrastructure or major renovations to maximise their use by
persons with disabilities.
Disproportionate burden: the proposal includes guarantees to ensure that the requirements of the Directive do not create a disproportionate
burden for economic operators. When assessing whether compliance with accessibility requirements imposes a disproportionate burden on
the competent
When assessing whether compliance with accessibility requirements imposes a disproportionate burden, only legitimate reasons should be
taken into consideration. Lack of priority, time or knowledge should not be considered to be legitimate reasons.
Structured dialogue: structured dialogue shall be established between relevant stakeholders, including persons with disabilities and their
representative organisations, and the market surveillance authorities to ensure that adequate principles for the assessment of the exceptions
are established in order to ensure that they are coherent.
National database: each Member State shall establish a publicly accessible database to register non-accessible products. Consumers shall be
able to consult and log information about non-accessible products. They should be informed of the possibility of lodging complaints. An
interactive system between national databases would allow the dissemination of information on products that are not accessible across
Europe.

Working Party: Members proposed that the Commission establish a working group of representatives of national market surveillance
authorities and relevant stakeholders, including persons with disabilities.
This working group should (i) facilitate the exchange of information and best practices among market surveillance authorities; (ii) ensuring
coherence in the application of accessibility requirements; and (iii) express an opinion on exceptions to accessibility requirements.
Application and transitional period: the provisions of the Directive shall apply from five years after its entry into force.

