Procedure file
Basic information
2015/0101(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure completed

World Health Organisation (WHO) Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control: Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products. Provisions
which do not fall under Title V of Part III of the TFEU
See also 2003/0316(CNS)
Subject
2.10.01 Customs union, tax and duty-free, Community transit
3.10.06.09 Industrial plants, tobacco, hops
6.20.02 Export/import control, trade defence
6.20.04 Union Customs Code, tariffs, preferential arrangements, rules of
origin

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
INTA

Rapporteur

International Trade

Appointed
13/07/2015

SZEJNFELD Adam
Shadow rapporteur

GUTIÉRREZ PRIETO
Sergio

MCCLARKIN Emma

CHARANZOVÁ Dita

BUCHNER Klaus
Committee for opinion
ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF)

Appointed

Commissioner
GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
04/05/2015

Initial legislative proposal published

09/02/2016

Legislative proposal published

11/04/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

21/04/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading
Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st

COM(2015)0194

Summary

14384/2015

Summary

Summary

27/04/2016

reading/single reading

A8-0154/2016

07/06/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

07/06/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

17/06/2016

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

17/06/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

01/10/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0238/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0101(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament
See also 2003/0316(CNS)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 033; Treaty on the Functioning of
the EU TFEU 218-p8-a2; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 207;
Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 218-p6a; Treaty on the
Functioning of the EU TFEU 114; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU
113

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

INTA/8/03425

Documentation gateway
Document attached to the procedure

15044/2013

18/11/2013

CSL

COM(2015)0194

04/05/2015

EC

Summary

Legislative proposal

14384/2015

09/02/2016

CSL

Summary

Committee draft report

PE567.603

06/04/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0154/2016

27/04/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0238/2016

07/06/2016

EP

Summary

Initial legislative proposal

Final act
Decision 2016/1749
OJ L 268 01.10.2016, p. 0001 Summary

2015/0101(NLE) - 04/05/2015 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude, on behalf of the European Union, the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to the World Health
Organisation?s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, in so far as the provisions of the Protocol which do not fall under Title V of Part III
of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union are concerned.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.

BACKGROUND: the World Health Assembly adopted in 2003 the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC), which aims at reducing
tobacco-related deaths and diseases around the world in a comprehensive manner. The EU concluded the FCTC by Council Decision
2004/513/EC.
The Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to the World Health Organisation?s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
was signed on 20 December 2013.
Illicit trade in tobacco products and in particular cigarette smuggling into the EU and within the EU is a criminal activity causing huge losses in
revenue for the EU and the Member States in terms of unpaid taxes and customs duties. Estimates indicate more than ?10 billion losses of
revenue annually to the EU and Member States.
Most of the EU Member States are affected by the illicit tobacco trade, either as points of entry or transit or destination countries. Since the
illicit products mostly originate from countries outside the EU, international cooperation, in particular also based on clear legislative
procedures, is key to addressing the problem of illicit trade. The FCTC Protocol currently constitutes the only multilateral regulatory initiative in
the area.
It is now necessary to approve the Protocol on behalf of the European Union.
CONTENT: under this proposal, the Council is invited to approve, on behalf of the European Union, the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in
Tobacco Products to the World Health Organisation?s Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.
This Decision applies to the provisions of the Protocol which do not fall within the scope of Title V of Part III of the Treaty on the Functioning of
the European Union (Freedom, Security and Justice).
The Protocol contains a complex set of measures, rules and policy in the field of fighting illicit trade in tobacco products. The Protocol
provisions fall into different areas of EU activity which may be subdivided as follows:
the manufacture and sale of tobacco (and related) products;
customs controls and cooperation including through mutual administrative assistance in customs matters;
approximation of criminal offences, judicial cooperation in criminal matters and police cooperation;
harmonised taxation and related rules.
The Protocol:
requires the introduction of a licensing, equivalent approval or control system by a competent authority for any natural or legal person
involved in the manufacturing and in the import and export of tobacco products and manufacturing equipment;
requires all natural and legal persons engaged in the supply chain of tobacco, tobacco products and manufacturing equipment to
conduct customer due diligence;
also provides for the establishment of a global tracking and tracing regime, within five years of the entry into force of the Protocol,
consisting of national and/or regional tracking and tracing systems controlled by the Parties for all tobacco products manufactured in
or imported into their territory.
Those articles are complemented by provisions on: (i) record-keeping and security and preventive measures, including anti-money-laundering
measures and reporting of suspicious transactions; (ii) sales by Internet; (iii) duty free sales of tobacco products and the obligation to
implement effective controls on tobacco and tobacco products in the free zones, including not mixing tobacco products with non-tobacco
products at the time of removal from a free zone.
Part IV of the Protocol defines the conduct to be established as unlawful under the Parties? legislation and obliges the Parties to ensure that
natural and legal persons are held liable for such unlawful conduct, including criminal offences. Further provisions concern seizure payments,
the handling of confiscated tobacco and special investigative techniques.
Part V of the Protocol contains provisions for the exchange of relevant information between the Parties, cooperation and mutual assistance
(both administrative and legal in relation to criminal matters), jurisdiction and extradition.
In parallel to this proposal, the Commission presented a separate proposal for a Council Decision on the conclusion of the Protocol, on behalf
of the European Union, as regards provisions which fall under Title V of Part III of the TFEU.

2015/0101(NLE) - 09/02/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude, on behalf of the European Union, the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to the World Health
Organisation's Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, with the exception of its provisions falling within the scope of Title V of Part Three
of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the conclusion of the World Health Organisation (WHO) Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) was approved
on behalf of the Community by Council Decision 2004/513/EC. The Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to the WHO FCTC
("the Protocol") was signed on 20 December 2013, subject to its conclusion at a later date.
The Union has exclusive competence for a number of provisions of the Protocol which fall within the scope of the Union's common commercial
policy or in areas where the Union has established common rules. Therefore, the Protocol should be approved on behalf of the Union as
regards matters falling within Union's competence only insofar as the Protocol may affect these common rules or alter their scope.
CONTENT: the proposed Decision seeks the approval, on behalf of the Union, of the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to
the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, with the exception of its provisions falling within the scope of Title V of Part Three of the
Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (area of freedom, security and justice).

The Protocol contains a set of measures and strategies in the field of fighting illicit trade in tobacco products.
The Protocol represents a significant contribution to the international efforts to eliminate all forms of illicit trade in tobacco products, and
thereby fight the circumvention of tax and customs duties obligations and reduce the supply of tobacco products.
The Protocol also contributes to the smooth functioning of the internal market for tobacco products whilst ensuring a high level of public health.
For details about the content of the Protocol, please refer to the summary of the Commissions initial legislative proposal of 4.5.2015.

2015/0101(NLE) - 27/04/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on International Trade adopted the report by Adam SZEJNFELD (EPP, PL) on the draft Council decision on the conclusion, on
behalf of the European Union, of the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to the World Health Organisation's Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control, with the exception of its provisions falling within the scope of Title V of Part Three of the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union.
The committee recommended that the European Parliament should give its consent to the conclusion of the Agreement.
To recall, the World Health Organisation's Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC) is the first global health treaty. It was developed
in response to the global tobacco epidemic and aims to tackle some of its causes, including illicit trade in tobacco products. It entered into
force on 27 February 2005 and there are currently 180 Parties to the Convention.
The Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products (FCTC Protocol) is based on Article 15 of the FCTC and was adopted by the
Conference of the Parties on 12 November 2012 in Seoul. This Protocol currently constitutes the only multilateral regulatory initiative in the
area. The EU signed the FCTC Protocol on 20 December 2013. The Protocol needs to be ratified by 40 parties for it to enter into force and its
ratification without delay by the European Union (and its Member States) would significantly contribute to the swift entry into force and
implementation of the FCTC Protocol.
In a short justification which accompanies the report, it is recalled that illicit trade in tobacco products, in particular cigarette smuggling is a
criminal activity posing a serious threat to public health and causes huge losses of revenue to the EU in terms of unpaid taxes and customs
duties. Estimates indicate more than EUR 10 billion losses of revenue annually to the EU and Member States.
A substantial part of the illicit tobacco products in the EU originate from the third countries. Therefore an effective global regime is the best
policy option to combat this cross-border phenomenon.
The FCTC Protocol is the main global initiative in this area. It contains a complex set of measures, rules and policy in the field of fighting illicit
trade in tobacco products.
The Protocol:
aims to make the supply chain of tobacco, tobacco products and manufacturing equipment secure by establishing a global tracking
and tracing system;
contains provisions to ensure control include licencing, record keeping requirements, regulation of Internet- sales, duty-free sales and
international transit;
establishes offences, addresses liability and seizure payments as well as the disposal of confiscated products;
aims to boost international cooperation including through mutual administrative assistance in customs matters.
With regard to these elements, Members are of the opinion that the ratification of the FCTC Protocol will benefit public health and help the
international fight against illicit tobacco trade, tax evasion and organised crime.

2015/0101(NLE) - 07/06/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 608 votes to 11, with 14 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to the World Health Organisation's
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, with the exception of its provisions falling within the scope of Title V of Part Three of the Treaty on
the Functioning of the European Union.
In line with the recommendation made by the Committee on International Trade, Parliament gave its consent to the conclusion of the
Agreement.
The Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products (FCTC Protocol) was adopted by the Conference of the Parties on 12 November
2012 in Seoul and contains a complex set of measures, rules and policy in the field of fighting illicit trade in tobacco products.
The Protocol:
aims to make the supply chain of tobacco, tobacco products and manufacturing equipment secure by establishing a global tracking
and tracing system;
contains provisions to ensure control include licencing, record keeping requirements, regulation of Internet- sales, duty-free sales and
international transit;
establishes offences, addresses liability and seizure payments as well as the disposal of confiscated products;
aims to boost international cooperation including through mutual administrative assistance in customs matters.

2015/0101(NLE) - 17/06/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to conclude, on behalf of the European Union, the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to the World Health

Organisations Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, in so far as the provisions of the Protocol which do not fall under Title V of Part III
of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) are concerned.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2016/1749 on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Protocol to Eliminate
Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to the World Health Organisation's Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, with the exception of its
provisions falling within the scope of Title V of Part Three of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
CONTENT: the Council Decision approves, on behalf of the Union, the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to the World
Health Organisations Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, in so far as the provisions of the Protocol which do not fall under Title V of
Part III of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) are concerned (Freedom, Security and Justice).
The Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products to the WHO FCTC (the Protocol) was signed on 20 December 2013, subject to its
conclusion at a later date.
The Protocol represents a significant contribution to the international efforts to eliminate all forms of illicit trade in tobacco products, and
thereby fight the circumvention of tax and customs duties obligations and reduce the supply of tobacco products. The Protocol also contributes
to the smooth functioning of the internal market for tobacco products whilst ensuring a high level of public health.
The Protocol:
aims to make the supply chain of tobacco, tobacco products and manufacturing equipment secure by establishing a global tracking
and tracing system;
contains provisions to ensure control include licencing, record keeping requirements, regulation of Internet- sales, duty-free sales and
international transit;
establishes offences, addresses liability and seizure payments as well as the disposal of confiscated products;
aims to boost international cooperation including through mutual administrative assistance in customs matters.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 1.10.2016.

