Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2017(BUD)

BUD - Budgetary procedure

Procedure completed

Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund: redundancies
in the manufacture of safety glass for the automotive industry in Belgium

Subject
3.40.03 Motor industry, cycle and motorcycle, commercial and agricultural
vehicles
4.15.05 Industrial restructuring, job losses, redundancies, relocations,
Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF)
8.70.55 2015 budget
Geographical area
Belgium

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgets

BUDG

Appointed
22/01/2015

NÍ RIADA Liadh
Shadow rapporteur

MUREŞAN Siegfried

GARDIAZABAL
RUBIAL Eider

TORVALDS Nils

VANA Monika

ZANNI Marco
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Budget

Appointed

Commissioner
GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
21/01/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

28/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

26/02/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/03/2015

Budgetary report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading

COM(2015)0009

Summary

A8-0034/2015

Summary

09/03/2015

Draft budget approved by Council

10/03/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

10/03/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

10/03/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

20/03/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0049/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2017(BUD)

Procedure type

BUD - Budgetary procedure

Procedure subtype

Mobilisation of funds

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

BUDG/8/02606

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0009

21/01/2015

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE546.865

09/02/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE549.294

16/02/2015

EP

Budgetary report tabled for plenary, 1st reading

A8-0034/2015

02/03/2015

EP

Summary

Budgetary text adopted by Parliament

T8-0049/2015

10/03/2015

EP

Summary

Final act
Decision 2015/470
OJ L 076 20.03.2015, p. 0056 Summary

2015/2017(BUD) - 21/01/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) to assist Belgium following redundancies in the manufacture of
safety glass for the automotive industry.
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
CONTENT: Article 12 of Council Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1311/2013 laying down the multiannual financial framework for the years
2014-2020 provides that the EGF shall not exceed a maximum annual amount of EUR 150 million (2011 prices) over and above the relevant
headings of the financial framework.
The rules applicable to financial contributions from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) are laid down Regulation (EC) No
1927/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund.
On 19 December 2013, Belgium submitted application EGF/2013/011 BE/Saint-Gobain Sekurit for a financial contribution from the EGF,
following redundancies linked to the closure of the production plant of Saint-Gobain Sekurit Benelux SA (SGS Benelux) located in Auvelais,
near Sambreville.
In this context, the Commission examined the application for mobilisation of the EGF to assist Belgium and concluded the following:
Belgium: EGF/2013/011 BE/Saint-Gobain Sekurit: Belgium submitted its application on 19 December 2013 and supplemented it by additional
information up to 4 July 2014.
In order to establish the link between the redundancies and major structural changes in world trade patterns due to globalisation, the Belgian
authorities argue that the sector of the manufacture of safety glass for the automotive industry, in which Saint-Gobain Sekurit (SGS) Benelux is
active, has undergone serious economic disruption as a result of several factors, such as a decrease in the production of automotive safety

glass in the EU, an increase of the market shares of competitors from non-EU countries and an increase in imports of these products into the
EU.
According to data referred to by the Belgian authorities, between 2007 and 2012, the production of passenger cars in the EU-27 decreased
from 21.9 million units to 19.5 million units (? 11.3 %; ? 2.4 % annual growth), whereas, in the rest of the world, it increased from 47.5 million
units to 60.6 million units (+ 27.6 %; + 5.0 % annual growth). This reduction in car production levels in the EU, which is linked to the general
decrease in consumer demand in the EU as a consequence of the economic crisis, has therefore led to a general reduction in demand for
automotive equipment in the EU, which has strongly affected automotive equipment suppliers. In the case of SGS Benelux, for example,
during the period preceding the redundancies (2011/2012), Ford, Volvo, and BMW, which were the main direct clients of SGS Benelux,
recorded decreases in sales of respectively 12 %, 10 % and 2 %.
This reduction in production levels has led to a weakening of the competitive position of EU producers of automotive safety glass, in particular
compared to producers in Turkey or China.
The impacts of these changes in trade patterns have been exacerbated by other factors such as high production costs (in particular labour
costs), overcapacity due to the reduction of production levels and low levels of productive investment. As a result, between 2007 and 2012,
SGS Benelux recorded an operating loss of EUR 20.46 million.
The Belgian application is based on the intervention criteria of Article 2(c) of the EGF Regulation, under which, in exceptional circumstances,
an application may be considered admissible even if the intervention criteria laid down in Articles 2(a) or 2(b) of the EGF Regulation are not
met, provided that the redundancies have a serious impact on employment and the local economy.
The application relates to 250 redundancies made at SGS Benelux during a period of four months from 31 August 2013 to 31 December 2013
and to 7 redundancies made at SGS Benelux before 31 August 2014 which are related to the same collective redundancies procedure.
The Belgian authorities argue that exceptional circumstances are applicable because, although the number of redundancies is below the
threshold of 500 redundancies, the effects of the redundancies are expected to be significant. In addition, it has been announced that another
enterprise belonging to the Saint-Gobain Group, Saint-Gobain Glass Benelux, will also cease production activities at its plant in Auvelais, in
September 2014. In total, the number of direct redundancies expected to be caused by the closure of SGS Benelux and Saint-Gobain Glass
Benelux is very high (approximately 260 redundancies at SGS Benelux and around 300 redundancies at Saint-Gobain Glass Benelux). These
redundancies are likely to have a serious impact on employment and the local economy.
Having examined this application, the Commission has concluded that the conditions for a financial contribution from the EGF are met.
Therefore, the proposed contribution from the EGF to the coordinated package of personalised services is EUR 1 339 928.
FINANCIAL IMPLICATION: considering the maximum possible amount of a financial contribution from the EGF, as well as the scope for
reallocating appropriations, the Commission proposes to mobilise the EGF for the total amount referred to above which represents 50% of the
total cost of actions.
The proposed decision to mobilise the EGF will be taken jointly by the European Parliament and the Council, as laid down in point 13 of the
Interinstitutional Agreement of 2 December 2013 between the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline,
on cooperation in budgetary matters and on sound financial management.
The Commission presents separately a transfer request in order to enter in the 2015 budget specific commitment appropriations, as required
in Point 13 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 2 December 2013.

2015/2017(BUD) - 02/03/2015 Budgetary report tabled for plenary, 1st reading
The Committee on Budgets adopted the report by Liadh NÍ RIADA (GUE/NGL, IE) on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament
and of the Council on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for an amount of EUR 1 339 928 in commitment and
payment appropriations in order to assist Belgium following redundancies in the manufacture of safety glass for the automotive industry.
Members recalled that the Union set up legislative and budgetary instruments to provide additional support to workers who are suffering from
the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to assist their reintegration into the labour market.
Belgian application: Belgium submitted application EGF/2013/011 BE/Saint-Gobain Sekurit for a financial contribution from the EGF following
257 redundancies linked to the closure of a plant of the Saint-Gobain Sekurit (SGS) group, located in Auvelais, which produced safety glass
for the automotive industry. The redundancies took place during and after the reference period from 31 August 2013 to 31 December 2013 and
are linked to a decline in the production of automotive safety glass in the European Union.
Members agreed with the Commission decision that the application for EGF financial contribution submitted by Belgium is entitled to a financial
contribution under Article 2(c), which requires exceptional circumstances to be demonstrated, despite the fact that the conditions set out in
Articles 2(a) and 2(b) of the EGF Regulation are not met. They stressed however that invoking Article 2(c) should be assessed on a
case-by-case situation and should not become a general method for the mobilisation of the EGF when basic conditions are not met.
Members welcomed the fact that, in order to provide workers with speedy assistance, the Belgian authorities decided to initiate the
implementation of the personalised services to the affected workers on 31 August 2013, well ahead of the decision and even the application
on granting the EGF support for the proposed coordinated package.
Expressing concerns about the length of the procedure, Members urged the Member States and all the institutions involved to make the
necessary efforts to improve procedural and budgetary arrangements in order to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF.
Members stressed that the EGF is a special instrument that allows the Union to react to specified unforeseen circumstances and should
maintain its main purpose, that is to provide support in case where, during a reference period, a large number of workers (minimum 500) are
made redundant as a result of major structural changes in world trade patterns due to globalisation and global financial and economic crises.
They stressed that the EGF must not become a substitute for other European Structural and Investment Funds, such as the European Social
Fund, and must be used to complement such funds. In this respect, the exceptional circumstances which allow for the mobilisation of the EGF
must not divert from the above-mentioned scope.

Nature of the redundancies: Members noted that the sector of the manufacture of safety glass for the automotive industry has undergone
serious economic disruption as a result of several factors, such as a decrease in the production of automotive safety glass in the Union, an
increase in the market shares of competitors from non-Member States and an increase in imports of these products into the Union. They also
noted that SGS Benelux's activities were closely linked to production trends in the automotive industry and that the socioeconomic situation of
the area concerned and of its neighbouring areas (Charleroi, Namur) means that the workers made redundant by SGS Benelux have limited
employment possibilities. They noted that the redundancies at SGS mainly concern production-line workers (83% of staff concerned have
ouvrier status). Members considered that in the context of the labour market situation in the affected region, the dismissed workers will have to
be retrained to find jobs in other occupations and/or other sectors.
Package of personalised services: Members noted that the coordinated package of personalised services to be co-funded includes the
following measures for the reintegration of the 257 redundant workers into employment (grouped by category): (1) individual job-search
assistance, case management and general information services, (2) training and retraining and (3) promotion of entrepreneurship. They
insisted on the need to enhance and encourage assistance with autonomy of workers. They recalled the importance of improving the
employability of all workers by means of adapted training and the recognition of skills and competences gained throughout a worker's
professional career.
Lastly, they also stressed that EGF assistance can co-finance only active labour market measures which lead to durable, long-term
employment.

2015/2017(BUD) - 10/03/2015 Budgetary text adopted by Parliament
The European Parliament adopted by 597 votes to 77, with 6 abstentions, a resolution on the proposal for a decision of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for an amount of EUR 1 339 928 in
commitment and payment appropriations in order to assist Belgium following redundancies in the manufacture of safety glass for the
automotive industry.
Parliament recalled that the Union set up legislative and budgetary instruments to provide additional support to workers who are suffering from
the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns and to assist their reintegration into the labour market.
It stressed the fact that the EGF is a special instrument that allows the Union to react to specified unforeseen circumstances and should
maintain its main purpose, that is to provide support in case where, during a reference period, a large number of workers (minimum 500) are
made redundant as a result of major structural changes in world trade patterns due to globalisation and global financial and economic crises.
The EGF must not become a substitute for other European Structural and Investment Funds, such as the European Social Fund, and must be
used to complement such funds. It emphasised that the exceptional circumstances which allow for the mobilisation of the EGF must not divert
from the above-mentioned scope.
Belgian application: Belgium submitted application EGF/2013/011 BE/Saint-Gobain Sekurit for a financial contribution from the EGF following
257 redundancies linked to the closure of a plant of the Saint-Gobain Sekurit (SGS) group, located in Auvelais, which produced safety glass
for the automotive industry. The redundancies took place during and after the reference period from 31 August 2013 to 31 December 2013 and
are linked to a decline in the production of automotive safety glass in the European Union.
Parliament agreed with the Commission decision that the application for EGF financial contribution submitted by Belgium is entitled to a
financial contribution under Article 2(c), which requires exceptional circumstances to be demonstrated, despite the fact that the conditions set
out in Articles 2(a) and 2(b) of the EGF Regulation are not met. It stressed however that invoking Article 2(c) should be assessed on a
case-by-case situation and should not become a general method for the mobilisation of the EGF when basic conditions are not met.
It welcomed the fact that, in order to provide workers with speedy assistance, the Belgian authorities decided to initiate the implementation of
the personalised services to the affected workers on 31 August 2013, well ahead of the decision and even the application on granting the EGF
support for the proposed coordinated package.
Expressing concerns about the length of the procedure, Members urged the Member States and all the institutions involved to make the
necessary efforts to improve procedural and budgetary arrangements in order to accelerate the mobilisation of the EGF.
Nature of the redundancies: Parliament noted that the sector of the manufacture of safety glass for the automotive industry has undergone
serious economic disruption as a result of several factors, such as a decrease in the production of automotive safety glass in the Union, an
increase in the market shares of competitors from non-Member States and an increase in imports of these products into the Union.
Limited opportunities: Parliament also noted that SGS Benelux's activities were closely linked to production trends in the automotive industry
and that the socioeconomic situation of the area concerned and of its neighbouring areas (Charleroi, Namur) means that the workers made
redundant by SGS Benelux have limited employment possibilities. It noted that the redundancies at SGS mainly concern production-line
workers (83% of staff concerned have ouvrier status). Parliament considered that in the context of the labour market situation in the affected
region, the dismissed workers will have to be retrained to find jobs in other occupations and/or other sectors .
The resolution insisted on the need to enhance and encourage assistance with autonomy and ease of access at regional level to implement a
bottom up ethos, empowering local solutions at a regional level where any situation which falls under the scope of the EGF might occur.
Package of personalised services: Parliament noted that the coordinated package of personalised services to be co-funded includes the
following measures for the reintegration of the 257 redundant workers into employment (grouped by category): (1) individual job-search
assistance, case management and general information services, (2) training and retraining and (3) promotion of entrepreneurship. It insisted
on the need to enhance and encourage assistance with autonomy of workers. It recalled the importance of improving the employability of all
workers by means of adapted training and the recognition of skills and competences gained throughout a worker's professional career.
Lastly, the resolution also stressed that EGF assistance can co-finance only active labour market measures which lead to durable, long-term
employment.

2015/2017(BUD) - 11/03/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to mobilise the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) to assist Belgium following redundancies in the manufacture of
safety glass for the automotive industry.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2015/470 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the mobilisation of the European
Globalisation Adjustment Fund in accordance with point 13 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 2 December 2013 between the European
Parliament, the Council and the Commission on budgetary discipline, on cooperation in budgetary matters and on sound financial
management (application EGF/2013/011 BE/Saint-Gobain Sekurit, from Belgium).
CONTENT: with this Decision, the European Parliament and the Council have decided to mobilise the sum of EUR 1 339 928 in commitment
and payment appropriations from European Globalisation Adjustment Fund within the framework of the general budget of the European Union
for the financial year 2015.
This amount shall assist Belgium in respect of redundancies in the enterprise Saint-Gobain Sekurit Benelux SA.
This application complies with the requirements for determining the financial contributions as laid down in Regulation (EC) No 1927/2006 (EGF
Regulation) which remains applicable, notwithstanding its repeal, for all applications submitted before 31 December 2013.
To recall, the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund was established to provide additional support for workers made redundant as a result
of major structural changes in world trade patterns due to globalisation and to assist them with their reintegration into the labour market.
Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 1311/2013 laying down the multiannual financial framework for the years 2014-2020 provides that the EGF shall
not exceed a maximum annual amount of EUR 150 million.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 11.03.2015.

