Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2284(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Activities, impact and added value of the European Globalisation Adjustment
Fund between 2007 and 2014

Subject
4.15.05 Industrial restructuring, job losses, redundancies, relocations,
Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF)

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL Employment and Social Affairs
(Associated committee)

Rapporteur

Appointed
23/10/2015

HARKIN Marian
Shadow rapporteur

SÓGOR Csaba

ULVSKOG Marita

GERICKE Arne

BOYLAN Lynn

VANA Monika

AGEA Laura
BIZZOTTO Mara
Committee for opinion
INTA

Rapporteur for opinion

International Trade

Appointed
30/11/2015

JONGERIUS Agnes
BUDG Budgets
(Associated committee)
CONT

15/09/2015
DENANOT Jean-Paul

Budgetary Control

30/11/2015
VALLI Marco

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
17/09/2015
DEUTSCH Tamás

FEMM

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

09/11/2015
BLINKEVIČIŪTĖ Vilija

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

THYSSEN Marianne

Key events
22/07/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

COM(2015)0355

Summary

29/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

29/10/2015

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

21/06/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

05/07/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

15/09/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

15/09/2016

Debate in Parliament

15/09/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/09/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0227/2016

Summary

T8-0361/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2284(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Implementation

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/8/04357

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document
Committee draft report

COM(2015)0355

22/07/2015

EC

PE578.543

02/03/2016

EP

Committee opinion

REGI

PE572.895

20/04/2016

EP

Committee opinion

INTA

PE577.053

25/04/2016

EP

Committee opinion

FEMM

PE577.082

25/04/2016

EP

PE582.101

27/04/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

Summary

Committee opinion

CONT

PE573.206

28/04/2016

EP

Committee opinion

BUDG

PE578.509

25/05/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0227/2016

05/07/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0361/2016

15/09/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)876

21/12/2016

2015/2284(INI) - 22/07/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to present a report on the activities of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) in 2013 and 2014.

CONTENT: the EGF, which was set up by Regulation (EC) No 1927/2006, was designed to reconcile the overall long-term benefits of open
trade for growth and employment with the short-term adverse effects which globalisation may have, particularly on the employment of the most
vulnerable and lowest-skilled workers.
The EGF is intended to provide support to workers made redundant as a result of major structural changes in world trade patterns. It
co-finances active labour market policy measures taken by the Member States to help redundant workers reposition themselves on the labour
market and find new jobs.
To respond more effectively to the global financial and economic crisis, the rules governing the EGF were amended first by Regulation (EC)
No 546/20092 and, since January 2014, by Regulation (EU) No 1309/2013.
Overview: the report notes that the e Fund has undergone a remarkable development since its beginnings in 2007. It covers a wide variety of
sectors and economic activities and more and more Member States have benefited from its support. In 2013 and 2014, the Commission
received 30 applications for contributions from the EGF, totalling EUR 109 million. These were submitted by 10 Member States (Belgium,
Germany, Ireland, Finland, France, Greece, Italy, the Netherlands, Poland and Spain). The applications, which requested a total of EUR
108 733 976 from the EGF, targeted 28 390 workers made redundant as a result of structural changes in world trade patterns due to
globalisation or the economic and financial crisis.
EGF applications were submitted for the first time for 10 sectors. The sectors concerned were: food products, slaughterhouses, chemicals,
glass, manufacture of computer, electronic and optical products, jewellery, transport/warehouse, air transport, food and beverage services,
programming and broadcasting, repair and installation of machinery and equipment, and information and communication.
The budgetary authority took 28 decisions targeting 27 610 redundant workers in 13 Member States, to make use of the EGF in 2013 and
2014, amounting to a total of EUR 114.4 million from the EGFs 2013-2014 budget.
Results from the EGF: the final reports presented by the 13 Member States showed that at the end of the EGF implementation period, 7 656
workers, or 44.9 % of the 18 848 workers who received EGF assistance, had found new jobs or were self-employed. The Commission
considers this a good result, particularly as the workers supported by EGF co-funded measures are usually among those facing the greatest
difficulties on the labour market.
The support packages which the 13 Member States provided to workers made redundant included a wide range of personalised job search,
outplacement and (re)qualification measures. The highest amounts were spent on two categories of measures:
training and retraining (about EUR 56.5 million, or 32 % of the total personalised services for all 34 cases) and
financial allowances paid to the workers while they were pursuing active labour market policy measures (about EUR 68.5 million, or
38.8 % of the total personalised services for all 34 cases).
Individual guidance and promotion of entrepreneurship were other frequently used measures.
The ex-post evaluation published in May 201411 indicates that the EGF made a positive contribution to addressing significant social and
labour market problems resulting from large-scale redundancy procedures.
Trends: with the increasing number of EGF cases, the Commission possesses more data to identify trends in applications and to gain an
overview of the direction of the Funds activities.
A total of EUR 561.1 million has been so far requested on behalf of 122 121 workers (this is the number of targeted workers estimated by the
Member States). The report gives a detailed breakdown of data regarding the 134 applications made by Member States between 2007 and
2014.
The Commission stresses in particular:
the trends so far show an increasing number of sectors for which EGF applications have been submitted, with 10 new sectors added
in this reporting period ;
Member States have gained experience in selecting the most suitable measures, directing their assistance to redundant workers in an
efficient manner, and making use of the EGF to test new approaches;
Member States are increasingly using the option of reallocating funds between measures during project implementation in order to
make best use of the approved contribution.
The new EGF Regulation (2014-2020): the report recalls that failure to achieve a qualified majority in Council meant that the EGFs temporary
crisis derogation could not be extended beyond the end of 2011. This limited the possibilities for EU assistance to workers in 2012 and 2013,
even though many were still seriously affected by the crisis.
However, the economic and financial crisis criterion was reintroduced by the new EGF Regulation (EU) No 1309/2013. The new Regulation
also expanded the categories of eligible workers to include self-employed workers and workers on temporary contracts and -by derogation
until the end of 2017 - young people 12 not in employment, education or training (NEETs). These changes broaden the scope for EGF
support. The new streamlined adoption timeline means that measures to help workers should be implemented more quickly.
The Commission considers that if the EGF is used to its full potential, in a way that complements other available instruments and in
consultation with the major stakeholders, workers eligible for EGF support can be helped in a tailored and personalised manner. This will
improve their labour market opportunities in the medium and longer term as markets continue to recover from the crisis.

2015/2284(INI) - 05/07/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Marian HARKIN (ADLE, IE) on the activities, impact and
added value of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund between 2007 and 2014.
The Committee on Budgets, exercising its prerogative as associated committees in accordance with Article 54 of the Rules of Procedure, also
gave its opinion on the report.

Members noted with satisfaction the finding from the Commission's report on the EGF's activities in 2013 and 2014 and welcomed the
extension of the funding period from one to two years. The report noted that the EGF interventions should be directed to investments that
contribute to growth, jobs, education, skills and workers geographical mobility and should be coordinated with existing EU programmes,
especially in the regions and sectors already suffering from the adverse effects of globalisation or restructuring of the economy. It noted that
the European Structural and Investment Funds (ESI) can act as follow-up measures in the EGF areas of support by stimulating investment.
Members considered that the functioning of the EGF has been improved by the reforms to the regulation and that the reduced appropriations
earmarked for the EGF in the annual budget have been sufficient to provide the necessary assistance and support that is both vital and
necessary for people who have lost their jobs and that the Commission should make improvements to the EGF database.
The Commission is invited to fully anticipate the effects of trade policy decisions on the EU labour market, also considering the evidence based
information of these effects that have been highlighted by the EGF application. The EGF suffers from a serious lack of awareness on the part
of some Member States, social partners and companies. Thus, Members called on the Commission to step up its communication efforts in this
area.
The report emphasised that the EGF cannot under any circumstances act a substitute to a serious policy to prevent and pre-empt
restructurings. It stressed the importance of a true industrial policy at EU level to bring sustainable and inclusive growth. It called on the
Commission to carry out sector-specific studies on the impact of globalisation and, on the basis of the findings, make proposals to encourage
companies to anticipate changes in their industries and to prepare their workers before making them redundant.
Beneficiaries of the EGF: Members welcomed the conclusions in the Court of Auditors report that nearly all EGF-eligible workers were able to
benefit from personalised and well-coordinated measures tailored to their individual needs and that nearly 50 % of workers who received
financial assistance are now back in employment. They believe that the involvement of targeted beneficiaries or their representatives, the
social partners, local employment agencies and other relevant stakeholders in the initial assessment and application is essential in order to
ensure positive outcomes for beneficiaries.
The report welcomed the emphasis in the new regulation on older and younger workers and the inclusion of NEETs in certain applications.
The Commission is called upon to include in its mid-term evaluation of the EGF a specific qualitative and quantitative assessment of the EGF
support to young persons not in employment, education or training (NEETs), especially in view of the implementation of the Youth Guarantee
and the necessary synergies between national budgets, the ESF and the Youth Employment Initiative (YEI).
The Commission is also called upon to ensure that in all EGF applications women and men are treated equally.
Cost effectiveness and added value of the EGF: the report called on the Commission and the Member States to use the scope for
implementing the EGF budget more flexibly and effectively, with the focus on outcomes, impact and value added. They considered that the
application procedure should be made faster and invited the Commission to assess thoroughly the reasons for the low implementation rates
and to propose measures to address the existing bottlenecks and ensure optimal use of the fund. The co-funding rate of 60 % should not be
increased.
Members regretted the fact that according to the Court of Auditors one third of EGF funding compensates national workers' income support
schemes with no EU added value. They also regretted the diminished funding for the EGF and considered that EGF and ESF measures
should be used to complement each other.
Impact on SMEs: concerned that the EGF has had a very limited impact on SMEs, Members called on the Commission to further reorient the
EGF towards SMEs which are key players in the European economy. They stipulated that there should be more use of the derogation from the
eligibility threshold, particularly to benefit SMEs and to take the 'Think Small First' principle into account in the planning and application stages.
Data requirements: the report recommended Member States to:
set quantitative re-integration objectives and systematically differentiate between EGF, ESF and other national measures specifically
designed for workers affected by mass redundancies;
distinguish between the two main types of EGF measures, i.e. active labour market measures and income support paid to workers,;
provide more detailed information on the measures accessed by individual participants in order to allow a more accurate cost-benefit
analysis of different measures.
The Commission is called on to provide information on the type and quality of jobs found by people who have been re-integrated into the
labour market and on the medium term trend as regards the rate of integration achieved through EGF interventions.

2015/2284(INI) - 15/09/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 475 votes to 63 with 74 abstentions a resolution on the application of Council Directive 2000/78/EC of 27
November 2000 establishing a general framework for equal treatment in employment and occupation (Employment Equality Directive).
Prohibit discrimination: Parliament welcomed the fact that almost all Member States have included the general principle of equal treatment on
specific grounds of discrimination in their constitutions. However, it regretted that only a few Member States have systematically ensured that
all existing legal texts are in line with the principle of equal treatment.
regretting the increase in experiences of discrimination and harassment, Members called on the Commission to include a specific focus on all
types of discrimination when monitoring the implementation of Directive 2000/78/EC, and to speed up the adoption of the EU horizontal
anti-discrimination directive proposed by the Commission in 2008, which was voted for by Parliament.
Members noted that non-discrimination in the field of occupation and employment is only effective if discrimination is comprehensively
combated in all areas of life through, for example, community support, legislation and coordination tools such as strategies and frameworks at
both Member State and EU levels, including the possibility of introducing positive action measures.
Religion and belief: studies showed that the most discriminated religious groups in the area of employment include Jews, Sikhs and Muslims
(and especially women). Members recommended the adoption of European frameworks for national strategies to combat anti-Semitism and
Islamophobia.

Given the increasingly xenophobic and Islamophobic context, Members considered that the consistent application of anti-discrimination
legislation should be viewed as an important element in radicalisation prevention strategies. Whilst acknowledging the role played by the
European Court of Human Rights through its decisions in the interpretation of the Directive in its entirety, Members expressed regret regarding
the low number of cases referred to courts, which contrasts with the high number of discrimination occurrences that emerge from victimisation
surveys but are not pursued in justice. Parliament called upon Member States to recognise the fundamental right to freedom of conscience. It
insisted that religious freedom is an important principle that should be respected by employers, underlining, however, that the implementation
of this principle is a question of subsidiarity.
Disability: Members encouraged Member States to interpret EU law in such a way as to provide a basis for a concept of disability in line with
the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD). They stressed the importance of:
protecting disabled workers, including those with a terminal illness, from any form of discrimination in the workplace
ensuring that socially responsible public procurement might be used as an instrument to integrate people with disabilities and other
vulnerable groups into the labour market;
using structural funds, in particular the European Social Fund, to adapt workplaces and to provide necessary assistance for persons
with disabilities at work;
implementing an all-encompassing framework for measures enabling access to quality employment for persons with disabilities.
Members encouraged Member States to: (i) develop and implement an all-encompassing framework for measures enabling access to quality
employment for persons with disabilities, including the possibility of using, for example, fines imposed for failure to comply with
anti-discrimination legislation; (ii) provide ongoing support to employers that hire persons with disabilities; (iii) combat prejudice against
persons with disabilities, especially persons with psychosocial or intellectual disabilities.
Age: underlining the important contributions that older workers make to society and the competitiveness of companies, Parliament stressed the
need to:
promote access to employment and integration into the labour market of all workers regardless of their age, and to apply measures in
order to protect all workers in the workplace
study the increasing problem of unemployment among people over the age of 50 and to develop effective tools in order to reintegrate
older workers into the labour market and protect them against unfair dismissal;
upscale digital skills among the working population to help older people and workers with disabilities remain longer in the labour
market;
promote free high-quality public services that provide proper and necessary care and assistance for children, the sick and the elderly.
Members welcomed the Commission's initiative on work-life balance. They recommended that the initiative fully include measures to support
informal carers and grandparents of working age, as well as young parents.
Sexual orientation: Members recalled that the scope of protection from discrimination available to trans people remains uncertain in many
Member States. They called for measures to implement effectively national legislation transposing the Gender Equality Directive (recast). They
also regretted the general under-reporting of all forms of discrimination against LGBTI people and highlighted the role of national LGBTI
organisations as key partners in raising awareness.
In general terms, Parliament recommended, inter alia:
developing harmonised and homogeneous statistics designed to fill in all gaps in the collection of gender equality data;
strengthening the role of the national equality bodies, ensuring their impartiality, developing their activities and enhancing their
capacities, including through the provision of adequate funding;
displaying greater commitment in implementing the principle of equality between women and men in employment policies;
enhancing the reconciliation of work and private life by concrete measures, such as urgently proposing new legislative proposals on
the Maternity Leave Directive so as to guarantee the right for women to return to work after pregnancy and maternity leave and
parental leave;
improving complaint mechanisms at national level by strengthening national equality bodies;
paying close attention to the rules applicable to sanctions and redress in the Member States;
ensuring adequate training is provided for employees of national, regional and local authorities, law enforcement bodies and labour
inspectorates;
involving social partners (trade unions and employers) and civil society, including equality bodies, in the effective application of
equality in employment and occupation.

