Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2754(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the renewal of the EU plan of action on gender equality and
women?s empowerment in development

Subject
4.10.04.01 Programmes and actions for gender equality
4.10.09 Women condition and rights
6.30 Development cooperation

Key players
Committee responsible

European Parliament

DEVE

Rapporteur

Appointed

Development

23/06/2015
MCAVAN Linda

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

International Cooperation and Development

MIMICA Neven

Key events
22/09/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

07/10/2015

Debate in Parliament

08/10/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

08/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

08/10/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0350/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2754(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Debate or resolution on oral question/interpellation

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 128-p5

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

DEVE/8/03747

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE567.463

02/09/2015

EP

Oral question/interpellation by Parliament

B8-0762/2015

05/10/2015

EP

Oral question/interpellation by Parliament

B8-0763/2015

05/10/2015

EP

Motion for a resolution

B8-0988/2015

05/10/2015

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0350/2015

08/10/2015

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2015)774

25/02/2016

EP

Summary

2015/2754(RSP) - 08/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European parliament adopted by 524 votes to 55 with 83 abstentions, a resolution on the renewal of the EU Plan of Action on Gender
Equality and Womens Empowerment in Development.
Members recalled that the EU was committed to promoting gender equality and ensuring gender mainstreaming in all of its actions.
In this context, they believed that the conclusions of the evaluation of first action plan for gender equality (GAP1) showed the clear need for a
step change in EU action on gender equality and womens empowerment and that a renewed political commitment by the European External
Action Service (EEAS) and the Commission was required to improve performance.
They stressed the importance of implementing the main recommendations of the evaluation in the successor to the GAP1.
Welcoming the publication of the 2nd Action Plan on gender equality (GAP2), Parliament urged the Commission and EEAS to begin
implementation of the new plan as soon as possible, and to involve Parliament in consultation throughout that process.
Content of the 2nd Action Plan: Parliament considered that GAP2 should focus on all aspects of EU external policy development cooperation,
humanitarian aid, trade, human rights and foreign affairs, migration and asylum in line with the policy coherence for development principle,
and should apply to developing, neighbourhood and enlargement countries alike.
Recalling that progress towards gender equality and womens empowerment should be core business for EU institutions, Parliament wanted
this issue to be integrated into all Union policies.
With particular regard to development policy, Parliament called on all EU delegations to submit an annual GAP report and for EU delegations
to present a summary of progress towards gender equality and womens empowerment. At the same time, Parliament felt that the review of
EDF country programming provided an opportunity to ensure that full implementation of GAP2 was on track.
Data collection and targets: Members insisted on the use of gender-sensitive quantitative and qualitative indicators and systematic and timely
collection of gender disaggregated data with regard to the beneficiaries and participants across all actions as part of the monitoring and
evaluation process. They underlined the need to invest in national statistics and calls on all the Member States to establish gender-sensitive
monitoring systems. Parliament invited EU delegations and the Member States embassies to prioritise high-quality gender analysis as the
basis for country-level strategy and programming. The EU should revise national indicative plans from the point of view of the new GAP.
Members stressed the need for clear targets and indicators, measured and disaggregated by sex, age, disability and other factors and
improved tracking of budgetary allocations.
Key aspects for the new GAP: Parliament believed that the GAP must address a comprehensive approach for the full implementation of the
EU guidelines on violence against women and girls with increased efforts and resources to eliminate all discriminatory practices against
women. There must be efforts to combat:
trafficking in human beings,
female genital mutilation,
forced sterilisation,
forced pregnancy,
gendercide,
domestic violence and marital rape,
child, early and forced marriage and
gender-based violence in conflict and post-conflict situations.
Parliament called for the development of specific EU actions to strengthen the rights of different groups of women, with special attention being
given to young people, migrants, and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons.
Members highlighted the fact that the use of rape as a weapon of war and oppression must be eliminated. They underlined the vulnerability of
women migrants, refugee and asylum seekers. They called for further efforts to increase womens access to health and health education and
family planning.
In general, Parliament believed that businesses had an important role to play in advancing gender equality through actions that contribute to
womens economic empowerment. It highlighted the positive role that micro-finance, social entrepreneurship, and alternative business models
continued to have in the field of womens economic empowerment and inclusion. It also emphasised the need for womens inclusion and
representation in emerging economic fields. The GAP2 must address the situation of LGBTI persons in third countries, and the importance of
strengthening womens legal rights and access to justice.
Promote increased participation of women in peacekeeping: Members called on the EU to promote increased participation of women in
peacekeeping, peace building processes and EU military and civil crisis management missions. They reiterated, their call on the EU for the
incorporation of gender perspectives and womens rights in all peace and security initiatives.
Parliament underlined the importance of measures strengthening leadership and participation of women and womens rights organisations in
the public as well as private spheres.
Lastly, it underlined the need to involve men and boys and promote their active engagement and responsibility in addressing discriminatory
social norms and combating gender stereotypes and violence against women and girls.

