Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2015/0307(COD)

Procedure completed

Schengen Borders Code: reinforcement of checks against relevant
databases at external borders
Amending Regulation (EU) 2016/399 2015/0006(COD)
See also 2017/2691(RSP)
Subject
7.10.02 Schengen area
7.10.04 External borders crossing and controls, visas
7.30 Police, judicial and customs cooperation in general

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
15/02/2016

MACOVEI Monica
Shadow rapporteur

KUDRYCKA Barbara

FAJON Tanja

IN 'T VELD Sophia

VERGIAT
Marie-Christine

LUNACEK Ulrike

WINBERG Kristina
Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
16/02/2016

DE SARNEZ Marielle
DEVE

JURI

Development

Legal Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Migration and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
AVRAMOPOULOS Dimitris

Key events
15/12/2015

Legislative proposal published

21/01/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

COM(2015)0670

Summary

25/02/2016

Debate in Council

21/06/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

21/06/2016

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

27/06/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

08/12/2016

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

15/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

16/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

16/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

07/03/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

15/03/2017

Final act signed

15/03/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

18/03/2017

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0218/2016

Summary

T8-0047/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0307(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EU) 2016/399 2015/0006(COD)
See also 2017/2691(RSP)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 077-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/05343

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0670

15/12/2015

EC

Committee draft report

PE578.659

05/04/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE582.195

29/04/2016

EP

PE578.843

18/05/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0218/2016

27/06/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0047/2017

16/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)156

14/03/2017

Committee opinion

AFET

Summary

Final act
Regulation 2017/458
OJ L 074 18.03.2017, p. 0001 Summary

2015/0307(COD) - 15/12/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to introduce a targeted amendment to Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a
Community Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders (Schengen Borders Code) in order to increase security
within the area without internal border control.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: control at external borders remains one of the main safeguards of the area without controls at internal borders. The
phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, many of whom are Union citizens, demonstrates the necessity to strengthen the checks at external
borders with regard to Union citizens.
It is estimated that up to 5 000 EU citizens departed to the conflict zones (notably Syria and Iraq) and most probably joined ISIS forces. Many
of the perpetrators of recent terrorist attacks, starting from Charlie Hebdo in January 2015, stayed or were trained abroad in the areas
controlled by the terrorist organisations.
This proposal replies to the call expressed in the Council conclusions of 19 and 20 November, which invited the Commission to present a
proposal for a targeted revision of the Schengen Borders Code to provide for systematic controls of EU nationals, including the verification of
biometric information, against relevant databases at external borders of the Schengen area, making full use of technical solutions in order not
to hamper the fluidity of movement.
This proposal is a response to the increase of terrorist threats in Europe as manifested by the attacks in Paris, Copenhagen and Brussels, but
should address all potential risks to internal security.
CONTENT: this proposal amends Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a Community
Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders (Schengen Borders Code).
The amended proposal:
obliges Member States to carry out systematic checks on persons enjoying the right of free movement under Union law (i.e. EU
citizens and members of their families who are not EU citizens) when they cross the external border against databases on lost and
stolen documents as well as in order to verify that those persons do not represent a threat to public order and internal security. This
obligation shall apply at all external borders i.e. at air, sea and land borders, both at entry and exit;
enables Member States, where a systematic consultation of databases on all the persons enjoying the right of free movement under
Union law could lead to disproportionate impact on the flow of traffic at the border, to carry out only targeted checks against databases
provided that a risk assessment shows this does not lead to risks related to internal security, public policy, international relations of the
Member States or a threat to the public health. The risk analysis should be communicated to Frontex and should be the subject of
regular reporting to the Commission and to Frontex;
reinforces the need to verify biometric identifiers as contained in Council Regulation (EC) No 2252/2004. This Regulation introduced
the facial image and fingerprints as security elements in the passport of EU citizens in order to render them more secure and establish
a reliable link between the holder and the passport. Therefore in case of doubts on the authenticity of the passport or on the identity of
the holder, border guards should verify those biometric identifiers;
removes the margin left to Member States not to check third country nationals on exit : the amendment will align the obligations to
check systematically also on exit that a third country national does not present a threat to public policy and internal security.
The United Kingdom and Ireland shall not take part in the adoption of this Regulation and is not bound by it or subject to its application.
Denmark shall decide within a period of six months after the Council has decided on this Regulation whether it will implement it in its national
law.

2015/0307(COD) - 27/06/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the report by Monica MACOVEI (ECR, RO) on the proposal for a
regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 as regards the reinforcement of checks
against relevant databases at external borders.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Respect for Fundamental Rights: it is recalled that the implementation of the Regulation shall take account the Universal Declaration of Human
Rights, the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union (TEU)
as well as all Union law relating to data protection. It is also stated that border checks shall be carried out in such a way as to fully respect
human dignity and that that should be carried out in a professional and respectful manner and should be proportionate to the objectives
pursued.

Access to relevant databases: in order to guarantee security of the Unions external borders, Member States shall ensure that their competent
authorities (including their border guards):
have an electronic connection to Interpol 's Stolen and Lost Travel Documents database (SLTD ) at external border crossing points;
have access to the relevant national and European data banks, including the Schengen Information System (SIS) and the Europol
Information System (EIS).
In this regard, it is stated that Member States that are not in the Schengen area and whose borders constitute the external borders should be
fully integrated into SIS in order to conduct better border management and help preserve the security of the Union.
Targeted checks: as a general rule, systematic checks should be carried out at all external borders. However, if these checks have a
disproportionate impact on the flow of traffic, the Member States concerned may carry out those checks on a targeted basis, provided that an
assessment of the risks shows that this derogation will not harm the internal security of the Union.
Such risk assessment should be based on a set of common risk indicators developed by the Commission, in close cooperation with Frontex.
It should be possible for border guards to decide not to check relevant databases regarding a person enjoying the right of free movement
under Union law if it can be clearly assessed that that person does not jeopardise the internal security of any of the Member States. Such
persons could include, inter alia:
children under the age of 12 and minors accompanied by parents;
school pupils when travelling on organised excursions;
elderly persons when travelling in an organised manner;
pilots of aircraft and other crew members;
Heads of State or government and the members of their delegations;
holders of diplomatic, official or service passports and members of international organisations;
rescue services, police and fire brigades and border guards;
off-shore workers;
holders of permits required by national law in accordance with specific Member States' arrangements in bilateral agreements.
Where a Member State intends to carry out targeted checks, it should notify the other Member States, Frontex and the Commission without
delay.
The duration and location of the targeted checks shall not go beyond what is strictly necessary.
Risk analysis: Frontex shall transmit without delay its evaluations of the Member States initial assessment and subsequent reports to all other
Member States, indicating whether or not it deems the Member State concerned to have conducted an appropriate security risk and traffic flow
assessment, and whether or not the Member State has appropriately decided to apply targeted checks on the basis of that assessment.
The risk assessment shall provide statistics on passengers and incidents related to cross-border crime.
Enhance biometric elements included in Member States identity cards: many identity cards produced by the Member States do not have any
security features such as facial image or fingerprints. In order to make it possible for systematic verification to be carried out on travel
documents other than passports, taking into account internal security issues, the Commission should take swift action to propose the
establishment of common standards for the security features and biometrics that are to be included in identity cards issued by the Member
States.
Impact of the Regulation: the Commission shall publish a study on the impact of this Regulation on the flow of traffic on the entry and exit at
Schengen external borders by one year after the date of entry into force of this Regulation. Then every two years, it shall submit a general
evaluation report.

2015/0307(COD) - 16/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 496 votes to 120, with 42 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 as regards the reinforcement of checks against relevant
databases at external borders.
The European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as
follows:
Border checks: the amended text stipulates that the phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, many of whom are Union citizens, demonstrates
the need to reinforce checks at external borders with regard to persons enjoying the right of free movement under Union law.
This Regulation amending the Schengen Border Code obliges the Member States to carry out systematic checks on entry and on exit to the
external borders of the Member States using the SIS and Interpol's Stolen and Lost Travel Documents (SLTD) database and other relevant
Union databases.
Member States are obliged to check systematically third -country nationals against all relevant databases on entry. It should be ensured that
such checks are also carried out systematically on exit.
One of the purposes of such checks is to prevent any threat to the internal security and public policy of the Member States, irrespective of the
origin of such threat, including where such a threat derives from Union citizens.
Such systematic checks should be carried out in full compliance with relevant Union law, including the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union.
In order to facilitate systematic checks against databases, Member States should phase out travel documents without machine -readable
zones.
Targeted checks: where the checks against the databases would have a disproportionate impact on the flow of traffic, a Member State may

decide to carry out those checks on a targeted basis at specified border crossing points, following an assessment of the risks related to the
public policy, internal security, public health or international relations of any of the Member States.
Persons who, in principle, are not subject to targeted checks against the databases, shall, as a minimum, be subject to a check with a view to
establishing their identity on the basis of the production or presentation of travel documents. Such a check shall consist of a rapid and
straightforward verification of the validity of the travel document for crossing the border, and of the presence of signs of falsification or
counterfeiting.
Transitional period: as regards air borders, Member State may decide to carry out those checks on a targeted basis during a maximum
transitional period of six months from the date of entry into force of this Regulation. This six-month transitional period may be prolonged for
that particular airport by a maximum of 18 months in exceptional cases, where, at a particular airport, there are specific infrastructural
difficulties requiring a longer period of time for adaptations.
Where a Member State intends to carry out checks against relevant databases on a targeted basis regarding persons enjoying the right of free
movement under Union law, it should notify the other Member States, the Agency and the Commission without delay. A procedure for such
notification should be developed by the Commission, in cooperation with the Member States, in accordance with the Practical Handbook for
Border Guards (Schengen Handbook).

2015/0307(COD) - 15/03/2017 Final act
PURPOSE: to introduce a targeted amendment to Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a
Community Code in order to increase security within the area without internal border control in response to heightened risks of terrorism.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2017/458 of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) 2016/399 as regards
the reinforcement of checks against relevant databases at external borders.
BACKGROUND: checks at the EUs external borders remain one of the main safeguards of the area without internal border control and
significantly contribute to ensuring the long-term security of the Union and its citizens. Such checks shall be carried out in the interests of all
Member States. One of the purposes of such checks is to prevent any threat to the internal security and public policy of the Member States.
Minimum checks based on a rapid and straightforward verification of the validity of the travel document for crossing the border are currently
the rule for persons enjoying the right of free movement under Union law. The phenomenon of foreign terrorist fighters, many of whom are
Union citizens, demonstrates the need to reinforce checks at external borders with regard to persons enjoying the right of free movement
under Union law.
CONTENT: the purpose of this regulation is to amend Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council
establishing a Community Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders (Schengen Borders Code) in response to the
heightened terrorist threat on the EUs territory.
Systematic border checks: the regulation amends the Schengen Border Code which obliges the Member States to carry out systematic checks
on entry and on exit to the external borders of the Member States using the SIS and Interpol's Stolen and Lost Travel Documents (SLTD)
database and other relevant Union databases.
The checks on the relevant persons will be compulsory both when they enter or leave by all air, sea and land borders.
Persons who, in principle, are not subject to targeted checks against the databases, shall, as a minimum, be subject to a check with a view to
establishing their identity on the basis of the production or presentation of travel documents. Such a check shall consist of a rapid and
straightforward verification of the validity of the travel document for crossing the border, and of the presence of signs of falsification or
counterfeiting, where appropriate by using technical devices, and, in cases where there are doubts about the travel document or where there
are indications that such a person could represent a threat to the public policy, internal security, public health or international relations of the
Member States, the border guard shall consult the databases and at least one of the biomentric identifiers integrated into the travel
documents.
In order to facilitate systematic checks against databases, Member States should gradually phase out travel documents without
machine-readable zones.
Such systematic checks should be carried out in full compliance with relevant Union law, including the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union.
Targeted checks: where the checks against the databases would have a disproportionate impact on the flow of traffic, a Member State may
decide to carry out those checks on a targeted basis at specified border crossing points, following an assessment of the risks related to the
public policy, internal security, public health or international relations of any of the Member States.
The scope and duration of the temporary reduction in targeted checks against the databases shall not exceed what is strictly necessary and
shall be defined in accordance with a risk assessment carried out by the Member State concerned.
Persons who, in principle, are not subject to targeted checks against the databases, shall, as a minimum, be subject to a check with a view to
establishing their identity on the basis of the production or presentation of travel documents. Such a check shall consist of a rapid and
straightforward verification of the validity of the travel document for crossing the border, and of the presence of signs of falsification or
counterfeiting.
Risk assessment: Member States shall transmit their risk assessments and their updates to the European Border and Coast Guard Agency
(and report every 6 months to the Commission).
Where certain Member States, the Agency or the Commission have concerns about the intention to carry out targeted checks against the
databases, they shall notify the Member State in question of those concerns without delay. The Member State in question shall take those
concerns into account.
The Commission shall, by 8 April 2019, transmit to the European Parliament and the Council an evaluation of the implementation and

consequences of the measures envisages in the regulation.
Air borders: with regard to air borders, the Member States may carry out targeted checks for a maximum transitional period of 6 months from
7.4.2017. This period may be extended by a maximum of 18 months where, at a particular airport, there are specific infrastructural difficulties
requiring a longer period of time for the necessary adaptations. This deadline may be extended in certain cases.
Land borders: at the border crossing points where those systematic checks are not carried out, the identity of persons enjoying the right of free
movement under Union law should be established on the basis of the production or presentation of an authentic travel document which is valid
for crossing the border.
The United Kingdom and Ireland are not taking part in the adoption of this regulation and are not bound by it. Denmark shall decide within a
period of 6 months after the regulations entry into force whether or not it will implement the regulation in its national law.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 7.4.2017 The regulation is directly applicable in all the Member States concerned by the envisaged measures.

