Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2195(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2014 discharge: European Agency for the operational management of
large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice (eu-LISA)

Subject
8.70.03.04 2014 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

CONT

Appointed
20/08/2015

VAUGHAN Derek
Shadow rapporteur

DEUTSCH Tamás

VISTISEN Anders
Primdahl

ALI Nedzhmi

DE JONG Dennis

JÁVOR Benedek

VALLI Marco
KAPPEL Barbara
Committee for opinion
LIBE

Rapporteur for opinion

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
19/11/2015

MACOVEI Monica

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
23/07/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

05/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

04/04/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

11/04/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

27/04/2016

Debate in Parliament

28/04/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

COM(2015)0377

Summary

A8-0124/2016

Summary

28/04/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

28/04/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

14/09/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0183/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2195(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/04229

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0377

23/07/2015

EC

Summary

N8-0144/2015
OJ C 409 09.12.2015, p. 0275

15/09/2015

CofA

Summary

Supplementary non-legislative basic
document

05584/2016

27/01/2016

CSL

Summary

Committee draft report

PE569.761

16/02/2016

EP

PE575.096

29/02/2016

EP

PE576.954

04/03/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0124/2016

11/04/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0183/2016

28/04/2016

EP

Summary

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

LIBE

Final act
Budget 2016/1555
OJ L 246 14.09.2016, p. 0331 Summary

2015/2195(DEC) - 23/07/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2014, as part of
the 2014 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security
and justice (EU-LISA).
CONTENT: this Commission document sets out the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2014 as
prepared on the basis of the information presented by the institutions, organisations and bodies of the EU, in accordance with Article 148 (2) of
the Financial Regulation applicable to the EU's General Budget, including the EU-LISA Agency.
The document contains the figures on which the discharge procedure is based.
On this basis, the Financial Controller of the European Commission ensures the certification of the consolidated accounts as declared by the
institutions, agencies and bodies of the European Union.
Discharge procedure of the EU agencies: the EU Budget finances a wide range of policies and programmes throughout the EU. In accordance
with the priorities set by the European Parliament and the Council in the multi-annual financial framework (MFF), the European Commission
carries out specific programmes, activities and projects in the field with the technical support of some specialised agencies.
The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide information on the activities of the institutions, agencies and other bodies of the EU from
a budgetary and accrual accounting perspective.
The consolidated reports on the implementation of the general budget of the EU include the budget implementation of all Institutions. Agencies
do not have a separate budget inside the EU budget; and they are partially financed by a Commission budget subsidy.

This document sets out how the Agency spent and implemented their budget in 2014. Each agency is subject to its own discharge procedure.
EASO: in 2014, the tasks and budget of the Office were as follows:
description of the tasks of EU-LISA: the Agency was set up under Regulation (EU) No 1077/2011 of the European Parliament and of
the Council. Its main aim is to ensure the operational management of the second generation Schengen Information System (SIS II),
Eurodac and Visa Information Systems (VIS);
EU-LISAs budget for 2014: the accounts of the Office for the year 2014 as presented by the Commission in its document on the
consolidated annual accounts of the European Union are as follows:
Commitment appropriations :
- committed : EUR 59 million;
- paid : EUR 49 million;
- carried-over : EUR 10 million.
Payment appropriations :
- committed : EUR 72 million;
- paid : EUR 54 million;
- carried-over : EUR 15 million.
Please refer also to the Final Accounts of the EU-LISA Agency.

2015/2195(DEC) - 15/09/2015 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Court of Auditors report on the annual accounts of the European Agency for the operational management
of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice (eu-LISA) for the year 2014, together with the Agencys reply.
CONTENT: in accordance with the tasks conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the Court
presents to the European Parliament and to the Council, in the context of the discharge procedure, a Statement of Assurance as to the
reliability of the annual accounts of each institution, body or agency of the EU, and the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying
them, on the basis of an independent external audit.
This audit concerned, amongst others, the annual accounts of the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT
systems in the area of freedom, security and justice (eu-LISA).
Statement of Assurance: pursuant to the provisions of Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the Court
has audited:
the annual accounts of the Foundation, which comprise the financial statements and the reports on the implementation of the budget
for the financial year ended 31 December 2014;
the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying those accounts.
Opinion on the reliability of the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the Offices annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects, its financial
position as at 31 December 2014 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the provisions
of its Financial Regulation and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer. Without calling into question this generally
favourable opinion, the Court draws attention to the valuation of the Schengen Information System (SIS II), the Visa Information System (VIS)
and Eurodac (systems) in the Agencys accounts. The operational management of these systems is the Agencys core task. In the absence of
reliable and complete information in respect of their total development cost, they are recorded in the Agencys accounts at their net book
values as per the Commissions books and updated at year end (approximately EUR 6.6 million at date of transfer and EUR 2.1 million euro at
31 December 2014). These values relate mainly to hardware and off-the-shelf software components and do not include software development
costs.
Opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts: the Court considers that the transactions underlying the
annual accounts for the year ended 31 December 2014 are legal and regular in all material respects.
The report also makes a series of observations on the budgetary and financial management of the Agency, accompanied by the latters
response. The main observations may be summarised as follows:
The Courts observations:
budgetary management: the Court notes that out of the EUR 6.6 million committed appropriations for staff and operational expenditure
which were carried over from 2013 to 2014, EUR 1.7 million euro (26 %) were cancelled in 2014, showing that budgetary needs were
overestimated at the end of 2013. Furthermore, committed appropriations carried over to 2015 were very high for administrative
expenditure at 87 %. These carry-overs mainly resulted from delayed procurements for the extension and refurbishment of the
Agencys site in Strasbourg. Carry-overs of committed appropriations were also high for operational expenditure at EUR 24.5 million
(85 %) mainly in relation to multi-annual contracts for the maintenance of the IT systems. The court considers that the high levels of
cancelled carry-overs from 2013 and the extent of carry-overs made from 2014 to 2015 is at odds with the budgetary principle of
annuality.
The Agencys replies:
budgetary management: the Agency states it has taken steps to improve its capacity to plan, monitor and implement available
appropriations. Specific organisational measures, are regular budget implementation reporting, are being implemented. The Agency
closely followed the Financial Regulation as regards carry-forwards, resulting in both automatic and non-automatic carry-overs as

allowed by the applicable rules on annuality. As regards non-automatic carry-overs for the Strasbourg site, the Management Board
approved these based on a duly justified proposal by the Agency in compliance with applicable rules. The Agency highlights its
difficulties regarding the differentiated nature of appropriations regarding commitments carried forward following financial
independence, and commitments migrated from DG HOME to the Agency.
Lastly, the Court of Auditors report contains a summary of the Agencys activities in 2014. This is focused on the following:
Budget: EUR 59.38 million in commitment appropriations.
Activities:
operational management and evolution of SISII, VIS and EURODAC;
helpdesk: provide first level support services to users across all systems under the management of eu-LISA;
provision of coordination, security and supervision of relations between Member States and the network provider for the
communication infrastructure for SIS II, Eurodac and VIS (sTESTA network);
participation in preparatory processes to design, develop and implement new systems;
timely and accurate provision of statistics and information on the performance of the systems as provided for in the relevant legal
bases;
reporting: fulfilment of all reporting obligations laid down in the establishing Regulation and legal bases for the IT systems under the
Agency's management
monitoring of new technologies and solutions relevant for the operational management and evolution of SIS II, VIS, Eurodac and other
large-scale IT systems
training: provision of bespoke system training plans for national authorities on IT systems managed by the Agency
establishment of an informal network of security experts with the Member States for the exchange of early warnings in cyber areas,
best practices and security incident management.

2015/2195(DEC) - 27/01/2016 Supplementary non-legislative basic document
Having examined the revenue and expenditure accounts for the financial year 2014 and the balance sheet as at 31 December 2014 of the
European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice (eu-LISA), as well as
the Court of Auditors' report on the annual accounts of the Agency for the financial year 2014, accompanied by the Agency's replies to the
Court's observations, the Council recommended the European Parliament to give a discharge to the Executive Director of the Agency in
respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2014.
The Council welcomed the Court's opinion that, in all material respects, the Agency's annual accounts present fairly its financial position as at
31 December 2014 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the provisions of the
Agency's Financial Regulation, and that the underlying transactions for 2014 are legal and regular in all material respects.
Nevertheless, the Council has made some observations which may be summarised as follows:
software development: the Council, once again, regretted the shortcomings identified by the Court with regard to the Agency's
valuation of the different IT systems transferred from the Commission, in particular, as regards software development costs ensued
and urged the Agency to take the appropriate corrective measures;
financial programming: the Council called on the Agency to improve its financial programming and monitoring of the budget
implementation, in order to reduce the level of commitments carried over to the next financial year and the amounts cancelled at the
end of the following year to the strict minimum, in line with the budgetary principle of annuality. It invited the Agency to put in place
reliable procedures for these purposes and welcomes the steps already taken in this regard.

2015/2195(DEC) - 11/04/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Derek VAUGHAN (S&D, UK) on discharge in respect of the implementation of the
budget of the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice
(eu-LISA) for the financial year 2014.
The parliamentary committee calls on the European Parliament to grant the Agencys Executive Director discharge in respect of the
implementation of the Agencys budget for the financial year 2014.
Noting that the Court of Auditors issued a statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts and the legality and regularity of the
underlying transactions for the financial year 2014, Members call on Parliament to approve the closure of the Agencys accounts. They made,
however, a number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is granted, in addition to the general
recommendations that appear in the draft resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies:
Agencys financial statements: Members note the Agencys final budget for the financial year 2014 was EUR 59 380 000, representing
a decrease of 3.2% compared to the year 2013. The entire budget of the Agency derives from the Union budget.
Emphasis of matter: Members note that the Court's report emphasises the issues related to the valuation of the SIS II, VIS and
EURODAC systems in the Agencys accounts. They note that the systems were transferred from the Commission to the Agency in
May 2013 by way of a non-exchange transaction. They take note that in the absence of reliable and complete information in respect of
the total development cost of those systems, the value of the systems was recorded in the Agencys accounts at their net book values
as per the Commissions books and updated at year-end. They acknowledges the Agency's comment that as long as the book value of
the assets transferred by the Commission to the Agency was established in line with the Commissions internal accounting rules, there
was no action that the Agency had to or could have performed in this respect. They also acknowledge that the value of transferred
assets is expected to become immaterial in the year 2015 due to the yearly application of depreciation of asset value and that as such,
for future discharges, this comment will no longer be relevant.
Commitments and carryovers: Members note that the committed appropriations carried over to 2015 were high for administrative

expenditure at EUR 15 million (87 %). They acknowledge that these carry-overs mainly resulted from delayed procurements for the
extension and refurbishment of the Agencys site in Strasbourg. The carry-overs for operational expenditure were high at EUR 24.5
million (85 %) and mainly related to multi-annual contracts for the maintenance of the Agencys IT systems. They therefore call on the
Agency to reduce the high level of carry-overs as it is at odds with the principle of annuality.
Members also made a series of observations regarding the Agencys budget and financial management, prevention and management of
conflicts of interest, as well as on contract award, recruitment and internal audit and control procedures.
Members note that the negotiations between the Agency and France were successfully concluded and that the seat agreement was signed for
the Agencys operational site in Strasbourg. They are also pleased that the negotiations between the Agency and Estonia were successfully
concluded and the seat agreement was signed at the end of 2014.
Lastly, Members call for an overall improvement in the prevention of, and the fight against, corruption through a holistic approach, commencing
with better public access to documents and more stringent rules on conflicts of interest, the introduction or strengthening of transparency
registers and the provision of sufficient resources for law enforcement measures, and also through improved cooperation among Member
States and with relevant third countries.

2015/2195(DEC) - 28/04/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom,
security and justice (eu-LISA) for the financial year 2014.
NON LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2016/1555 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of
the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice for the financial
year 2014.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the Executive Director of the European Agency for the
operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice for the implementation of the latters budget for
the financial year 2014.
This decision is in line with the European Parliament's resolution adopted on 28 April 2016 and comprises a series of observations that form
an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 28 April 2016).
Amongst Parliaments main observations in the resolution accompanying the discharge decision, the latter highlighted issues related to the
valuation of the SIS II, VIS and EURODAC systems in the Agencys accounts. It recalled that the systems were transferred from the
Commission to the Agency in May 2013 by way of a non-exchange transaction. In the absence of reliable and complete information in respect
of the total development cost of those systems, the value of the systems was recorded in the Agencys accounts at their net book values as per
the Commissions books and updated at year-end. Parliament acknowledged the Agency's comment that as long as the book value of the
assets transferred by the Commission to the Agency was established in line with the Commissions internal accounting rules, there was no
action that the Agency had to or could have performed in this respect. It should also be noted that the value of transferred assets is expected
to become immaterial in the year 2015 due to the yearly application of depreciation of asset value and that as such, for future discharges.

2015/2195(DEC) - 28/04/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament decided to grant the Executive Director of the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT
systems in the area of freedom, security and justice (eu-LISA) discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agencys budget for the
financial year 2014. The vote on the decision on discharge covers the closure of the accounts (in accordance with Annex 5, Article 5 (1) (a) to
Parliaments Rules of Procedure.
Noting that the Court of Auditors has stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the Agencys annual accounts for the financial year
2014 are reliable and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular, Parliament adopted by 501 votes to 121 with 7 abstentions, a
resolution containing a series of recommendations, which form an integral part of the decision on discharge and which add to the general
recommendations set out in the resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies:
Agencys financial statements: Parliament noted the Agencys final budget for the financial year 2014 was EUR 59 380 000,
representing a decrease of 3.2% compared to the year 2013. The entire budget of the Agency derives from the Union budget.
Emphasis of matter: Parliament noted that the Court's report emphasises the issues related to the valuation of the SIS II, VIS and
EURODAC systems in the Agencys accounts. It stated that the systems were transferred from the Commission to the Agency in May
2013 by way of a non-exchange transaction. It took note that in the absence of reliable and complete information in respect of the total
development cost of those systems, the value of the systems was recorded in the Agencys accounts at their net book values as per
the Commissions books and updated at year-end. It acknowledged the Agency's comment that as long as the book value of the assets
transferred by the Commission to the Agency was established in line with the Commissions internal accounting rules, there was no
action that the Agency had to or could have performed in this respect. It also acknowledged that the value of transferred assets is
expected to become immaterial in the year 2015 due to the yearly application of depreciation of asset value and that as such, for
future discharges, this comment will no longer be relevant.
Commitments and carryovers: it noted that the committed appropriations carried over to 2015 were high for administrative expenditure
at EUR 15 million (87 %). It acknowledged that these carry-overs mainly resulted from delayed procurements for the extension and
refurbishment of the Agencys site in Strasbourg. The carry-overs for operational expenditure were high at EUR 24.5 million (85 %) and
mainly related to multi-annual contracts for the maintenance of the Agencys IT systems. It therefore called on the Agency to reduce
the high level of carry-overs as it is at odds with the principle of annuality.
Associated countries: Parliament recalled that according to Regulation (EU) No 1077/2011, countries associated with the
implementation, application and development of the Schengen acquis and EURODAC-related measures must make a contribution to
the Agencys budget.

Parliament also made a series of observations regarding the Agencys budget and financial management, prevention and management of
conflicts of interest, as well as on contract award, recruitment and internal audit and control procedures.
Parliament noted that the negotiations between the Agency and France were successfully concluded and that the seat agreement was signed
for the Agencys operational site in Strasbourg. It is also pleased that the negotiations between the Agency and Estonia were successfully
concluded and the seat agreement was signed at the end of 2014.
Lastly, Parliament called for an overall improvement in the prevention of, and the fight against, corruption through a holistic approach,
commencing with better public access to documents and more stringent rules on conflicts of interest, the introduction or strengthening of
transparency registers and the provision of sufficient resources for law enforcement measures, and also through improved cooperation among
Member States and with relevant third countries.

