Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2086(INL)

INL - Legislative initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Cross-border aspects of adoptions

Subject
4.10.02 Family policy, family law, parental leave
7.40.02 Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
30/06/2015

ZWIEFKA Tadeusz
Shadow rapporteur

ROZIÈRE Virginie

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

CAVADA Jean-Marie

CHRYSOGONOS
Kostas

DURAND Pascal

FERRARA Laura
Committee for opinion
PETI

Rapporteur for opinion

Petitions

Appointed
05/05/2015

MARIAS Notis

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
30/04/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

29/11/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

06/12/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

02/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

02/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

02/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading
End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0370/2016

Summary

T8-0013/2017

Summary

02/02/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2086(INL)

Procedure type

INL - Legislative initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Request for legislative proposal

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 046

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/03332

Documentation gateway
Committee opinion

PE576.867

21/04/2016

EP

Committee draft report

PE582.107

11/05/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE585.624

08/07/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0370/2016

06/12/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0013/2017

02/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)188

10/04/2017

PETI

2015/2086(INL) - 06/12/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the report by Tadeusz ZWIEFKA (EPP, PL) with recommendations to the Commission on
cross-border aspects of adoptions (Initiative Rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure).
The Hague Convention of 29 May 1993 on Protection of Children and Cooperation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption, has been ratified by all
Member States. It concerns the procedure for adoptions across borders, and mandates the automatic recognition of such adoptions.
However, the Convention does not cover the situation of a family with a child adopted under a purely national procedure which then moves to
another Member State. This can lead to significant legal difficulties if the legal relationship between the parent(s) and the adopted child is not
automatically recognised. Additional administrative or judicial procedures may be required, and in extreme cases recognition may be refused
altogether.
Cross-border recognition of domestic adoption orders: in order to exercise their right to free movement and to protect fundamental human
rights of EU citizens, Members stated that there is a clear need for European legislation to provide for the automatic cross-border recognition
of domestic adoption orders. They called on the Commission to submit, by 31 July 2017, on the basis of Articles 67 and 81 of the Treaty on the
Functioning of the European Union, a proposal for a Council Regulation on the cross-border recognition of adoption orders, following the
recommendations set out below:
the proposed regulation provides for the automatic recognition of adoption orders made in a Member State under any procedure other
than under the framework of the 1993 Hague Convention. Once one Member State has recognised an adoption order made in a third
country under its relevant national procedural rules, that adoption order shall be recognised in all other Member States;
the rules of jurisdiction should be highly predictable and founded on the principle that jurisdiction is generally based on the adopting
parents' habitual residence, or the habitual residence of one of those parents or of the child. Jurisdiction should be limited to this
ground, save in situations involving third countries, where the Member State of nationality may be a connecting factor;
any interested party should be able to apply for refusal of the recognition of an adoption order if he or she considers one of the
grounds for refusal of recognition to be present: (i) if such recognition is manifestly contrary to public policy ( ordre public) in the
Member State addressed; (ii) if the originating Member State did not have jurisdiction;
a European Certificate of Adoption should be created in order to speed up any administrative query over automatic recognition. The
model for the certificate is to be adopted as a Commission delegated act.
The draft resolution adopted by the committee responsible highlighted the following issues:
Common minimum standards for adoptions: Member States should take all decisions in adoption matters with the best interests of the child in
mind and with respect for his or her fundamental rights, while always taking into account the specific circumstances of the particular case.
Children who have been put up for adoption should not be seen as the property of a state, but as individuals with internationally recognised
fundamental rights. Cultural and linguistic traditions of the child should be taken into consideration and be respected as much as possible.

The child should always be given the opportunity to be heard without pressure, and express his or her view on the adoption process, taking
into account his or her age and maturity.
Members stated that no decision on adoption should be taken before the biological parents have been heard and, where applicable, have
exhausted all legal remedies concerning their parental authority, and the withdrawal of parental authority from the biological parents is final.
The relevant authorities should always first consider the possibility of placing the child with relatives, even when those relatives live in another
country, if the child has established a relationship with those members of the family and following an individual assessment of the child's
needs, before giving the child up for adoption by strangers.
Particular attention should be given to unaccompanied minors who have applied for or have refugee status, preferably by placing them in
foster families in the interim period.
Civil justice cooperation in the field of adoption: the report called on the Member States to intensify their cooperation in the field of adoption
and the Commission to establish an effective European network of judges and authorities specialised in adoption in order to facilitate the
exchange of information and good practice.
Members stressed the need to cooperate closely, including through European authorities such as Europol, to prevent the cross-border
abduction, sale and trafficking of children for adoption purposes.
Lastly, the Commission is urged to publish on the European e-Justice Portal relevant legal and procedural information on adoption law and
practice in all the Member States.

2015/2086(INL) - 02/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 533 votes to 41, with 72 abstentions, a resolution with recommendations to the Commission on
cross-border aspects of adoptions.
The Hague Convention of 29 May 1993 on Protection of Children and Cooperation in Respect of Intercountry Adoption, which all Member
States have ratified, provides a system of administrative cooperation and recognition for intercountry adoptions, i.e. adoptions where the
adopters and the child or children do not have their habitual residence in the same country.
However, the Convention does not cover the situation of a family with a child adopted under a purely national procedure which then moves to
another Member State. This can lead to significant legal difficulties if the legal relationship between the parent(s) and the adopted child is not
automatically recognised.
Cross-border recognition of domestic adoption orders: in order to protect the best interests of the child, avoid forum shopping and to facilitate
the exercise of the right to freedom of movement, Parliament called on the Commission to submit, by 31 July 2017, on the basis of Articles 67
and 81 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, a proposal for a Council Regulation on the cross-border recognition of national
adoption orders, following the recommendations set out below:
Automatic recognition: the proposed regulation provides for the automatic recognition of adoption orders made in a Member State
under any procedure other than under the framework of the 1993 Hague Convention. Once one Member State has recognised an
adoption order made in a third country under its relevant national procedural rules, that adoption order shall be recognised in all other
Member States.
Jurisdiction: the rules of jurisdiction should be highly predictable and founded on the principle that jurisdiction is generally based on the
adopting parents' habitual residence, or the habitual residence of one of those parents or of the child. Jurisdiction should be limited to
this ground, save in situations involving third countries, where the Member State of nationality may be a connecting factor.
Grounds for refusal: any interested party should be able to apply for refusal of the recognition of an adoption order if he or she
considers one of the grounds for refusal of recognition to be present: (i) if such recognition is manifestly contrary to public policy (ordre
public) in the Member State addressed; (ii) if the originating Member State did not have jurisdiction.
European certificate: a European Certificate of Adoption should be created in order to speed up any administrative query over
automatic recognition. The model for the certificate is to be adopted as a Commission delegated act.
The resolution highlighted the following issues:
Common minimum standards for adoptions: Member States should take all decisions in adoption matters with the best interests of the child in
mind, while always taking into account the specific circumstances of the particular case.
Hence:
children who have been put up for adoption should not be seen as the property of a state, but as individuals with internationally
recognised fundamental rights. Cultural and linguistic traditions of the child should be taken into consideration and be respected as
much as possible;
the child should always be given the opportunity to be heard without pressure, and express his or her view on the adoption process,
taking into account his or her age and maturity;
Members stated that no decision on adoption should be taken before the biological parents have been heard and, where applicable,
have exhausted all legal remedies concerning their parental authority, and the withdrawal of parental authority from the biological
parents is final;
the relevant authorities should always first consider the possibility of placing the child with relatives, even when those relatives live in
another country, if the child has established a relationship with those members of the family and following an individual assessment of
the child's needs, before giving the child up for adoption by strangers;
lastly, particular attention should be given to unaccompanied minors who have applied for or have refugee status, preferably by
placing them in foster families in the interim period.
Civil justice cooperation in the field of adoption: the resolution called on the Member States to intensify their cooperation in the field of adoption
and the Commission to establish an effective European network of judges and authorities specialised in adoption in order to facilitate the
exchange of information and good practice. The Commission is called upon to provide funding for the specialised training of judges working in

the field of cross-border adoptions.
Members stressed the need to cooperate closely, including through European authorities such as Europol, to prevent the cross-border
abduction, sale and trafficking of children for adoption purposes.
The Commission is urged to publish on the European e-Justice Portal relevant legal and procedural information on adoption law and practice
in all the Member States.

