Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2015/0306(COD)

Procedure completed

European travel document for the return of illegally staying third-country
nationals

Subject
7.10.04 External borders crossing and controls, visas
7.10.06 Asylum, refugees, displaced persons; Asylum, Migration and
Integration Fund (AMIF)

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
15/02/2016

HALLA-AHO Jussi
Shadow rapporteur

MUSSOLINI Alessandra

DALLI Miriam

MICHEL Louis

VERGIAT
Marie-Christine

SARGENTINI Judith

WINBERG Kristina
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

AFET

Foreign Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

DEVE

Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Migration and Home Affairs

Appointed

Commissioner
AVRAMOPOULOS Dimitris

Key events
15/12/2015

Legislative proposal published

01/02/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

30/05/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/05/2016

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report

COM(2015)0668

Summary

adopted in committee
06/06/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

14/09/2016

Debate in Parliament

15/09/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

15/09/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/10/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

26/10/2016

Final act signed

26/10/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

17/11/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0201/2016

Summary

T8-0352/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0306(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 079-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/05339

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0668

15/12/2015

EC

Summary

Committee draft report

PE578.713

04/04/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE582.194

09/05/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0201/2016

06/06/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0352/2016

15/09/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)737

26/11/2016

Final act
Regulation 2016/1953
OJ L 311 17.11.2016, p. 0013 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2015/0306(COD) - 15/12/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish the format and the technical specifications of a European travel document for the return of third-country nationals
subject to a return decision.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the council.

ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the effective return of third country nationals who do not fulfil or no longer fulfil the conditions for entry, stay or residence in
the Member State of the Union is an essential part of a comprehensive approach to ensure the proper functioning of the EU migration policies
and for maintaining public trust in the Union migration system. However, the EU system to return irregular migrants is not sufficiently effective.
The lack of valid travel documents issued by the country of destination of the returnee is one of the main obstacles to successful return. At
present, Member States may issue a substitute document for those illegally staying third-country nationals who do not possess a valid travel
document. However, its recognition by third countries is low, including because of its unsatisfactory security features and standards.
CONTENT: the objective of this proposal is to establish a dedicated European travel document for the return of third-country nationals subject
to a return decision.
It aims to:
harmonise the format and technical specifications of the European travel document for the return of illegally staying third-country
nationals in order to ensure higher technical and security standards, in particular as regards safeguards against counterfeiting and
falsification;
facilitate recognition of this document by third countries for the purpose of return and readmission;
increase flexibility for the authorities of third countries in terms of managing documents in order for them to accelerate the
administrative procedures for return and reduce the administrative burden on competent consular authorities;
set the rules relating to the fees for issuing the European travel document for return, which shall be free of charge for the third-country
national given that it shall only be valid for a single journey;
contribute to reducing the period during which returnees awaiting removal are kept in administrative detention.

2015/0306(COD) - 06/06/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the report by Jussi HALLA-AHO (ECR, FI) on the proposal for a regulation
of the European Parliament and of the Council on a European travel document for the return of illegally staying third-country nationals.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position at first reading adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative
procedure amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Scope: Members clarified that this Regulation shall establish the common format and the technical and security specifications of a harmonised
European travel document for the return of third country nationals staying irregularly on the territory of the Union.
The content and technical specifications of the European travel document for return should be harmonised in order to ensure high technical
and security standards, in particular as regards safeguards against counterfeiting and falsification.
This Regulation shall respect the fundamental rights and observes the principles recognised by the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the
European Union, in particular human dignity and the protection in the event of removal, expulsion or extradition. It should apply without
prejudice to the right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial and to the right to asylum as provided for the Charter.
Union readmission agreements: Members introduced a definition stipulating that it shall mean agreements which are based on reciprocal
obligations and are concluded between the Union and third countries to facilitate the return of persons residing irregularly on the territory of the
Union, in accordance with Article 79 (3) TFEU. The negotiation of new Union readmission agreements, which should take precedence over
bilateral agreements between Member States and third countries, would guarantee a more effective implementation of this Regulation, within
the framework of a more coherent return policy. If third countries entering into readmission agreements, either with the Union or the Member
States, refuse to legally recognise the European travel document for return, a formal explanation for such refusal should be provided.
European travel document for return: the document shall contain a passport photograph. It shall be established in an official language or the
languages of the Member State that issues the return decision and it shall be translated into English and French and, where possible, into an
official language of the third country of return. The document shall be valid for a single journey which ends in the returnee arrival in the third
country of return.
Additional documents: where necessary, available, relevant, and for the purpose of facilitating the readmission of a third country national
staying irregularly on the territory of the Union, additional documents may be attached to the European travel document for return, provided
that they do not endanger the private life, liberty or property of the returnee and respect the data protection safeguards provided for in
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council.
In the case of forced returns, a declaration of fitness to travel, following a medical examination carried out prior to removal, shall be attached to
the European travel document for return.
Technical specifications: an amendment stipulated that the security features and technical specifications of the European travel document for
return shall update those already set in application of Council Regulation (EC) No 333/2002 in order to include digital elements which can
ensure the security and safety of the document issued.
Delegated acts: the Commission shall adopted delegated acts in order to amend or supplement certain non-essential elements of the model
for a European travel document for return, and to facilitate cooperation between agencies of the Union in the field of migration for the purpose
of providing Union travel documents, issuing documents and enhancing consular cooperation with third countries.
Review: the Commission shall review this Regulation no later than 18 months after its entry into force to assess, in detail, its impact on the
effective enforcement of return decisions, and whether it is necessary to amend any of the features of the European travel document for
return.
That review shall take account of returns in the context of Union readmission agreements, bilateral readmission agreements or other
arrangements with third countries, as well as in the context of return-related cooperation with third countries not covered by formal
agreements.

The Commission shall present the results of its review to the Parliament and to the Council accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative
proposal to amend this Regulation.

2015/0306(COD) - 15/09/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 494 votes to 112 with 50 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on a European travel document for the return of illegally staying third-country nationals.
Parliaments position, adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal as follows:
European travel document for return: it is recalled that the readmission of own nationals is an obligation under international customary law,
with which all States are required to comply. In this context, the identification of illegally staying third-country nationals and the issuance of
documents including the European travel document for return should, where appropriate, be subject to cooperation with diplomatic
representations and negotiations with third countries entering into readmission agreements, either with the Union or with the Member States.
Enhanced security features and technical specifications of the European travel document for return: it is stipulated that the future Regulation
should establish a uniform European travel document for the return of illegally staying third-country nationals, in particular its format, security
features and technical specifications.
Format and content of the European travel document for return: the format of the European travel document for return shall correspond to the
model set out in the Annex.
It shall contain the following information:
the name, surname, date of birth, sex, nationality, distinguishing marks and, if known, the address in the third country of return of the
third-country national;
a photograph of the third-country national;
the issuing authority, date and place of issue and period of validity;
information about the departure and arrival of the third-country national.
It should be noted that the European travel document for return shall be valid for a single journey up until the time of arrival in the third country
of return of the third-country national subject to a return decision issued by a Member State.
Delegated acts: in order to amend certain non-essential elements of the model for the European travel document for return, the power to adopt
acts in accordance with Article 290 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) should be delegated to the Commission. It
is of particular importance that the Commission carry out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at expert level. In
particular, to ensure equal participation in the preparation of delegated acts, the European Parliament and the Council receive all documents at
the same time as Member States' experts, and their experts systematically have access to meetings of Commission expert groups dealing with
the preparation of delegated acts, in accordance with the principles laid down in the Interinstitutional Agreement of 13 April 2016 on Better
Law-Making.
Review and reporting: by 2 years after the date of entry into force of this Regulation, the Commission shall review and report on the effective
implementation of this Regulation.

2015/0306(COD) - 26/10/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish the format and the technical specifications of a European travel document for the return of third-country nationals
subject to a return decision.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/1953 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the establishment of a European travel
document for the return of illegally staying third-country nationals, and repealing the Council Recommendation of 30 November 1994.
CONTENT: this Regulation establishes a uniform European travel document for the return of illegally staying third-country nationals . It sets out
in particular its format, security features and technical specifications. These may be found in the annex to the Regulation.
The European travel document for return shall contain the following information:
the name, surname, date of birth, sex, nationality, distinguishing marks and, if known, the address in the third country of return of the
third-country national;
a photograph of the third-country national;
the issuing authority, date and place of issue and period of validity;
information about the departure and arrival of the third-country national.
It shall be valid for a single journey up until the time of arrival in the third country of return of the third-country national subject to a return
decision issued by a Member State.
The Commission is empowered to adopt delegated acts in order to amend the format of the European travel document for return.
Technical specifications: the security features and technical specifications of the European travel document for return shall be those set out in
Regulation (EC) No 333/2002.
Review and reporting: by 8 December 2018, the Commission shall review and report on the effective implementation of this Regulation.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 7.12.2016.
APPLICATION: 8.4.2017.
DELEGATED ACTS: the power to adopt acts intended to amend certain non-essential elements of the format of the travel document for return

shall be conferred on the Commission for an indefinite period from 7.12.2016. A delegated act shall enter into force only if the European
Parliament or the Council has not raised objections.

