Procedure file
Basic information
2015/0001(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure completed

Fishing opportunities in EU waters of fishing vessels flying the flag of
Venezuela in the exclusive economic zone off the coast of French Guiana.
Declaration

Subject
3.15.04 Management of fisheries, fisheries, fishing grounds
3.15.15 Fisheries agreements and cooperation
Geographical area
Venezuela
French Guiana

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
PECH

Rapporteur

Fisheries

Appointed
10/03/2015

FERREIRA João
Shadow rapporteur

MATO Gabriel

CORBETT Richard

BILBAO BARANDICA
Izaskun

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Maritime Affairs and Fisheries

Commissioner
VELLA Karmenu

Key events
12/01/2015

Initial legislative proposal published

30/01/2015

Legislative proposal published

25/02/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

17/06/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

19/06/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

07/07/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

07/07/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/09/2015

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

14/09/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

COM(2015)0001

Summary

05420/2015

Summary

A8-0195/2015

Summary

T8-0242/2015

Summary

19/09/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0001(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 043-p2; Treaty on the Functioning
of the EU TFEU 218-p6a

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

PECH/8/02580

Documentation gateway
Initial legislative proposal

COM(2015)0001

12/01/2015

EC

Summary

Legislative proposal

05420/2015

30/01/2015

CSL

Summary

Committee draft report

PE551.985

31/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0195/2015

19/06/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0242/2015

07/07/2015

EP

Summary

Final act
Decision 2015/1565
OJ L 244 19.09.2015, p. 0055 Summary

2015/0001(NLE) - 12/01/2015 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to approve, on behalf of the European Union, the Declaration on the granting of fishing opportunities in EU waters to fishing
vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the exclusive economic zone off the coast of French Guiana.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: Council Regulation (EC) No 1006/2008 concerning authorisations for fishing activities presupposes the existence of an
international fisheries agreement when granting fishing authorisations to third-country vessels within EU waters. The EU has not concluded
such an international fisheries agreement with Venezuela.
However, access for Venezuelan fishing vessels operating in EU waters off the coast of the French department of Guiana has been provided
in the form of a Council Declaration (Decision 2012/19/EU) which, in accordance with the case-law of the International Court of Justice, has
legal effects under international law.
By its judgement of 26 November 2014 on the joined cases C-103/12 and C-165/12 (European Parliament and the Commission v. Council),
the Court of Justice annulled Council Decision 2012/19/EU. It also confirmed that decisions relating to the conclusion of external fisheries
agreements fall fully within the scope of Article 43(2) TFEU (in conjunction with the applicable procedure of Article 218 TFEU, i.e. Article
218(6)a(v) for the decisions on the conclusion) and rejected the position that such decisions could fall within the scope of Article 43(3) TFEU.
The Court of Justice maintained the effects of the Council Decision until the entry into force, within a reasonable period of time after the date of
the judgement, of a new decision to be adopted on an appropriate legal basis. Hence, the present proposal.
CONTENT: in order to ensure the continuity of the access following the judgement of the Court, the Commission considers it necessary that t
he Council re-adopts a Decision on the declaration addressed to Venezuela confirming its readiness to issue fishing authorisations to a limited
number of fishing vessels flying the flag of Venezuela on the condition that they comply with the applicable legally binding Union acts.
The Declaration provides that in accordance with Council Regulation (EC) No 1006/2008 concerning authorisations for fishing activities of
Community fishing vessels outside Community waters and the access of third country vessels to Community waters, the authorised fishing
vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela shall comply with the provisions of the European Union common fisheries policy

concerning the conservation and control measures and other European Union provisions governing fishing activities in that zone.
More particularly, authorised fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela shall comply with any relevant European
Union rules or regulations specifying, inter alia, the fish stocks that may be targeted, the maximum number of authorised fishing vessels and
the proportion of catches to be landed into ports in French Guiana.

2015/0001(NLE) - 30/01/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to approve, on behalf of the European Union, the Declaration on the granting of fishing opportunities in EU waters to fishing
vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the exclusive economic zone off the coast of French Guiana.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: subject to their compliance with the applicable legally binding Union acts on the conservation and management of fishery
resources, fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela have operated in Union waters in the exclusive economic
zone off the coast of French Guiana for many decades.
The processing industry based in the French Guiana depends on the landings from those fishing vessels and therefore the continuity of those
operations should be ensured.
This Decision should replace Council Decision 2012/19/EU which was annulled by the judgement of the Court of Justice of 26 November 2014
and the effects of which are being maintained until the entry into force of a new decision within a reasonable period of time. As the Declaration
has already been notified to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, there is no need for a new notification thereof.
CONTENT: under this proposed Decision, the Council is requested to approve the Declaration addressed to the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela on the granting of fishing opportunities in EU waters to fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the
exclusive economic zone off the coast of the French Guiana on behalf of the European Union.
Declaration: in the Declaration addressed to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, it is stipulated that:
the EU shall issue fishing authorisations to a limited number of fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to
fish in the part of the exclusive economic zone off the coast of French Guiana that lies more than 12 nautical miles from the base lines;
the authorised fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela shall comply with the provisions of the European
Union common fisheries policy concerning the conservation and control measures and other European Union provisions governing
fishing activities in that zone;
the authorised fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela shall comply with any relevant European Union
rules or regulations specifying, inter alia, the fish stocks that may be targeted, the maximum number of authorised fishing vessels and
the proportion of catches to be landed into ports in French Guiana.
Without prejudice to the withdrawal of authorisations granted to individual fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on grounds of their failure to comply with any relevant European Union rules or regulations, the European Union may at any time withdraw, by
way of unilateral declaration, the specific undertaking expressed in this Declaration to grant fishing opportunities.
For further details of the proposed Decision, please refer to the summary of the Commissions initial legislative proposal dated 12/01/2015.

2015/0001(NLE) - 19/06/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Fisheries adopted the report by João FERREIRA (GUE/NGL, PT) on the draft Council decision on the approval, on behalf
of the European Union, of the Declaration on the granting of fishing opportunities in EU waters to fishing vessels flying the flag of the
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the exclusive economic zone off the coast of French Guiana.
The committee recommended the European Parliament to give its consent to the approval of the Declaration.
To recall, given that there is no international agreement between the EU and Venezuela on fisheries, cooperation with this country is not in line
with the requirements of Community law. In practice, however, fishing by Venezuelan vessels is allowed.
Accordingly, the Commission made a proposal for an EU commitment on the transfer of fishing rights to Venezuelan vessels. The legal
solution found - a declaration to be made by the Council, with the approval of the European Parliament, which aligned the agreement with
Union legislation, in particular with the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP), for the conservation and management of fishing stocks, as well as
other legislation affected - is appropriate for the small-scale fishing in question.
This declaration took shape in Decision 2012/19/EU, by which the Council - changing the legal basis of the declaration - regarded Parliament
as an advisory body, rather than the body from which it needed to request approval.
As a result, Parliament and the Commission brought proceedings before the European Court of Justice in order to annul the decision of the
Council.
The Court clearly confirmed that decisions relating to the conclusion of external fisheries agreements are fully covered by Article 43(2) TFEU,
namely that Parliaments decision is not only advisory but binding, in the sense that its approval is required.
Consequently, as the judgment of the ECJ was in favour of the position of the Commission and the European Parliament, the Commission
submitted a new proposal to the Council and Parliament aiming to replace Decision 2012/19/EU, the proposal which is currently under review.
Now that this institutional conflict is resolved, which was based solely on a disagreement over the correct legal basis, the rapporteur is of the
opinion that the approval procedure for this proposal should be completed as soon as possible. This will thereby provide the fishing carried on
in this area and whose regular activity was not affected by this delay with the appropriate framework.

2015/0001(NLE) - 07/07/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 651 votes to 18, with 42 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
approval, on behalf of the European Union, of the Declaration on the granting of fishing opportunities in EU waters to fishing vessels flying the
flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the exclusive economic zone off the coast of French Guiana.
Following the recommendation by the Committee on Fisheries, Parliament gave its consent to the approval of the Declaration.

2015/0001(NLE) - 14/09/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to approve, on behalf of the European Union, the Declaration on the granting of fishing opportunities in EU waters to fishing
vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the exclusive economic zone off the coast of French Guiana.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2015/1565 on the approval, on behalf of the European Union, of the Declaration on the granting of
fishing opportunities in EU waters to fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the exclusive economic zone off
the coast of French Guiana.
CONTENT: subject to their compliance with the applicable legally binding Union acts on the conservation and management of fishery
resources, fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela have operated in Union waters in the exclusive economic
zone off the coast of French Guiana for many decades.
Under this Decision, the Council approved the declaration addressed to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on the granting of fishing
opportunities in EU waters to fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the exclusive economic zone off the
coast of the French Guiana on behalf of the European Union.
Declaration: the declaration stipulates that:
the European Union shall issue fishing authorisations to a limited number of fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela to fish in the part of the exclusive economic zone off the coast of French Guiana that lies more than 12 nautical miles from
the base lines;
the authorised fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela shall comply with the provisions of the European
Union common fisheries policy concerning the conservation and control measures and other European Union provisions governing
fishing activities in that zone;
authorised fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela shall comply with any relevant European Union rules
or regulations specifying, inter alia, the fish stocks that may be targeted, the maximum number of authorised fishing vessels and the
proportion of catches to be landed into ports in French Guiana.
Without prejudice to the withdrawal of authorisations granted to individual fishing vessels flying the flag of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela
on grounds of their failure to comply with any relevant European Union rules or regulations, the European Union may at any time withdraw, by
way of unilateral declaration, the specific undertaking expressed in this Declaration to grant fishing opportunities.
Legal note: this Decision should replace Council Decision 2012/19/EU which was annulled by the judgement of the Court of Justice of 26
November 2014 and the effects of which are being maintained until the entry into force of a new decision within a reasonable period of time.
As the Declaration has already been notified to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, there is no need for a new notification.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 22.9.2015.

