Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2273(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU relations with Tunisia in the current regional context

Subject
6.40.05.02 Relations with the countries of the Great Maghreb and Maghreb
Geographical area
Tunisia

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
29/06/2015

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo
Shadow rapporteur

CESA Lorenzo

PANZERI Pier Antonio

BASHIR Amjad

VAUTMANS Hilde

VERGIAT
Marie-Christine

SMITH Alyn

Key events
29/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

12/07/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

26/07/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/09/2016

Debate in Parliament

14/09/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

14/09/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/09/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information

A8-0249/2016

Summary

T8-0345/2016

Summary

Procedure reference

2015/2273(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/04815

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE576.965

01/03/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE580.794

19/05/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0249/2016

26/07/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0345/2016

14/09/2016

EP

Summary

2015/2273(INI) - 26/07/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Fabio Massimo CASTALDO (EFDD, IT) on the EU relations with Tunisia
in the current regional context.
Members recalled that the peaceful democratic transition process in Tunisia represents a successful example in the Arab world and its
consolidation is paramount for the stability of the entire region. Therefore, they renew their commitment to the Tunisian people and the political
transition process that began in 2011.
While supporting the consolidation of the democratic transition and foster investment and development in all sectors of the economy and
society in the country, Members consider that it is imperative for Tunisia to implement adequate reforms aimed at boosting employment and
developing sustainable and inclusive growth.
They stressed the importance of respect for human rights and the relaunch of the political process of integration in the framework of the Arab
Maghreb Union.
I - Political reforms and Institutions: Members expressed support for the process of democratisation and for the Peoples Representative
Assembly (PRA) given the challenge of enhancing stability in a volatile regional context while deepening democracy. They expressed support
for a review of the needs of the PRA. The European Parliaments services should enhance the capacity-building support activities provided to
the PRA.
Welcoming an enhanced dialogue between the EU and Tunisia, Members called for measures on:
reforming public administration in the country;
democratic transition and development in general;
decentralisation and the empowerment of regions;
monitoring respect for human rights, including the protection of women and children, gender equality and the protection of all victims of
persecution and discrimination.
Members called for an EU and EP monitoring mission and election assistance for local elections (scheduled in October 2016). They called for
support for gender-balanced policies and for the inclusion of young people in political life, especially regarding the promotion of youth
participation in local elections.
As regards human rights, Members called for measures to prevent the use of torture and to abolish the death penalty.
The report called for a reform of the penal code which penalises homosexuality.
As regards civil liberties, Members called for a reform of the penal code to defend the freedom of expression and freedom of the press and
media, freedom of expression online
II. Economic and social development: Members welcomed the Commissions proposal for macro-financial assistance of EUR 500 million. They
also noted the launch of negotiations on an ambitious free trade agreement (DCFTA) between the EU and Tunisia.
They encouraged partnerships with other interested global and regional donor countries and organisations and, in particular, measures
reducing regional disparities and promoting training and investment in agriculture, taking into account the specificities of local agriculture, IT,
the social economy, the manufacturing sector, tourism and SMEs which would boost employment.
In order to address unemployment, especially for young people, Members called for deep reforms with a view to promoting quality education.
They called on all parties to maintain a spirit of good cooperation in order to focus on reforms with a view to inclusive economic development
for all territories of the country, including the less advanced and impoverished inland regions. The EU is called upon to step up its efforts
against desertification in Tunisia and water shortages.

Measures are necessary to combat corruption.
The report expressed concerns regarding the sustainability of the Tunisian debt. It called for the conversion of Tunisian debt into investment
projects, especially for building strategic infrastructures and reducing regional disparities. It called for further assistance for SMEs, notably
access to financial support.
They also encouraged more North African regional cooperation on specific issues such as afforestation and water management, as well as
greater socioeconomic integration, within the context sustainable development.
III. Security and defence: Members are deeply concerned about the immediate security spillover in Tunisia originating, among other reasons,
from instability in Libya. They expressed concerns at the high number of Tunisian foreign fighters joining Daesh and other terrorist groups .
They are particularly concerned about the situation in Libya and called on all parties in Libya to engage constructively with the Government of
National Accord (GNA).
Members called on the Tunisian Government to set up a strategy to deal with returning foreign fighters, for example by coupling punitive and
precautionary measures with deradicalisation and rehabilitation programmes. They recognise that terrorism is a shared challenge which
requires a joint response and that cooperation between the EU and Tunisia in the field of security and the fight against terrorism has been
stepped up recently.
They expressed its deepest concern about Law 22/2015 on counter-terrorism, adopted in July 2015 by Tunisia's Assembly of Representatives,
which imposes the death penalty as a possible sentence for a range of terror offences. The Tunisian authorities are called upon to continue to
observe the moratorium on the death penalty and although Tunisia is one of the countries that are most vulnerable to the terrorism threat,
states are obliged to fully respect human rights when fighting terrorism.
In parallel, Members welcomed the launch, in November 2015, of the EU programme of support for security sector reform in Tunisia. They
called for the promotion of a logic of objectives, rather than mere support by policy instruments, within a clear strategic vision focusing on
prevention.
IV. Mobility, research, education and culture: Members welcomed the EU and the Tunisia Mobility Partnership signed in March 2014.They
recommended that Member States should show their solidarity with Tunisia by facilitating the issuing of visas for entrepreneurs, teachers,
students, researchers, artists, etc.
They encouraged the EU to sign mobility partnerships with the partner countries in its southern neighbourhood in order to relax visa
procedures in conjunction with readmission agreements. They called on the Commission, in cooperation with the Member States, to develop
possibilities for circular migration schemes which would open up safe and legal routes for migrants.
Members condemned trafficking in human beings, most of the victims of which are women, and called on the Tunisian authorities to cooperate
closely with Member States in order to tackle organised forms of illegal immigration.
Members underlined that Tunisia should become a full participant in the Erasmus + programme in order to develop further the exchange of
university students. Partnerships should be developed among schools, universities and research centres or in the area of culture and sports.
Lastly, Members stated that the use of Arabic is necessary to ensure the involvement of civil society in EU-Tunisia relations, in particular in the
context of the free trade agreement negotiations.

2015/2273(INI) - 14/09/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 596 votes to 59, with 49 abstentions, a resolution on the EU relations with Tunisia in the current regional
context.
Parliament recalled that the peaceful democratic transition process in Tunisia represents a successful example in the Arab world and its
consolidation is paramount for the stability of the entire region. Therefore, it renewed its commitment to the Tunisian people and the political
transition process that began in 2011.
While supporting the consolidation of the democratic transition and foster investment and development in all sectors of the economy and
society in the country, Parliament considered that it is imperative for Tunisia to implement adequate reforms aimed at boosting employment
and developing sustainable and inclusive growth.
It stressed the importance of respect for human rights and the relaunch of the political process of integration in the framework of the Arab
Maghreb Union.
I - Political reforms and Institutions: Parliament recalled its support for the process of democratisation and for the Peoples Representative
Assembly (PRA) given the challenge of enhancing stability in a volatile regional context while deepening democracy. It expressed support for a
review of the needs of the PRA. The European Parliaments services should enhance the capacity-building support activities provided to the
PRA.
Welcoming an enhanced dialogue between the EU and Tunisia, Members called for measures on:
reforming public administration in the country;
democratic transition and development in general;
decentralisation and the empowerment of regions;
monitoring respect for human rights, including the protection of women and children, gender equality and the protection of all victims of
persecution and discrimination.
Parliament called for an EU and EP monitoring mission and election assistance for local elections (scheduled in October 2016). It also called
for support for gender-balanced policies and for the inclusion of young people in political life, especially regarding the promotion of youth
participation in local elections.
As regards human rights, Parliament called for measures to prevent the use of torture and to abolish the death penalty.

The resolution called for a reform of the penal code which penalises homosexuality.
As regards civil liberties, Parliament called for a reform of the penal code to defend the freedom of expression and freedom of the press and
media, freedom of expression online.
II. Economic and social development: Parliament welcomed the Commissions proposal for macro-financial assistance of EUR 500 million.
It noted the launch of negotiations on an ambitious free trade agreement (DCFTA) between the EU and Tunisia. It called on the Commission to
take a progressive approach during the negotiations and ensure that this agreement will be mutually beneficial while taking proper account of
the significant economic disparities between the two parties.
Parliament encouraged partnerships with other interested global and regional donor countries and organisations and, in particular, measures
reducing regional disparities and promoting training and investment in agriculture, taking into account the specificities of local agriculture, IT,
the social economy, the manufacturing sector, tourism and SMEs which would boost employment.
In order to address unemployment, especially for young people, Parliament called for deep reforms with a view to promoting quality education.
It called on all parties to maintain a spirit of good cooperation in order to focus on reforms with a view to inclusive economic development for
all territories of the country, including the less advanced and impoverished inland regions. The EU is called upon to step up its efforts against
desertification in Tunisia and water shortages.
Measures are necessary to combat corruption.
The resolution expressed concerns regarding the sustainability of the Tunisian debt. It called for the conversion of Tunisian debt into
investment projects, especially for building strategic infrastructures and reducing regional disparities. It called for further assistance for SMEs,
notably access to financial support.
Members also encouraged more North African regional cooperation on specific issues such as afforestation and water management, as well
as greater socioeconomic integration, within the context sustainable development.
III. Security and defence: Parliament expressed its deep concern about the immediate security spillover in Tunisia originating, among other
reasons, from instability in Libya. It expressed concerns at the high number of Tunisian foreign fighters joining Daesh and other terrorist groups
. It is particularly concerned about the situation in Libya and called on all parties in Libya to engage constructively with the Government of
National Accord (GNA).
Parliament called on the Tunisian Government to set up a strategy to deal with returning foreign fighters, for example by coupling punitive and
precautionary measures with deradicalisation and rehabilitation programmes. It recognised that terrorism is a shared challenge which requires
a joint response and that cooperation between the EU and Tunisia in the field of security and the fight against terrorism has been stepped up
recently.
Members expressed its deepest concern about Law 22/2015 on counter-terrorism, adopted in July 2015 by Tunisia's Assembly of
Representatives, which imposes the death penalty as a possible sentence for a range of terror offences. The Tunisian authorities are called
upon to continue to observe the moratorium on the death penalty and although Tunisia is one of the countries that are most vulnerable to the
terrorism threat, states are obliged to fully respect human rights when fighting terrorism.
Parliament recognised that poverty and social exclusion are among the major causes of radicalisation. It called for more effective social
inclusion of young people to enable them to find stable employment and prevent them from becoming targets for recruitment as fighters for
terrorist organisations. It recommended using the expertise gathered through the initiative of international organisations such as Hedayah to
develop local and regional strategies for countering violent extremism.
In parallel, Parliament welcomed the launch, in November 2015, of the EU programme of support for security sector reform in Tunisia. It called
for the promotion of a logic of objectives, rather than mere support by policy instruments, within a clear strategic vision focusing on prevention.
IV. Mobility, research, education and culture: Members welcomed the EU and the Tunisia Mobility Partnership signed in March 2014. They
recommended that Member States should show their solidarity with Tunisia by facilitating the issuing of visas for entrepreneurs, teachers,
students, researchers, artists, etc.
Parliament encouraged the EU to sign mobility partnerships with the partner countries in its southern neighbourhood in order to relax visa
procedures in conjunction with readmission agreements. It called on the Commission, in cooperation with the Member States, to develop
possibilities for circular migration schemes which would open up safe and legal routes for migrants.
Parliament also condemned trafficking in human beings, most of the victims of which are women, and called on the Tunisian authorities to
cooperate closely with Member States in order to tackle organised forms of illegal immigration.
Members underlined that Tunisia should become a full participant in the Erasmus + programme in order to develop further the exchange of
university students. Partnerships should be developed among schools, universities and research centres or in the area of culture and sports.
Lastly, Parliament stated that the use of Arabic is necessary to ensure the involvement of civil society in EU-Tunisia relations, in particular in
the context of the free trade agreement negotiations.

