Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2015/0225(COD)

Procedure completed, awaiting publication in Official Journal

Prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms
Amending Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 2011/0202(COD)
See also 2015/0226(COD)
Subject
2.50.03 Securities and financial markets, stock exchange, CIUTS,
investments
2.50.04 Banks and credit
2.50.05 Insurance, pension funds
2.50.08 Financial services, financial reporting and auditing
2.50.10 Financial supervision

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
28/11/2016

KARAS Othmar
Shadow rapporteur

FERNÁNDEZ Jonás

SWINBURNE Kay

THEURER Michael

KARI Rina Ronja

SCOTT CATO Molly

VALLI Marco
MONOT Bernard
Committee for opinion
JURI

Legal Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
HILL Jonathan

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
30/09/2015

Legislative proposal published

14/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

COM(2015)0473

Summary

08/12/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

08/12/2016

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

19/12/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0388/2016

11/07/2017

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE607.909

25/10/2017

Debate in Parliament

26/10/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

20/11/2017

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

12/12/2017

Final act signed

12/12/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

Summary

T8-0416/2017

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0225(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 2011/0202(COD)
See also 2015/0226(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed, awaiting publication in Official Journal

Committee dossier

ECON/8/04620

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0473

30/09/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2015)0185

30/09/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2015)0186

30/09/2015

EC

CON/2016/0011
OJ C 219 17.06.2016, p. 0002

11/03/2016

ECB

Committee draft report

PE583.904

06/06/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE587.498

06/09/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0388/2016

19/12/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0416/2017

26/10/2017

EP

Summary

European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report

Summary

Summary

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

Research document

Briefing

2015/0225(COD) - 30/09/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish a revised regulatory framework on capital charges for exposures to securitisations within the objective of reviving EU
securitisation markets.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure on an
equal footing with the Council.
CONTEXT: securitisations are an important constituent part of well-functioning financial markets. The Commission considers that promoting
the development of a securitisation market based on sound practices will contribute to a return to sustainable growth and job creation.
Furthermore, a common, high quality EU securitisation framework will promote further integration of financial markets in the Union, help
diversify funding sources and unlock capital, making it easier for credit institutions to lend to households and businesses.
In order to attain this objective, two steps must be taken:
1) to develop a common substantive framework for securitisations for all participants in this market and identify a subset of transactions
meeting certain eligibility criteria: simple, transparent and standardised (STS) securitisations or STS securitisations. This is the subject of the
Commission Proposal for a Securitisation Regulation.
2) to make amendments to the regulatory framework of securitisations in EU law, including in the area of capital charges for credit institutions
and investment firms originating, sponsoring or investing in these instruments, to provide for a more risk-sensitive regulatory treatment for STS
securitisations.
The global financial crisis revealed a number of shortcomings in the current securitisation framework. In order to address these shortcomings
and contribute to enhancing the resilience of institutions to market shocks, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) adopted in
December 2014 a recommendation for a revised securitisation framework ("the Revised Basel Framework"). The measure has been designed
to reduce the complexity of the current regulatory capital requirements, reflect better the risks of positions in a securitisation and allow the use
of the information available to institution to allocate capital requirements based on their own calculations, thus reducing reliance on external
ratings.
At an European level, the European Banking Authority (EBA) issued a report on qualifying securitisations on 7 July 2015 which recommended
lowering capital charges for STS securitisations to a prudent level relative to those set out in the Revised Basel Framework and to amend the
regulatory capital requirements for securitisations set out in the Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (CRR) in line with the Revised Basel
Framework. For STS securitisations, the EBA re-calibrated downwards the 3 approaches developed by the BCBS for the Revised Basel
Framework.
The Commission now proposes to amend the regulatory capital requirements for securitisations in the CRR in order to:
implement the regulatory capital calculation approaches set out in the Revised Basel Framework;
introduce a re-calibration for STS securitisations, consistent with the recommendation of the EBA.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the impact assessment accompanying the Securitisation Regulation clearly shows the benefits in terms of efficiency
and effectiveness of:
introducing a revised regulatory framework on capital charges for exposures to securitisations, and
differentiating the treatment of STS securitisations having regard to the overall objectives of the Commission legislative package on
securitisation, i) remove stigma attached to securitisations among investors; ii) remove regulatory disadvantages for STS products;
and iii) reduce or eliminate unduly high operational costs for issuers and investors.
CONTENT: this Regulation forms a legislative package with the proposed Securitisation Regulation which aims to restart securitisation
markets on a more sustainable basis and making this a safe and efficient instrument for funding and risk management.
The proposed Regulation aims to review the regulatory capital requirements laid down in Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (CRR) for institutions
originating, sponsoring or investing in securitisations should be amended to reflect adequately the specific features of STS securitisations and
address the shortcomings of the framework which became apparent during the financial crisis, namely its mechanistic reliance on external
ratings, excessively low risk weights for highly-rated securitisation tranches and, conversely, excessively high risk weights for low-rated
tranches, and insufficient risk sensitivity.
The amendments to the existing regulatory framework should take account of the regulatory capital calculation approaches set out in the
Revised Basel Framework. Under this framework:
institutions may calculate capital requirements for their securitisation positions in accordance with a single hierarchy of approaches,
which starts with the Internal Ratings Based Approach (IRB Approach) at the top;
if an institution cannot use the approach based on internal ratings, it must use a External Ratings-Based Approach ("SEC-ERBA"
Approach), provided the exposure has an external credit assessment which meets a series of operational requirements;
in the case where the Institution cannot use the External Ratings Based Approach, either because is located in a jurisdiction that
doesn't permit its use or because it lacks the information needed to use that approach, it shall use a Standardised Approach (the
"SEC-SA" Approach) based on a supervisory-provided formula.
No later than 3-years from the entry into force of this Regulation, the Commission will review the proposed approach to capital requirements

for securitisation exposures, including the hierarchy of approaches, taking into account its impact on securitisation markets developments and
the need to preserve financial stability in the EU.

2015/0225(COD) - 11/03/2016 European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report
OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK on (a) a proposal for a regulation laying down common rules on securitisation and creating a
European framework for simple, transparent and standardised securitisation; and (b) a proposal for a regulation amending Regulation (EU) No
575/2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms.
The ECB welcomed the objectives of the proposed regulations of promoting the further integration of Union financial markets, diversifying
funding sources and unlocking capital for sound lending to the real economy. It supported the establishment of criteria to identify a subset of
securitisations which can be classified as simple, transparent and standardised (STS) and welcomed the proposed CRR amendments
adjustment to capital charges to provide for a more risk-sensitive treatment for STS securitisations.
As regards the proposed amendment of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms,
the EBC made the following recommendations:
Capital treatment for STS securitisations: the ECB strongly supported the incorporation of the STS criteria in the banking regulatory capital
framework through the proposed CRR amendment, as an enhancement to the December 2014 revisions to the Basel securitisation framework.
It considered that the calibration, which reduces capital charges for STS securitisations, is appropriate, considering their lower risk profile.
In relation to the hierarchy of approaches, the ECB considered the proposed changes to be a positive first step towards a more equal
regulatory treatment of STS securitisations issued in different Union jurisdictions. As drafted, it effectively permits credit institutions to cap
capital charges under the securitisation external ratings-based approach (SEC-ERBA) at the level applicable under the securitisation
standardised approach (SEC-SA), subject to certain conditions.
The ECB recommended disallowing the use of SEC-ERBA for STS securitisations only. This would provide equality of treatment across Union
STS securitisations and between Union STS securitisations and non-Union securitisations issued in jurisdictions where the use of external
ratings and, consequently, the application of SEC-ERBA, is not permitted.
Competent authorities should nevertheless retain their discretion to impose capital charges higher than those resulting from the application of
SEC-SA for STS securitisations (as for non-STS securitisations), where justified on a case-by-case basis, e.g. due to residual structural
complexities or other relevant risk drivers not sufficiently captured in all cases under the standardised approach.
Importantly, the ECBs recommendation to disallow the application of SEC-ERBA is, however, contingent on the maintenance of high
standards for asset quality and self-attestation.
Capital treatment for qualifying synthetic securitisations: the proposed CRR amendment introduces a differentiated capital treatment for senior
tranches of synthetic securitisations meeting certain criteria.
The ECB noted that, from a prudential perspective, the arguments for reducing capital charges for certain synthetic securitisations are not as
strong as for traditional STS securitisations. Notably there is currently limited data available on both the volume and performance of synthetic
securitisations due to their private nature. The ECB therefore acknowledges the cautious approach taken by the Commission, whereby the
preferential treatment is strictly limited to a subset of synthetic securitisation structures.
It recommended that the prudence of the framework for qualifying synthetic structures should be further strengthened by developing criteria
specifically adapted to synthetic securitisations.
Strengthening the significant risk transfers (SRT) assessment: the ECB recommended that the proposed CRR amendment should be used as
an opportunity to both clarify and strengthen the current CRR provisions with regard to significant risk transfer and implicit support. First, the
conditions for recognising SRT (38) in Articles 244 and 245 should be linked to the conditions for implicit support in Article 250, as they
address the same issues. In addition, the quantitative significant risk transfer tests should be reviewed by the EBA as they are insufficient and
open to regulatory arbitrage in certain cases.

2015/0225(COD) - 19/12/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the report by Othmar KARAS (EPP, AT) on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and
investment firms.
In brief, the proposed Regulation seeks to revise amend Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (CRR) for institutions originating, sponsoring or
investing in securitisations to reflect adequately the specific features of simple, transparent and standardised (STS) securitisations when such
securisations also meet the additional requirements laid down in this Regulation, and address the shortcomings of the framework which
became apparent during the financial crisis.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Securitisations: it is highlighted that securitisations are an important constituent part of well-functioning financial markets insofar as they
contribute to diversifying institutions' funding sources and releasing regulatory capital which can then be reallocated to support further lending.
Members considered that financial stability should be guaranteed and that the capital be used to fund the real economy rather than for
speculative activity.
Revised Basel Framework: the amendments to Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 should take into account the provisions of the Revised Basel
Framework. Members made reference to the fact that on 11 July 2016, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) published an
updated standard for the regulatory capital treatment of securitisation exposures that includes the regulatory capital treatment for "simple,

transparent and comparable" securitisations. That standard amends the Committee's 2014 capital standards for securitisation.
Calculation of regulatory capital requirements: an amendment stated that a securitisation standardised approach ("SEC-SA") should then be
available to institutions that may not use the SEC-IRBA in relation to their positions in a given securitisation.
The SEC-SA should rely on a supervisory-provided formula using as an input the capital requirements that would be calculated under the
Standardised Approach to credit risk (SA) in relation to the underlying exposures if they had not been securitised ("Ksa"). When the first two
approaches are not available or the use of the SEC-SA would result in incommensurate regulatory capital requirements relative to the credit
risk embedded in the underlying exposures, institutions should be able to apply the Securitisation External Ratings Based Approach
(SEC-ERBA).
Under the SEC-ERBA, capital requirements should be assigned to securitisation tranches on the basis of their external rating.
Members also proposed to ban re-securitisations given their higher level of complexity and risk.
Macroprudential oversight of the securitisation market: the amended text stipulated that the European Systemic Risk Board ( ESRB) shall be
responsible for the macroprudential oversight of the Unions securitisation market and European Banking Union (EBA) shall be responsible for
the microprudential oversight, while taking into account the specificity of market segments and asset classes.
The STS Regulation provides for the publication of the biennial report on the securitisation market. In order to reflect changes in market
circumstances, to prevent asset bubbles from developing in different market segments or asset classes and to prevent parts of the Unions
securitisation market from closing down in times of crisis, the Commission shall consider, within six months after the publication of the report
and every two years thereafter, adjusting the following, where applicable:
the risk floor levels for securitisations;
the leverage ratio, liquidity coverage ratio, net stable funding ratio for credit institutions and investment firms active in the securitisation
market.
Following the publication of the report, the ESRB shall make recommendations to the Member States.

2015/0225(COD) - 26/10/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 458 votes to 135 with 26 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on prudential requirements for credit institutions and
investment firms.
In brief, the proposed Regulation seeks to revise amend Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (CRR) for institutions originating, sponsoring or
investing in securitisations to reflect adequately the specific features of simple, transparent and standardised (STS) securitisations and
address the shortcomings of the framework which became apparent during the financial crisis.
Securitisations: the amended text highlights that securitisations are an important constituent part of well-functioning financial markets insofar
as they contribute to diversifying the funding and risk diversification sources of credit institutions and investment firms and releasing regulatory
capital which can then be reallocated to support further lending, in particular the funding of the real economy. Those benefits should, however,
be weighed against their potential costs and risks, including their impact on financial stability.
Revised Basel Framework: amendments to Regulation (EU) 575/2013 should take into account the provisions of the Revised Basel
Framework. Parliament made reference to the fact that the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision published, on 11 July 2016, an updated
standard for the regulatory capital treatment of securitisation exposures that includes the regulatory capital treatment for "simple, transparent
and comparable" securitisations. That standard amends the standards applicable to securitisations published by the Committee in 2014.
Calculation of regulatory capital requirements: Parliament stated that a standardised approach ("SEC-SA") for securitisation should be
available to institutions that may not use the SEC-IRBA (Internal Ratings Based Approach) in relation to their positions in a given
securitisation. The SEC-SA should rely on a formula using as an input the capital requirements that would be calculated under the
Standardised Approach to credit risk in relation to the underlying exposures as if they had not been securitised ("Ksa").
When the first two approaches are not available, institutions should be able to apply the Securitisation External Ratings Based Approach (
SEC-ERBA). However, institutions should always use the SEC-ERBA as a fall-back when the SEC-IRBA is not available for low-rated tranches
and certain medium-rated tranches of STS securitisations identified through appropriate parameters.
Moreover, competent authorities should be able to prohibit the use of the SEC-SA when the latter is not able to adequately tackle the risks that
the securitisation poses to the solvability of the institution or to financial stability. Upon notification to the competent authority, institutions
should be allowed to use the SEC-ERBA in respect of all rated securitisations they hold when they cannot use the SEC-IRBA.
Re-securitisations: since re-securitisations exhibit greater complexity and riskiness, Parliament stated that only certain forms of
re-securitisations are permitted under the Regulation creating a European framework for simple, transparent and standardised securitisation.
Lower risks for STS: the amendments made to Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 provide for an appropriately risk-sensitive calibration for STS
securitisations, provided that they also meet additional requirements to minimise risk.
Furthermore, lower capital requirements applicable to STS securitisations should be limited to securitisations where the ownership of the
underlying exposures is transferred to a securitisation special purpose entity or SSPE ("traditional securitisations").
Report and review: by 1 January 2022, the Commission shall report on the application of the regulation in the light of developments in
securitisation markets, including from a macroprudential and economic perspective, accompanied by a legislative proposal if appropriate. It
shall, in particular, assess the following points:
the impact of the hierarchy of methods and of the calculation of the risk-weighted exposure amounts of securitisation positions;
the effects on the financial stability of the Union and Member States, with a particular focus on potential immovable property market
speculation;
what measures would be warranted to reduce any negative effects of securitisation on financial stability while preserving its positive

effect on financing, including the possible introduction of a maximum limit on exposure to securitisations; and
the effects on the ability of financial institutions to provide a sustainable and stable funding channel to the real economy, with particular
attention to SMEs.
The report shall also take into account regulatory developments in international fora, in particular those relating to international standards on
securitisation.

