Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2139(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Role of intercultural dialogue, cultural diversity and education in promoting
EU fundamental values

Subject
4.45 Common cultural area, cultural diversity

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
CULT

Rapporteur

Culture and Education

Appointed
04/05/2015

WARD Julie
Shadow rapporteur

HÖLVÉNYI György

KRASNODĘBSKI
Zdzisław

TOOM Yana

MICHELS Martina

MARAGALL Ernest

ADINOLFI Isabella

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Education, Youth, Sport and Culture

NAVRACSICS Tibor

Key events
09/07/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

07/12/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

21/12/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

18/01/2016

Debate in Parliament

19/01/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

19/01/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

19/01/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information

A8-0373/2015

Summary

T8-0005/2016

Summary

Procedure reference

2015/2139(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CULT/8/03828

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE565.021

25/09/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE567.797

28/10/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0373/2015

21/12/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0005/2016

19/01/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)220

01/06/2016

2015/2139(INI) - 21/12/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Culture and Education adopted the own-initiative report by Julie WARD (S&D, UK) on the role of intercultural dialogue,
cultural diversity and education in promoting EU fundamental values.
Members argued that a European Union approach should take stock and resume the excellent work initiated during the 2008 European Year
of Intercultural Dialogue and encouraged all stakeholders to establish an up-to-date, clear, policy-related definition of intercultural dialogue.
They stressed that a genuine intercultural and interfaith dialogue encourages positive and cooperative interactions, promotes understanding
and respect between cultures, increases diversity and respect for democracy, liberty, human rights as well as tolerance for universal and
culture specific values. Members advocated that the EU, acting as global peace actor, should include culture and cultural exchanges and
enhance education in EU external relations and development policy.
Intercultural, interfaith and value-based approach: Members advocated that fostering an intercultural, interfaith and value-based approach in
the educational field should be encouraged in order to address and promote mutual respect, integrity, ethical principles cultural diversity, social
inclusion and cohesion, including through exchange and mobility programmes for all. Intercultural dialogue may significantly contribute to the
improvement of democracy and the development of greater and deeper inclusivity and sense of belonging.
Enhancing the teaching of intercultural dialogue: Members considered that increasing public investment in inclusive, quality and accessible
formal, non-formal and informal education is the first step to providing equal access and opportunities for all. Formal, non-formal and informal
education and access to lifelong learning not only provide knowledge, skills and competences, but should also help learners to develop ethical
and civic values and become active, responsible, open-minded members of society. Members stressed the importance of participation in
sports and volunteering activities in stimulating the development of civic, social and intercultural competences.
Members encouraged mobility specifically for teachers from primary and secondary levels in order to share experiences. The role and
importance of the Erasmus+ programme which fosters a European awareness among young people and creates a sense of common
belonging and a culture of intercultural dialogue was emphasised.
Members also noted the essential role of teachers in strengthening in cooperation with families social ties, generating a sense of belonging
and helping young people to develop ethical and civic values.
Support to NGOs, human rights organisations: Members recognised the need to provide sustainable and structural support to NGOs, human
rights organisations, youth organisations and training institutions to challenge extremism through social cohesion and inclusion, active
citizenship and empowerment and participation of youth.
As regards the combat against discrimination, Members affirmed the need, when dealing with the issue of intercultural dialogue and education,
to keep a gender perspective and to take into account the needs of people suffering multiple forms of discrimination, including people with
disabilities, people identifying as LGBTI and people from marginalised communities. Member States are called upon to involve marginalised
communities, migrants, refugees and host communities as well as faith and secular communities in respectful and empowering inclusion
processes.
Diplomacy and intercultural dialogue: Members called on the Commission to mainstream cultural diplomacy and intercultural dialogue in all EU
external relations instruments and in the EU development agenda. They called furthermore on the EU and the Member States to strengthen
cooperation with other European and international organisations such as the United Nations and its related agencies, in particular UNESCO,
UNICEF and UNHCR and called for more cooperation with national cultural institutes.
Cultural identity and refugees: Members invited the Member States and the Commission to prevent extremism, such as xenophobia, racism
and all forms of discrimination and marginalisation through community cohesion measures that are able to successfully challenge economic
and social inequalities. They recommended that the EU cooperate in making learning and schooling accessible for refugee children by

continuing to support programs on access to education in humanitarian crises and to ensure the integration of migrant students in Europe. In
parallel, Members stressed the family role in the preservation of cultural identity, traditions, ethics and the value systems of society, and
stressed that the introduction of children to the culture, values and norms of their society begins in the family.
Intercultural dialogue as a strong and committed political objective of the EU: Members called on the Commission and the Council to adopt
intercultural dialogue as a strong and committed political objective of the EU and therefore guarantee EU support. They encouraged the
Commission and the Member States to further prioritise initiatives directed towards supporting cultural diversity, intercultural dialogue and
education, and to fully exploit EU financial instruments, programmes and initiatives, such as the Erasmus+, Europe for Citizens, Creative
Europe and Horizon 2020 programmes, EU neighbourhood policy and external relations instruments.

2015/2139(INI) - 19/01/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 554 votes to 147, with 12 abstentions, a resolution on the role of intercultural dialogue, cultural diversity
and education in promoting EU fundamental values.
Parliament took stock of the excellent work initiated during the 2008 European Year of Intercultural Dialogue and called on all stakeholders to
establish an up-to-date, clear, policy-related definition of intercultural dialogue.
Intercultural and interfaith dialogue: Parliament advocated that fostering an intercultural, interfaith and value-based approach in the educational
field should be encouraged in order to address and promote mutual respect, integrity, ethical principles cultural diversity, social inclusion and
cohesion, including through exchange and mobility programmes for all. The EU, acting as global peace actor, should include culture and
cultural exchanges and enhance education in EU external relations and development policy.
It called for interfaith dialogue to be taken into account as a component of intercultural dialogue, a precondition for peace, and an essential tool
of conflict management, focusing on the dignity of the individual and on the need to uphold human rights around the world, with particular
reference to freedom of thought, conscience and religion and religious minorities right to protection.
It stressed that a genuine intercultural and interfaith dialogue encourages positive and cooperative interactions, promotes understanding and
respect between cultures, increases diversity and respect for democracy, liberty, human rights as well as tolerance for universal and culture
specific values. In an amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament insisted on the importance of the timely integration and education of
segregated communities.
Members stated that intercultural dialogue may significantly contribute to the improvement of democracy and the development of greater and
deeper inclusivity and sense of belonging.
Enhancing the teaching of intercultural dialogue: the resolution considered that increasing public investment in inclusive, quality and accessible
formal, non-formal and informal education is the first step to providing equal access and opportunities for all. Formal, non-formal and informal
education and access to lifelong learning not only provide knowledge, skills and competences, but should also help learners to develop ethical
and civic values and become active, responsible, open-minded members of society. It also stressed the importance of participation in sports
and volunteering activities in stimulating the development of civic, social and intercultural competences.
Parliament encouraged mobility specifically for teachers from primary and secondary levels in order to share experiences. The role and
importance of the Erasmus+ programme which fosters a European awareness among young people and creates a sense of common
belonging and a culture of intercultural dialogue was emphasised.
Parliament also noted the essential role of teachers in strengthening in cooperation with families social ties, generating a sense of belonging
and helping young people to develop ethical and civic values.
Support to NGOs, human rights organisations: Parliament recognised the need to provide sustainable and structural support to NGOs, human
rights organisations, youth organisations and training institutions to challenge extremism through social cohesion and inclusion, active
citizenship and empowerment and participation of youth.
As regards the combat against discrimination, Members affirmed the need, when dealing with the issue of intercultural dialogue and education,
to keep a gender perspective and to take into account the needs of people suffering multiple forms of discrimination, including people with
disabilities, people identifying as LGBTI and people from marginalised communities. Member States are called upon to involve marginalised
communities, migrants, refugees and host communities as well as faith and secular communities in respectful and empowering inclusion
processes.
Diplomacy and intercultural dialogue: Parliament called on the Commission to mainstream cultural diplomacy and intercultural dialogue in all
EU external relations instruments and in the EU development agenda. It called furthermore on the EU and the Member States to strengthen
cooperation with other European and international organisations such as the United Nations and its related agencies, in particular UNESCO,
UNICEF and UNHCR and called for more cooperation with national cultural institutes.
Cultural identity and refugees: Parliament invited the Member States and the Commission to prevent extremism, such as xenophobia, racism
and all forms of discrimination and marginalisation through community cohesion measures that are able to successfully challenge economic
and social inequalities. It recommended that the EU cooperate in making learning and schooling accessible for refugee children by continuing
to support programs on access to education in humanitarian crises and to ensure the integration of migrant students in Europe. In parallel, it
stressed the family role in the preservation of cultural identity, traditions, ethics and the value systems of society, and stressed that the
introduction of children to the culture, values and norms of their society begins in the family.
Intercultural dialogue as a strong and committed political objective of the EU: Parliament called on the Commission and the Council to adopt
intercultural dialogue as a strong and committed political objective of the EU and therefore guarantee EU support. It encouraged the
Commission and the Member States to further prioritise initiatives directed towards supporting cultural diversity, intercultural dialogue and
education, and to fully exploit EU financial instruments, programmes and initiatives, such as the Erasmus+, Europe for Citizens, Creative
Europe and Horizon 2020 programmes, EU neighbourhood policy and external relations instruments.

