Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2230(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Gender mainstreaming in the work of the European Parliament

Subject
4.10.04 Gender equality
8.40.01 European Parliament

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
FEMM

Rapporteur

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

Appointed
02/12/2014

MLINAR Angelika
Shadow rapporteur

PIETIKÄINEN Sirpa

WARD Julie

WIŚNIEWSKA Jadwiga

FORENZA Eleonora

VANA Monika
Committee for opinion
EMPL

European Commission

Employment and Social Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
10/09/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

18/02/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

23/02/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

07/03/2016

Debate in Parliament

08/03/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

08/03/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

08/03/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information

A8-0034/2016

Summary

T8-0072/2016

Summary

Procedure reference

2015/2230(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

FEMM/8/04389

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE573.219

18/12/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE575.339

25/01/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0034/2016

23/02/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0072/2016

08/03/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)349

04/07/2016

2015/2230(INI) - 23/02/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Womens Rights and Gender Equality adopted the own-initiative report by Angelika MLINAR (ALDE, AT) on Gender
Mainstreaming in the work of the European Parliament.
The report recalled that achieving gender equality is central to the protection of human rights, economic growth, social inclusion and
sustainability. However, progress in achieving gender equality in the EU is stagnating and at this pace will not be achieved for some time yet.
One of the competences of the committee responsible is to contribute to the implementation and further development of gender mainstreaming
in all policy areas. Whereas the majority of parliamentary committees generally give importance to gender mainstreaming, others exhibit little
or no interest in this matter. Moreover, insufficient funds and human resources are being allocated to ensure real progress in gender
mainstreaming of Parliaments activities.
General assessment of the existing institutional framework: the report noted that female representation in key decision-making positions at
political and administrative level, including within Parliaments political groups, remains low. Different bodies are in charge of developing and
implementing gender mainstreaming both at policy and working life level in the Parliament. Members regret that the activities of these different
bodies are not being coordinated or integrated within Parliament or with other institutions. Effective cooperation is called for between all actors
in this institutional framework. They reiterated their commitment to regularly adopt and implement a policy plan for gender mainstreaming
within Parliament.
Members called for ongoing development of the gender mainstreaming network (a network which assesses, through a questionnaire, the state
of play of gender mainstreaming in each policy area). However, they noted the need for greater and active participation by MEPs in the
network.
Gender mainstreaming tools: the committee stressed that the practice of using gender mainstreaming amendments(GMAs) has proved to be
more effective than opinions as they are more concise, can be more rapidly submitted and relate to key, specific and delimited issues. It
reiterated its call on the competent committee to include this practice of GMAs in the Rules of Procedure, taking into account the specific role
of the Committee on Womens Rights and Gender Equality in gender mainstreaming as a horizontal principle.
Members regretted that despite the interinstitutional declaration on ensuring gender mainstreaming annexed to the Multiannual Financial
Framework, no measures concerning gender budgeting have so far been taken. They also deplored that the gender budgeting exercise has
revealed that the gender perspective is far from being assumed in all policies, at all levels and at every stage of the policymaking process. In
this context, they noted that it is particularly crucial to build up in-house capacity on gender-responsive budgeting in order to enhance
Parliaments scrutiny role on these matters.
Members noted that the Commission is considering issuing a report on gender mainstreaming in the Commission in 2017. They also
reaffirmed the need for sufficient allocation of resources also at Parliament level in order to develop gender impact assessments and
gender-based analysis.
The committee noted that, in the replies to the questionnaires on the state of gender mainstreaming in the parliamentary committees, specific
tools were highlighted as being effective in integrating a gender perspective in the work of committees, including:
distribution of key documents and inclusion of gender equality issues in the terms of reference of studies commissioned;
focusing attention on the use of specific terminology and definitions in relation to gender equality issues;
promoting ex-ante and ex-post assessment of draft proposals for legislation and for future agreements;
training and awareness-raising activities for Members, staff, political advisers and assistants.
The report called for an accreditation system to be established so that those who undergo gender mainstreaming training at Parliament can
receive formal certification, which they can carry through their career paths.

Gender mainstreaming in the work of committees: the committee reiterated its call for the commitment to delivering a biannual report on
gender mainstreaming in the work of Parliament to be met. It regretted that a large majority of the committees have neither adopted nor
discussed an action plan on gender equality for their work. It stated that a standing rapporteur on gender mainstreaming will reinforce the
current structure.
Interinstitutional cooperation to support gender mainstreaming: Members stressed that stronger interinstitutional relations will improve the
gender balance in EU policy-making. They called on the Commission to propose an appropriate framework for establishing interinstitutional
gender mainstreaming cooperation, such as the establishment of an interinstitutional high level working group on gender mainstreaming, and
also involving other stakeholders in this field.
They recommended that data be provided annually by the European Ombudsman to Parliaments High Level Group on Gender Equality and
Diversity, as regards complaints about maladministration relating to gender equality in Parliament. They also called for the exchanges of best
practice to be organised at all levels with other institutions and organisations. Regular interparliamentary meetings on gender mainstreaming
should be organised.

2015/2230(INI) - 08/03/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 453 votes to 173, with 79 abstentions, a resolution on Gender Mainstreaming in the work of the
European Parliament.
Parliament recalled that achieving gender equality is central to the protection of human rights, economic growth, social inclusion and
sustainability. However, progress in achieving gender equality in the EU is stagnating and at this pace will not be achieved for some time yet.
It stated that one of the competences of the committee responsible is to contribute to the implementation and further development of gender
mainstreaming in all policy areas. Whereas the majority of parliamentary committees generally give importance to gender mainstreaming,
others exhibit little or no interest in this matter.
General assessment of the existing institutional framework: Parliament noted that female representation in key decision-making positions at
political and administrative level, including within Parliaments political groups, remains low. Different bodies are in charge of developing and
implementing gender mainstreaming both at policy and working life level in the Parliament.
It regretted that the activities of these different bodies responsible for gender mainstreaming are not being coordinated or integrated within
Parliament or with other institutions. It undertakes to establish effective cooperation between all actors in this institutional framework and
recalled its commitment to regularly adopt and implement a policy plan for gender mainstreaming within Parliament.
Parliament called for ongoing development of the gender mainstreaming network, representing committees but also interparliamentary
delegations, and its full involvement in regular monitoring of the state of play of gender mainstreaming across policy areas. It noted the need
for greater and active participation by Members in the network and called for substitute Members to be added to the network in order to
increase participation, as is the case for committees and delegations.
Parliament also called for a yearly analysis of the state of play of gender equality within Parliament, based on gender disaggregated data, at all
levels of staff and political bodies, including parliamentary assistants, and for this reporting to be made public. In this respect, plenary deplored
the fact that the targets for gender balance at senior and middle management level adopted by the Bureau in 2006 (Kaufmann report) were not
reached by the 2009 deadline. It urged for effective, corrective and far-reaching measures to be taken so as to reach these gender equality
targets within the shortest possible time frame.
Gender mainstreaming tools: Parliament stressed that the practice of using gender mainstreaming amendments(GMAs) has proved to be
more effective than opinions as they are more concise, can be more rapidly submitted and relate to key, specific and delimited issues. It
reiterated its call on the competent committee to include this practice of GMAs in the Rules of Procedure, taking into account the specific role
of the Committee on Womens Rights and Gender Equality in gender mainstreaming as a horizontal principle.
It regretted that despite the interinstitutional declaration on ensuring gender mainstreaming annexed to the Multiannual Financial Framework,
no measures concerning gender budgeting have so far been taken. It also deplored that the gender budgeting exercise has revealed that the
gender perspective is far from being assumed in all policies, at all levels and at every stage of the policymaking process. In this context, it
noted that it is particularly crucial to build up in-house capacity on gender-responsive budgeting in order to enhance Parliaments scrutiny role
on these matters.
Parliament noted that the Commission is considering issuing a report on gender mainstreaming in the Commission in 2017. It also reaffirmed
the need for sufficient allocation of resources also at Parliament level in order to develop gender impact assessments and gender-based
analysis. It called on the Commission to perform systematic gender impact assessments on new legislative or policy proposals, on the basis of
its reinforced assessment of their impact on fundamental rights and in order to guarantee that the EU is upholding womens rights.
Parliament noted that, in the replies to the questionnaires on the state of gender mainstreaming in the parliamentary committees, specific tools
were highlighted as being effective in integrating a gender perspective in the work of committees, including:
distribution of key documents and inclusion of gender equality issues in the terms of reference of studies commissioned;
focusing attention on the use of specific terminology and definitions in relation to gender equality issues;
promoting ex-ante and ex-post assessment of draft proposals for legislation and for future agreements;
training and awareness-raising activities for Members, staff, political advisers and assistants.
Parliament expressed its full support for developing targeted and regular gender mainstreaming training, with adequate resources and
tailor-made for Parliament specific needs, addressed to all Parliament staff working in policy fields. These training sessions should include
information on the multiple and intersectional forms of discrimination. There is a need to ensure that all its services are aware of their
responsibilities in implementing gender mainstreaming. On the other hand, plenary rejected the principle of an accreditation system to be
established for those who undergo gender mainstreaming training at Parliament.
Gender mainstreaming in the work of committees: Parliament reiterated its call for the commitment to delivering a biannual report on gender
mainstreaming in the work of Parliament to be met. It regretted that a large majority of the committees have neither adopted nor discussed an

action plan on gender equality for their work. On the other hand, it rejected the idea of the establishing a standing report on gender
mainstreaming in committees. It took the view that an internal monitoring body needs to be created in order to follow up and evaluate ex-post
the implementation of tools and actions.
Interinstitutional cooperation to support gender mainstreaming: Parliament stressed that stronger interinstitutional relations will improve the
gender balance in EU policy-making. It called on the Commission to propose an appropriate framework for establishing interinstitutional
gender mainstreaming cooperation, such as the establishment of an interinstitutional high level working group on gender mainstreaming, and
also involving other stakeholders in this field. In this regard, plenary called on the Commission to follow up on the results of the public
consultation and the positions of Parliament and of the Council by immediately adopting a communication on a new Strategy for Gender
Equality and Womens Rights post-2015 which addresses gender equality issues in line with the international agenda.
It recommended that data be provided annually by the European Ombudsman to Parliaments High Level Group on Gender Equality and
Diversity, as regards complaints about maladministration relating to gender equality in Parliament. It also called for the exchanges of best
practice to be organised at all levels with other institutions and organisations. Regular interparliamentary meetings on gender mainstreaming
should be organised.
It is also noted that an alternative motion for resolution proposed by more than 40 members was rejected in plenary.

