Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2093(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

How to make fisheries controls in Europe uniform

Subject
3.15.07 Fisheries inspectorate, surveillance of fishing vessels and areas

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
PECH

Rapporteur

Fisheries

Appointed
31/03/2015

THOMAS Isabelle
Shadow rapporteur

CADEC Alain

VAN DALEN Peter

NICOLAI Norica

SENRA RODRÍGUEZ
Maria Lidia

AFFRONTE Marco

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Maritime Affairs and Fisheries

VELLA Karmenu

Key events
30/04/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

12/07/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

18/07/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

24/10/2016

Debate in Parliament

25/10/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

25/10/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

25/10/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2093(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A8-0234/2016

Summary

T8-0407/2016

Summary

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

PECH/8/03340

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE576.833

18/03/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE580.534

27/04/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0234/2016

18/07/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0407/2016

25/10/2016

EP

Summary

2015/2093(INI) - 18/07/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Fisheries adopted the own-initiative report by Isabelle THOMAS (S&D, FR) on How to make fisheries controls in Europe
uniform.
Obstacles to harmonisation: Members stressed the importance of ensuring effective control of fisheries activities in order to guarantee
sustainable exploitation of living marine resources and maintain a level playing field among EU fleets. They called on Member States to ensure
effective implementation of Regulation (EC) 1224/2009 establishing a Community control system.
The report makes a number of observation:
quite apart from possible regional variations, substantial differences exist in the application of European regulations in Member States ,
particularly those deriving from the control regulation. Each Member State has its own distinctive legal system as well as different
administrative and judicial structures, which are inevitably reflected in the systems of administrative and/or criminal penalties and in
the fact that those systems lead to discrepancies and unfairness between Member States;
the effectiveness of controls also varies on account of the immense diversity of fishing grounds within the EU, ranging from narrow,
confined zones, whose fishery resources are shared essentially by neighbouring Member States, to very distant and remote zones;
there is a difference in approach between controls based on risk assessment and random checks on fishing activity and on marketing
channels for catches;
the current complexity of technical measures and the vast number of provisions, possibly even contradictory, including multiple
derogations and exceptions, provisions disseminated across a range of different legal texts makes them difficult not only to
understand, but also to control and enforce.
Member States were urged to properly implement the Control Regulation, in order to have a clear view of which parts need to be improved in
the upcoming revision and thus to ensure a functional and easily applicable Control Regulation for the future as well.
Proposals to overcome the current obstacles:
Improve legislation: Members are in favour of a simplification and improvement of Union legislation, as well as a reduction in the administrative
burden, through a limited and targeted revision of Council Regulation (EC) No 1224/2009, scheduled for and expected by 2017 at the latest. At
the same time, they wanted to retain effective rules able to prevent, detect and sanction infringements of the Common Fisheries Policy, and
focus primarily on better implementation of norms between different Member States, by researching in particular a greater harmonisation.
Closer cooperation between Member States would be a way towards further harmonisation of controls.
Better application of existing legislation: the Commission must attend to uniform and accurate transposition and verify the state of
implementation of existing legislation. Control procedures must be transparent, even-handed and standardised, allowing Member States to be
put on an equal footing as regards controls on their fishermen, and rules on control should be simpler, and more comprehensive and
consistent.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU): Members recommend the strengthening of controls in order to prevent the importation of fish
from illegal, unreported and unregulated fisheries by setting up national intelligence teams staffed with specialised fishing inspectors.
Data: Members believed there is a need for the collection, management and use of good-quality data regarding the landing obligation. They
called for increased cooperation between Member States through exchanges of inspectors, control methods and data, risk analysis sharing
and shared information on quotas of flagged vessels. They also recalled the importance of having the capacity to share data in real time.
Training of fishermen: Members proposed that training and information for fishermen be improved, with a view to inculcating a culture of
understanding and respect for the rules. They suggested that online databases be created for documents and information relevant to fisheries,
making the regulations accessible for all to read and understand.
Strengthened monitoring: the report recommends expanding the controls for example extending monitoring to cover the entire production
chain, and assigning responsibility for control at sea to a single administrative body, in order to avoid an overlapping of controls which wastes
human, logistic, and financial resources.

Sanctions: Members recommend the standardisation of sanctions while keeping them at a level that is proportional and non-discriminatory and
that acts as a deterrent; preference should be given to incentives for fishermen who comply with CFP rules in order to prevent infringements.
Member States were asked to take the initiative for an extensive standardisation of sanctions, in particular penal ones, in order to put an end to
the inequities existing at present.
Modernisation: the report encouraged the establishment of funding mechanisms to increase the use of low-cost technologies to enable
voluntary control and increase monitoring and safety of fishermen, especially in small-scale artisanal fisheries. It stressed the importance of
electronic technologies which represent a potentially cost-effective means to widen observation of activities at sea, but stated opposition to any
mandatory video surveillance system on board.
The available budgetary resources, particularly under the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (EMFF), should be realistic, consistent, and
sufficient to pursue the objectives of controls.

2015/2093(INI) - 25/10/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 581 votes to 59, with 48 abstentions, a resolution on How to make fisheries controls in Europe uniform.
Obstacles to harmonisation: Members stressed the importance of ensuring effective control of fisheries activities in order to guarantee
sustainable exploitation of living marine resources and maintain a level playing field among EU fleets. They called on Member States to ensure
effective implementation of Regulation (EC) 1224/2009 establishing a Community control system.
The resolution makes a number of observations:
substantial differences exist in the application of European regulations in Member States, particularly those deriving from the control
regulation. Each Member State has its own distinctive legal system as well as different administrative and judicial structures, which are
inevitably reflected in the systems of administrative and/or criminal penalties and in the fact that those systems lead to discrepancies
and unfairness between Member States;
some Member States organise control from gear to plate and others controlling only certain links in the chain and excluding aspects
relating to transportation of catches or to catering, for example;
the effectiveness of controls also varies on account of the immense diversity of fishing grounds within the EU, ranging from narrow,
confined zones, whose fishery resources are shared essentially by neighbouring Member States, to very distant and remote zones;
there is a difference in approach between controls based on risk assessment and random checks on fishing activity and on marketing
channels for catches;
the current complexity of technical measures and the vast number of provisions, possibly even contradictory, including multiple
derogations and exceptions, provisions disseminated across a range of different legal texts makes them difficult not only to
understand, but also to control and enforce;
the level of infraction differs from one Member State to another, and that for the same infraction the sanction may be either an
administrative or a penal one.
Member States were urged to properly implement the Control Regulation, in order to have a clear view of which parts need to be improved in
the upcoming revision and thus to ensure a functional and easily applicable Control Regulation for the future as well.
Proposals to overcome the current obstacles:
Improve legislation: Members are in favour of a simplification of Union legislation, as well as a reduction in the administrative burden
with a view to achieving better lawmaking, in particular through a limited and targeted revision of Council Regulation (EC)
No 1224/2009, scheduled for and expected by 2017 at the latest, while retaining effective rules able to prevent, detect and sanction
infringements of the Common Fisheries Policy, and focusing primarily on better implementation of norms between different Member
States, by researching in particular a greater harmonisation. Traditional small-scale coastal fishing should be promoted in any new
legislation.
Common syllabus and standardised rules: Parliament reiterated the importance of strengthening the EFCAs mandate in order to set
up joint fisheries control operations enabling efficient coordinated action by many local, regional and national authorities, and by EU
agencies performing coastguard duties at EU level. Members considered that the implementation by the EFCA of a core curriculum for
the training of fisheries inspectors is an essential point for the standardisation of training and control procedures.
Better application of existing legislation: the Commission must attend to uniform and accurate transposition and verify the state of
implementation of existing legislation. Control procedures must be transparent, even-handed and standardised, allowing Member
States to be put on an equal footing as regards controls on their fishermen, and rules on control should be simpler, and more
comprehensive and consistent.
Illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU): Parliament recommended the strengthening of controls in order to prevent the
importation of fish from illegal, unreported and unregulated fisheries by setting up national intelligence teams staffed with specialised
fishing inspectors.
Data: Parliament believed there is a need for the collection, management and use of good-quality data regarding the landing
obligation. It called for increased cooperation between Member States through exchanges of inspectors, control methods and data,
risk analysis sharing and shared information on quotas of flagged vessels. It also recalled the importance of having the capacity to
share data in real time.
Training of fishermen: Members proposed that training and information for fishermen be improved, with a view to inculcating a culture
of understanding and respect for the rules. They suggested that online databases be created for documents and information relevant
to fisheries, making the regulations accessible for all to read and understand.
Strengthened monitoring: the report recommends expanding the controls for example extending monitoring to cover the entire
production chain, and assigning responsibility for control at sea to a single administrative body, in order to avoid an overlapping of
controls which wastes human, logistic, and financial resources.
Sanctions: Members recommend the standardisation of sanctions while keeping them at a level that is proportional and
non-discriminatory and that acts as a deterrent. They noted that they would prefer economic sanctions, including temporary
suspensions of activity, to penal sanctions, but also considered that preference should be given to incentives for fishermen who
comply with CFP rules in order to prevent infringements.

Modernisation: Parliament encouraged the establishment of funding mechanisms to increase the use of low-cost technologies to
enable voluntary control and increase monitoring and safety of fishermen, especially in small-scale artisanal fisheries. It stressed the
importance of electronic technologies which represent a potentially cost-effective means to widen observation of activities at sea, but
stated opposition to any mandatory video surveillance system on board.
Lastly, Members stated that the available budgetary resources, particularly under the European Maritime and Fisheries Fund (EMFF), should
be realistic, consistent, and sufficient to pursue the objectives of controls.

