Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2103(INL)

INL - Legislative initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Civil law rules on robotics

Subject
3.40.06 Electronics, electrotechnical industries, ICT, robotics
7.40.02 Judicial cooperation in civil and commercial matters

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI Legal Affairs
(Associated committee)

Rapporteur

Appointed
20/01/2015

DELVAUX Mady
Shadow rapporteur

COMODINI CACHIA
Therese

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

CAVADA Jean-Marie

MAŠTÁLKA Jiří

ANDERSSON Max

FERRARA Laura
Committee for opinion
EMPL

Rapporteur for opinion

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
10/06/2015

KÓSA Ádám
ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

19/04/2016
BUŞOI Cristian-Silviu

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

19/05/2015
KALLAS Kaja

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

23/06/2015
CHARANZOVÁ Dita

TRAN Transport and Tourism
(Associated committee)
LIBE Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs
(Associated committee)

European Commission

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

JOUROVÁ Věra

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

15/06/2016

24/05/2016
BONI Michał

Commission DG

Key events
21/05/2015

MAYER Georg

15/09/2016

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

12/01/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

27/01/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

15/02/2017

Debate in Parliament

16/02/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

16/02/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

16/02/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0005/2017

Summary

T8-0051/2017

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2103(INL)

Procedure type

INL - Legislative initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Request for legislative proposal

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 046

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/03463

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE582.443

31/05/2016

EP

Committee opinion

IMCO

PE585.496

12/10/2016

EP

Committee opinion

ENVI

PE587.414

14/10/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.395

26/10/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE592.405

26/10/2016

EP

Committee opinion

ITRE

PE583.918

15/11/2016

EP

Committee opinion

TRAN

PE589.230

16/11/2016

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE584.250

23/11/2016

EP

Committee opinion

LIBE

PE589.153

23/11/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0005/2017

27/01/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0051/2017

16/02/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2017)310

16/05/2017

2015/2103(INL) - 27/01/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the report by Mady DELVAUX (S&D, LU) with recommendations to the Commission on Civil Law
Rules on Robotics (Initiative Rule 46 of the Rules of Procedure).
The Committee on Transport and Tourism as well as the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, exercising their prerogatives

as associated committees in accordance with Article 54 of the Rules of Procedure, also gave their opinions on the report.
More and more appliances are now able to operate interactively and autonomously to some extent. Examples include self-driving cars and
autonomous weapons. Artificial intelligence and robotics are advancing at an accelerating pace and legislation needs to be updated in line with
a changing world.
Now that humankind stands on the threshold of an era when ever more sophisticated robots, bots, androids and other manifestations of
artificial intelligence ("AI") seem to be poised to unleash a new industrial revolution, which is likely to leave no stratum of society untouched.
The development of robotics and artificial intelligence raises legal and ethical issues which require a prompt intervention at EU level.
Members called on the Commission to submit, on the basis of Article 114 TFEU, a proposal for a directive on civil law rules on robotics,
following the detailed recommendations:
Common Union definitions: Members called on the Commission to propose common Union definitions of cyber physical systems, autonomous
systems, smart autonomous robots and their subcategories.
Registration of smart robots: Members considered that a comprehensive Union system of registration of advanced robots should be introduced
within the Unions internal market. The Commission is called upon to establish criteria for the classification of robots that would need to be
registered. They also considered it essential, in the development of robotics and AI, to guarantee that humans have control over intelligent
machines at all times and that special attention should be paid to the possible development of an emotional connection between humans and
robots ? particularly in vulnerable groups (children, the elderly and people with disabilities).
In order to avoid fragmentation in the internal market, the report noted that testing, certification and market approval should only be required in
a single Member State and that this approach should be accompanied by effective market surveillance.
Research and innovation: welcoming the fact that more and more research projects are being funded by the Member States and the Union,
Members called on the Commission and the Member States to strengthen financial instruments for research projects in robotics and ICT. The
EU already supports robotics projects through the SPARC programme which funds innovation in robotics by European companies and
research institutions. However, increased support for this particular programme is called for.
Ethical principles: Members stressed that the existing Union legal framework should be updated and complemented, where appropriate, by
guiding ethical principles in line with the complexity of robotics and its many social, medical and bioethical implications. A clear, strict and
efficient guiding ethical framework for the development, design, production, use and modification of robots is needed to complement the
existing national and Union acquis. They proposed, in the annex to the resolution, a framework in the form of a charter consisting of a code of
conduct for robotics engineers, of a code for research ethics committees when reviewing robotics protocols and of model licences for
designers and users.
The report suggested that advanced robots should be equipped with a black box which records data on every transaction carried out by the
machine, including the logic that contributed to its decisions.
A European Agency for robotics and artificial intelligence: Members stressed that enhanced cooperation between the Member States and the
Commission is necessary in order to guarantee coherent cross-border rules in the Union. This Agency should provide the technical, ethical
and regulatory expertise needed to support the relevant public actors, at both Union and Member State level. The Agency should be provided
with a proper budget and staffing.
Intellectual property rights: Members emphasised that the protection of networks of interconnected robots and artificial intelligence has to be
ensured to prevent potential security breaches. A high level of security and protection of personal data together with due regard for privacy in
communication between humans, robots and AI are fundamental. The Commission and the Member States are urged to ensure that civil law
regulations in the robotics sector are consistent with Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the
protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and the free movement of such data (General Data Protection
Regulation).
Liability: civil liability for damage caused by robots is a crucial issue which also needs to be analysed and addressed at Union level. In this
regard, the Commission is asked to submit a proposal for a legislative instrument on legal questions related to the development and use of
robotics and artificial intelligence foreseeable in the next 10 to 15 years, combined with non-legislative instruments such as guidelines and
codes of conduct.
Members made a further series of recommendations on autonomous vehicles (the automotive sector is in most urgent need of efficient Union
and global rules), drones, medical robots and human repair. They also called on the Commission to provide significant support for the
development of digital abilities as a first step towards better aligning labour market shortages and demand.

2015/2103(INL) - 16/02/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 451 votes to 138 with 20 abstentions, a resolution containing recommendations to the Commission on
Civil Law Rules on Robotics.
Humankind stands on the threshold of an era when ever more sophisticated robots, bots, androids and other manifestations of artificial
intelligence ("AI") seem to be poised to unleash a new industrial revolution, which is likely to leave no stratum of society untouched. The
development of robotics and artificial intelligence raises legal and ethical issues that require a prompt intervention at EU level.
Members called on the Commission to submit, on the basis of Article 114 TFEU, a proposal for a directive on civil law rules on robotics,
bearing in mind the following recommendations:
Definition and classification of a smart robot: Parliament called on the Commission to propose common Union definitions of cyber physical
systems, autonomous systems, smart autonomous robots and their subcategories.
Registration of smart robots: Parliament considered that a comprehensive Union system of registration of advanced robots should be
introduced within the Unions internal market. The Commission is called upon to establish criteria for the classification of robots that would need
to be registered.

Members also considered it essential, in the development of robotics and AI, to guarantee that humans have control over intelligent machines
at all times and that special attention should be paid to the possible development of an emotional connection between humans and robots ?
particularly in vulnerable groups (children, the elderly and people with disabilities).
In order to avoid fragmentation in the internal market, Parliament noted that testing, certification and market approval should only be required
in a single Member State and that this approach should be accompanied by effective market surveillance. It also underlined the importance of
the principle of mutual recognition in the cross-border use of robots and robotic systems.
Research and innovation: Members asked the Commission and Member States to strengthen financial instruments for research projects in
robotics and ICT, including public-private partnerships. Whilst welcoming the fact that the Member States and the Union are funding more and
more research projects, Parliament called for increased EU support for the Horizon 2020 funded SPARC programme.
Ethical principles: Parliament stressed the need for a clear, strict and efficient guiding ethical framework for the development, design,
production, use and modification of robots is needed to complement the existing national and Union acquis. It proposed, in the annex to the
resolution, a framework in the form of a charter consisting of a code of conduct for robotics engineers, of a code for research ethics
committees when reviewing robotics protocols and of model licences for designers and users.
The code should be based on the principles of beneficence, non-maleficence, autonomy and justice. Researchers and designers were asked
to act responsibly and bear in mind the need to respect, dignity, privacy, and human safety.
A European Agency for robotics and artificial intelligence: in order to guarantee coherent cross-border rules in the Union, Parliament asked the
Commission to consider the designation of such an Agency in order to provide the technical, ethical and regulatory expertise needed to
support the relevant public actors, at both Union and Member State level. The Agency must be granted an appropriate budget.
Intellectual property rights: Members called on the Commission to support a horizontal and technologically neutral approach to intellectual
property applicable to the various sectors in which robotics could be employed. Parliament emphasised that a high level of security and
protection of personal data together with due regard for privacy in communication between humans, robots and AI are fundamental. The
Commission and the Member States are urged to ensure that civil law regulations in the robotics sector are consistent with Regulation (EU)
2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council (General Data Protection Regulation).
Liability: the Commission is asked to submit a proposal for a legislative instrument on legal questions related to the development and use of
robotics and artificial intelligence foreseeable in the next 10 to 15 years, combined with non-legislative instruments such as guidelines and
codes of conduct.
The Commission was asked to explore the implications of all possible legal solutions, such as:
establishing a compulsory insurance scheme where relevant and necessary for specific categories of robots whereby, similarly to what
already happens with cars, producers, or owners of robots would be required to take out insurance cover for the damage potentially
caused by their robots;
ensuring that a compensation fund would not only serve the purpose of guaranteeing compensation if the damage caused by a robot
was not covered by insurance;
creating a specific legal status for robots in the long run, so that at least the most sophisticated autonomous robots could be
established as having the status of electronic persons responsible for making good any damage they may cause.
Members made a further series of recommendations on autonomous vehicles (the automotive sector is in most urgent need of efficient Union
and global rules), drones, medical robots and human repair.
Employment: stressing the need to prepare for the changes that robotics will mean for society, Parliament asked the Commission to start
monitoring medium- and long-term job trends more closely, with a special focus on the creation, displacement and loss of jobs in the different
fields/areas of qualification, as well as the consequences on the viability of the social security systems of the Member States. It also called
upon the Commission to provide significant support for the development of digital abilities as a first step towards better aligning labour market
shortages and demand.

