Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2117(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Implementation of the Mining Waste Directive (2006/21/EC)
See also Directive 2006/21/EC 2003/0107(COD)
Subject
3.60.01 Solid fuels, coal mining, mining industry
3.70.13 Dangerous substances, toxic and radioactive wastes (storage,
transport)
3.70.16 Law and environment, liability

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ENVI

Rapporteur

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Appointed
28/05/2015

HÖLVÉNYI György
Shadow rapporteur

CAPUTO Nicola

DEMESMAEKER Mark

MEISSNER Gesine

KONEČNÁ Kateřina

ŠKRLEC Davor

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Environment

VELLA Karmenu

Key events
21/05/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

21/03/2017

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

23/03/2017

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

27/04/2017

Results of vote in Parliament

27/04/2017

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/04/2017

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2117(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

A8-0071/2017

Summary

T8-0199/2017

Summary

Procedure subtype

Implementation
See also Directive 2006/21/EC 2003/0107(COD)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ENVI/8/03397

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE594.105

13/12/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE599.718

14/02/2017

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0071/2017

23/03/2017

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0199/2017

27/04/2017

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2017)472

07/09/2017

2015/2117(INI) - 23/03/2017 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted an own-initiative report by György HÖLVÉNYI (EPP, HU) on the
implementation of the mining waste Directive (2006/21/EC).
Directive 2006/21/EC on the management of waste from the extractive industries was adopted in the aftermath of two major accidents
involving the spill of hazardous extractive waste in 1998 and 2000. The deadline for transposition of the Directive expired on 1 May 2008.
The key finding of this report is, that Member State (EU-27) have experienced some kind of transposition problems in terms of timing or
quality, or both. Thus proper implementation of the Directive cannot be expected in practice in all Member States , given that there are on-going
non-conformity infringement procedures. It was hence recommended that the process of transposition of the Directive is completed as soon as
possible.
Inspections: the Directive does not explicitly define its concept nor set out in detail how an inspection should be carried out. The lack of a
uniform inspections approach across the EU implies differences in terms of compliance and enforcement costs, and hence for different levels
of efficiency of the implementation of the Directive from one Member State to another.
Therefore, the Commission is called upon to: (i) adopt concrete sector-specific guidelines, including a definition, on inspections in the
extractive waste industries as soon as possible, and in any case not later than by the end of 2017; (ii) ensure the possibility of unscheduled
on-the-spot inspections by the relevant competent Member State authorities.
Reporting system: the limitations of the current three-year reporting system have meant that the unsatisfactory quality of available data has not
made it possible to outline and assess the implementation of the Directive in practice.
Members called for the reform of the current reporting mechanism (including the questionnaire) as a matter of priority so as to allow a proper
assessment of the implementation of the Directive. The Commission should include in the reporting mechanism a demand that all the relevant
environmental impact data be provided. The chosen reform approach should allow for a European database of extractive waste facilities to be
established and easily updated.
Further effort is needed to ensure that all Member States understand and apply the basic concepts of the directive in a similar way.
Classification of facilities: Members expressed concern about the incompleteness of the process regarding the due classification and
permitting of Category A facilities, which involve higher risks. A significant number of EU Member States appear not to have correctly identified
the facilities falling under the scope of the Directive, in particular as regards facilities that should be classified as falling under Category A.
The report called on Member States to: (i) finalise the adequate classification of facilities on their territories and to adopt the missing external
emergency plans no later than by the end of 2017; (ii) improve the safety of dams in order to protect human health and the environment,
especially in Category A facilities.
Moreover, given that some Member States are unable to prevent soil and water pollution by some operators, the Commission should propose
more effective measures to protect the environment and citizens health. The Commission is also invited to:
propose a complete ban on the use of cyanide mining technologies in the European Union as soon as possible;
ensure sufficient financing for research and innovation in the field of the management of mining waste facilities in order to improve the
safety of those facilities;
give priority to higher environmental standards and resource efficiency when defining best practices to be included in the mining waste
management plans; consider available advanced technologies during the process of permitting extractive waste facilities, especially as
regards the design of tailing dams;
further invest in research and development in alternative viable processes to supply the EU with raw and secondary raw materials and
to prevent waste from mining activities;

encourage the recovery of critical raw materials also from mining waste, as defined in the EU Action Plan for the Circular Economy.
Lastly, the report emphasised that, in view of the EUs transition towards a circular economy, it is essential to reduce the use of resources and
foster reuse and recycling. It called on the Commission to consider setting targets to this end based on a life-cycle assessment.

2015/2117(INI) - 27/04/2017 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 566 votes to 8, with 20 abstentions, a resolution on the implementation of the mining waste Directive
(2006/21/EC).
Directive 2006/21/EC on the management of waste from the extractive industries was adopted in the aftermath of two major accidents
involving the spill of hazardous extractive waste in 1998 and 2000. The deadline for transposition of the Directive expired on 1 May 2008.
Member States (EU-27) have experienced some kind of transposition problems in terms of timing or quality, or both. Thus, proper
implementation of the Directive cannot be expected in practice in all Member States, given that there are on-going non-conformity infringement
procedures. It was hence recommended that the process of transposition of the Directive is completed as soon as possible.
Inspections: the Directive does not explicitly define its concept nor set out in detail how an inspection should be carried out. The lack of a
uniform inspections approach across the EU implies differences in terms of compliance and enforcement costs, and hence for different levels
of efficiency of the implementation of the Directive from one Member State to another.
Therefore, the Commission is called upon to:
adopt concrete sector-specific guidelines, including a definition, on inspections in the extractive waste industries as soon as possible,
and in any case not later than by the end of 2017;
ensure the possibility of unscheduled on-the-spot inspections by the relevant competent Member State authorities.
Reporting system: the current three-year reporting system is ineffective in that it does not allow for the full picture regarding implementation to
be outlined and assessed. Some of the figures provided by Member States regarding the number of facilities on their territories identified as
being subject to the Directive do not seem plausible, because in some cases they are relatively low.
Parliament called for the reform of the current reporting mechanism (including the questionnaire). This mechanism demands that all the
relevant environmental impact data be provided.
The chosen reform approach should allow for a European database of extractive waste facilities to be established and easily updated.
Members welcomed the Commissions plans to issue general guidance on the implementation of the provisions set out in the Directive and
called for renewed efforts to ensure that Member States understand and apply the basic concepts of the directive in a similar way.
Classification of facilities: Parliament expressed concern about the incompleteness of the process regarding the due classification and
permitting of Category A facilities, which involve higher risks. A significant number of EU Member States appear not to have correctly identified
the facilities falling under the scope of the Directive, in particular as regards facilities that should be classified as falling under Category A. In
addition, external emergency plans are missing for around 25 % of the Category A facilities located on EU territory.
The resolution called on Member States to:
finalise the adequate classification of facilities on their territories and to adopt the missing external emergency plans no later than by
the end of 2017;
improve the safety of dams in order to protect human health and the environment, especially in Category A facilities.
Moreover, given that some Member States are unable to prevent soil and water pollution by some operators, the Commission should propose
more effective measures to protect the environment and citizens health. The Commission is also invited to:
investigate how Article 14 of the Directive and Commission Decision 2009/335/EC have been implemented in the Member States and
whether the financial security instruments established are sufficient and fit for purpose;
propose a complete ban on the use of cyanide mining technologies in the European Union as soon as possible;
ensure sufficient financing for research and innovation in the field of the management of facilities in order to improve the safety of
those facilities;
give priority to higher environmental standards and resource efficiency when defining best practices to be included in the mining waste
management plans; consider available advanced technologies during the process of permitting extractive waste facilities, especially as
regards the design of tailing dams;
further invest in research and development in alternative viable processes to supply the EU with raw and secondary raw materials and
to prevent waste from mining activities;
encourage the recovery of critical raw materials also from mining waste, as defined in the EU Action Plan for the Circular Economy;
come up with an action plan on the full rehabilitation of historical waste sites, taking into account examples of best practices.
Lastly, Parliament stressed the need to reduce the use of resources and foster reuse and recycling in view of the EUs transition towards a
circular economy. It called on the Commission to consider setting targets to this end based on a life-cycle assessment.

