Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2003(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU-China relations

Subject
6.40.17 Relations with BRIC countries
Geographical area
China

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
07/10/2014

BELDER Bas
Shadow rapporteur

LÓPEZ-ISTÚRIZ
WHITE Antonio

LEINEN Jo

VAN BAALEN
Johannes Cornelis

MÉLENCHON Jean-Luc

SCHOLZ Helmut

BÜTIKOFER Reinhard

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

Key events
15/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

26/11/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/12/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

15/12/2015

Debate in Parliament

16/12/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

16/12/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

16/12/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0350/2015

Summary

T8-0458/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2003(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/02474

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE560.676

17/06/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE565.199

22/09/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE567.662

23/09/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0350/2015

02/12/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0458/2015

16/12/2015

EP

Summary

2015/2003(INI) - 02/12/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Bastiaan Belder (ECR, NL) on EU-China relations. It noted that 2015
marks the 40th anniversary of diplomatic relations between the EU and China. The EU-China Strategic Partnership is of key importance to
relations between the EU and China and to finding mutual answers to a range of global concerns.
EU-China Strategic Partnership and Cooperation: the report welcomed the 40th anniversary of diplomatic relations between the EU and China
as a source of inspiration to strengthen the Strategic Partnership, and to speed up the ongoing negotiations for a new Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement based on trust, transparency and respect for human rights. It stressed the need for EU Member States to speak with
one voice to the Chinese Government, particularly in view of Beijing's present reshaping of the global governance architecture. In this respect,
Members:
looked forward to a close cooperation of the EU with the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) but regretted the lack of close
coordination at EU level regarding several Member States' membership of the AIIB;
stressed the importance of trade and investment policy, as the most obvious area to exert maximum leverage in the strategic
relationship with China;
took note of the recently developed cooperation between China and Central and Eastern European countries, also known as the 16+1
group, which includes several EU Member States, but considered that this should not divide the EU or weaken its position vis-à-vis
China and should also address human rights issues.
Members called on the European External Action Service and the Commission to submit an annual report to Parliament on the development of
EU-China relations. The EEAS was asked to ensure that human rights are high on the agenda in relations and dialogues with China.
The report went on to underline the importance of the Bilateral Investment Agreement (BIT) between the EU and China currently under
negotiation. It called, inter alia, for a fully-fledged sustainable development chapter to be included in the BIT, which provides for binding
commitments with respect to ILO core labour standards and key Multilateral Environmental Agreements. Whilst welcoming the fact that over
the last decades a considerable number of Chinese citizens have been lifted out of extreme poverty thanks to substantial economic growth,
Members voiced, nonetheless, their concern that these economic improvements often cause environmental problems and great inequalities.
They also recalled that the EU Ombudsman in her draft recommendation adopted on 26 March 2015 criticised the absence of a human rights
impact assessment in relation to the Investor-State Dispute Settlement mechanism in the negotiations for a trade and investment agreement
with Vietnam. Members noted that this sets an important precedent for the negotiations for the EU-China Bilateral Investment Agreement.
Internal situation: the committee observed that Chinas human rights record remained a matter of serious concern. It discussed the adoption of
several pieces of repressive legislation, including the draft Foreign NGO Management Law, and the new draft law on cybersecurity. Members
called on the European Council, the EEAS and the Commission to continue to complain forcefully to the Chinese authorities against these
highly controversial measures.
They expressed concern at the recent political and civil unrest in Hong Kong, and called on China to abide by its obligations to the people of
Hong Kong to preserve their rights and freedoms.
External situation: the committee noted that since its launch President Xis Chinese Dream of national rejuvenation foresees a more proactive
role for China in the world. It encouraged the VP/HR to explore the possibilities of developing a common approach to China with the US
wherever this would contribute to advancing EU interests. It noted the priority given by President Xi's presidency to the relationship with the

US, given his proposal for a 'new type of major power relationship' between China, the US and other regional actors. Members favoured a
more constructive approach to a new world orde r which China should help construe and integrate, one founded on the universal values of
human rights, democracy and human security. Members called on the EU to be more active in Asia, and to cooperate with China, the US and
other regional actors for more stability in the region.
Members went on to discuss the expansion of the Chinese navy, calling for a balanced attitude, to avoid worries on the part of China's
neighbours and more tension in the Pacific and Indian Oceans and to guarantee Europe's crucial interest in freedom of navigation on the seas.
They called on the VP/HR to identify the risks to peace and security in the region as well as globally should armed conflict arise in the East
and South China Seas, in line with the priorities set forth in the European Maritime Security Strategy, what risks this would entail for the
freedom and safety of navigation in the region, and what risks exist there to specific European interests.
The Chinese Government was urged to use all its levers of influence to ensure stability in the Korean peninsula and to induce North Korea to
return to credible denuclearisation talks.
Human rights situation: Members noted the recent worsening of the situation of human rights in China started in 2013 and has intensified an
already existing crackdown over the population. They were concerned that in the official Chinese view, the universality of human rights is
questioned on grounds of cultural differences, and that this has led to lack of understanding and distrust in EU-China relations. They called,
therefore, on the Chinese leadership to reconsider and to respect the universality of human rights and on the EU institutions to work together
with the Chinese authorities in their dialogues in order to advance respect for universality.
Members want on to state their concern that China is currently the world's largest executioner and continues to impose the death penalty in
secret on thousands of people annually. They were also deeply concerned that the Chinese government is continuing its hardline policies
against the Tibetan people, especially by rejecting the Dalai Lama's Middle Way Approach which seeks neither independence nor separation
but a genuine autonomy within the framework of the Chinese Constitution. They called for the Chinese government to re-enter into a dialogue
with Tibetan representatives.
Cross-strait relations: Members advocated negotiating a bilateral investment agreement between the EU and Taiwan, given that Taiwan was,
at regional level, the best gateway to China for EU businesses and that numerous states including China have concluded such (de facto)
agreements with Taiwan.
Whilst commending the acceptance by the Chinese government of Taiwan's participation in some UN organisations (WHO, ICAO), the
committee expressed its concern at the Chinese government's reaffirmation of the 2005 Anti-Secession Law that allows for the use of military
means in the case of a declaration of independence by Taiwan. It felt that a gradual demilitarisation of the region would further facilitate the
rapprochement of the parties, emphasising that all cross-strait disputes should be settled by peaceful means on the basis of international law.

2015/2003(INI) - 16/12/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 554 votes to 50, with 99 abstentions, a resolution on EU-China relations.
Parliament noted that 2015 marks the 40th anniversary of diplomatic relations between the EU and China. The EU-China Strategic Partnership
is of key importance to relations between the EU and China and to finding mutual answers to a range of global concerns.
EU-China Strategic Partnership and Cooperation: Parliament welcomed the 40th anniversary of diplomatic relations between the EU and
China as a source of inspiration to strengthen the Strategic Partnership, and to speed up the ongoing negotiations for a new Partnership and
Cooperation Agreement based on trust, transparency and respect for human rights. It stressed the need for EU Member States to speak with
one voice to the Chinese Government, particularly in view of Beijing's present reshaping of the global governance architecture. In this respect,
Parliament:
looked forward to a close cooperation of the EU with the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB) but regretted the lack of close
coordination at EU level regarding several Member States' membership of the AIIB;
stressed the importance of trade and investment policy, as the most obvious area to exert maximum leverage in the strategic
relationship with China;
took note of the recently developed cooperation between China and Central and Eastern European countries, also known as the 16+1
group, which includes several EU Member States, but considered that this should not divide the EU
or weaken its position vis-à-vis China and should also address human rights issues.
Parliament called on the European External Action Service and the Commission to submit an annual report to Parliament on the development
of EU-China relations. The EEAS was asked to ensure that human rights are high on the agenda in relations and dialogues with China.
The resolution went on to underline the importance of the Bilateral Investment Agreement (BIT) between the EU and China currently under
negotiation. It called, inter alia, for a fully-fledged sustainable development chapter to be included in the BIT, which provides for binding
commitments with respect to ILO core labour standards and key Multilateral Environmental Agreements. Whilst welcoming the fact that over
the last decades a considerable number of Chinese citizens have been lifted out of extreme poverty thanks to substantial economic growth,
Parliament voiced, nonetheless, its concern that these economic improvements often cause environmental problems and great inequalities.
It also recalled that the EU Ombudsman in her draft recommendation adopted on 26 March 2015 criticised the absence of a human rights
impact assessment in relation to the Investor-State Dispute Settlement mechanism in the negotiations for a trade and investment agreement
with Vietnam. Parliament noted that this sets an important precedent for the negotiations for the EU-China Bilateral Investment Agreement.
Internal situation: Parliament observed that Chinas human rights record remained a matter of serious concern. It discussed the adoption of
several pieces of repressive legislation, including the draft Foreign NGO Management Law, and the new draft law on cybersecurity. It called on
the European Council, the EEAS and the Commission to continue to complain forcefully to the Chinese authorities against these highly
controversial measures.
Members expressed concern at the recent political and civil unrest in Hong Kong, and called on China to abide by its obligations to the people
of Hong Kong to preserve their rights and freedoms. They strongly supported One country, two systems as a basis for good relations between
the Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macao and mainland China.

External situation: Parliament noted that since its launch President Xis Chinese Dream of national rejuvenation foresees a stronger and more
proactive role for China in the world. It encouraged the VP/HR to explore the possibilities of developing a common approach to China with the
US wherever this would contribute to advancing EU interests.
It stressed:
that Chinas persistent rise as a global power requires a continuous and rapid reconsideration of Europes strategic priorities in its
relations with China, as a matter of urgency;
the need for a world power like China to contribute, in a globalised and interdependent context and in a more active and constructive
manner, to confronting global challenges and regional conflicts and to attaining a multilateral world order that respects international
law, universal values and peace.
It considered that China should increasingly take its place among the worlds leading countries, acting according to the rules set for all.
Parliament also noted the priority given by President Xis presidency to the relationship with the US, given his proposal for a new type of major
power relationship between China, the US and other regional actors. It favoured a more constructive approach to a new world order which
China should help construe and integrate, one founded on the universal values of human rights, democracy and human security. It called on
the EU to be more active in Asia, and to cooperate with China, the US and other regional actors for more stability in the region.
China Sea: Parliament stated that it remains alarmed at the escalating tension between parties in the South China Sea and called, therefore,
on all parties involved to avoid unilateral provocative actions in the South China Sea . It stressed the importance of peaceful settlement of
disputes, based on international law and with the help of impartial international mediation such as the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS).
It considered it regrettable that China refuses to acknowledge the jurisdiction of both UNCLOS and the Court of Arbitration. It considered that a
way forward for a possible peaceful resolution of the tension in the areas of the South and East China Seas is the negotiation and joint
implementation of codes of conduct for the peaceful exploitation of the maritime areas in question , including the establishment of safe trade
routes and quotas for fishing or attribution of areas for resource exploration.
Parliament also welcomed the agreement reached recently between China and ASEAN to speed up consultations on a Code of Conduct for
the disputes in the South China Sea and it took note of Taiwans South China Sea Peace Initiative aimed at reaching a consensus on a code of
conduct and the establishment of a mechanism allowing all sides to cooperate in the joint exploitation of natural and marine resources in the
region; supports all actions enabling the South China Sea to become a Sea of Peace and Cooperation.
Members invited the VP/HR to identify the risks to peace and security in the region as well as globally should armed conflict arise in the East
and South China Seas, what risks this would entail for the freedom and safety of navigation in the region, and what risks exist there to specific
European interests. The Chinese Government is urged to use all its levers of influence to ensure stability in the Korean peninsula and to
induce North Korea to return to credible denuclearisation talks and take concrete steps to denuclearise.
The resolution recalled that China remains North Koreas most important ally, and therefore Parliament encouraged the Chinese government,
together with the international community, to play a constructive role in urgently addressing the dire human rights situation in North Korea,
including dealing with the thousands of North Korea refugees who cross the border into China fleeing appalling conditions at home.
Further salient international issues: Parliament urged the Chinese government to exert influence on Pakistan to persuade that country to
refrain from fuelling instability in the region. It regretted the fact that China, in partnership with Russia, has continuously blocked UN action on
Syria, where a deadly war is being waged by Bashar al Assad on the Syrian people, for over four years now. It underlined the importance of
mutual trust and cooperation between China and the EU and the other key international actors to tackle global security issues. Members hope
that China will offer its support to the EU- and US-led initiatives aiming at ending the breaches of international law causing the conflict in
Eastern Ukraine and at restoring the territorial integrity and sovereignty of Ukraine after Russias aggression.
Human rights situation: Parliament noted the recent worsening of the situation of human rights in China started in 2013 and has intensified an
already existing crackdown over the population. It noted its concern that in the official Chinese view, the universality of human rights is
questioned on grounds of cultural differences, and that this has led to lack of understanding and distrust in EU-China relations. It called,
therefore, on the Chinese leadership to reconsider and to respect the universality of human rights and on the EU institutions to work together
with the Chinese authorities in their dialogues in order to advance respect for universality.
Parliament went on to state its concern that China is currently the world's largest executioner and continues to impose the death penalty in
secret on thousands of people annually. It emphasised once again that abolition of the death penalty contributes to the enhancement of human
dignity and the progressive development of human rights.
On the issue of corruption, Parliament noted that certain commitments have been put forward by President Xi to comprehensively advance
ruling the country according to the law, along with combating corruption.
It is also deeply concerned that the Chinese government is continuing its hardline policies against the Tibetan people, especially by rejecting
the Dalai Lama's Middle Way Approach which seeks neither independence nor separation but a genuine autonomy within the framework of the
Chinese Constitution. Members called for the Chinese government to re-enter into a dialogue with Tibetan representatives.
Parliament urged European companies investing in China to respect international labour standards and to make commitments to go beyond
Chinese labour rights, if these do not meet internationally agreed standards.
Cross-strait relations: Parliament advocated negotiating a bilateral investment agreement between the EU and Taiwan, given that Taiwan was,
at regional level, the best gateway to China for EU businesses and that numerous states including China have concluded such (de facto)
agreements with Taiwan.
Whilst commending the acceptance by the Chinese government of Taiwan's participation in some UN organisations (WHO, ICAO), Parliament
expressed its concern at the Chinese government's reaffirmation of the 2005 Anti-Secession Law that allows for the use of military means in
the case of a declaration of independence by Taiwan.
It deplored the fact that there are still 1 500 long-range missiles aimed at Taiwan from southern China and took the view that a gradual
demilitarisation of the region would further facilitate the rapprochement of the parties.
Parliament emphasised that all cross-Strait disputes should be settled by peaceful means on the basis of international law and stressed that

the meeting on 23 May 2015 on Kinmen Island between top officials from the two sides of the Taiwan Strait was an encouraging step.

