Procedure file
Basic information
RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

2015/2977(RSP)

Procedure completed

Resolution on education for children in emergency situations and protracted
crises

Subject
4.10.03 Child protection, children's rights
6.50 Emergency, food, humanitarian aid, aid to refugees, Emergency Aid
Reserve

Key players
European Parliament
European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Education, Youth, Sport and Culture

NAVRACSICS Tibor

Key events
25/11/2015

Debate in Parliament

26/11/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

26/11/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

26/11/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0418/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2977(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 128-p5

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Documentation gateway
Oral question/interpellation by Parliament

B8-1108/2015

20/11/2015

EP

Motion for a resolution

B8-1240/2015

24/11/2015

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0418/2015

26/11/2015

EP

Summary

2015/2977(RSP) - 26/11/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 499 votes to 61 with 86 abstentions, a resolution tabled by the Committee Development on
Development on education for children in emergency situations and protracted crises.
Members stressed the importance of universal high-quality public education as a catalyst for development
They highlighted educations role as a powerful tool to help young people overcome trauma, and promote peace-building and reconciliation.
They also underlined that, over the longer term, quality education could be a critical ingredient in the reconstruction of post-conflict societies.
Members emphasised the positive role education plays in childrens development and well-being. They recognised the progress made since

the adoption of the MDGs and called for the EU and its Member States to make these goals the top priority in their internal policies and their
relations with third countries.
Stressing that these goals especially poverty eradication, universal access to education and gender equality will not be attained, Members
called for strengthening the resilience of education systems in these countries and of ensuring uninterrupted learning when crises struck. They
stressed, therefore, the need for greater commitment on the part of the EU, the Member States and all other stakeholders, in order to provide
instruments to ensure development and widespread education in such crisis-stricken countries.
Education and refugees: Parliament highlighted the fact that millions of children have been forced to become refugees, and stressed that
access to education for refugee children is of paramount importance. It called on host countries to ensure that refugee children are given full
access to education, and to promote as far as possible their integration and inclusion in the national education systems. It also called also on
the humanitarian and development communities to pay more attention to the education and training of teachers from both the displaced and
the host communities, and on international donors to prioritise education when responding to refugee crises.
At the same time, Parliament called on Member States to develop specific reception schemes for unaccompanied children and single mothers
with children. It urged the Commission and Member States to support refugee students in transit, by cooperating with various international
organisations. It called on the Commission and the Member States to establish education corridors to ensure that students from countries in
conflict, in particular Syria, Iraq and Eritrea, are accepted in universities.
Welcoming the establishment of the Bekou Trust Fund, the Madad Trust Fund and the Emergency Trust Fund for Africa as effective tools for
addressing the divide between humanitarian and development funding in complex emergencies, Members called for the EU and Member
States to include education for children as a priority in allocating resources from EU Trust Funds.
Education in emergency situations: Members called for the EU to work with partner countries, other donors, the private sector and civil society
to improve educational opportunities for young people in conflict situations and other emergencies. They praised the EU Children of Peace
initiative, which seeks to fund humanitarian education projects in emergency situations, and called on the Commission to scale up this
initiative.
Parliament also welcomed the No Lost Generation initiative, launched by a number of donors and humanitarian and development entities,
including the EU, with a view to providing access to education for millions of children in Syria and neighbouring countries.
Increasing resources: Parliament deplored the fact that despite the important role of education in emergencies, this policy area received less
than 2 % of all humanitarian funds in 2014. It hoped therefore that, under the new programme to restructure the distribution of EU funds,
funding for child education programmes, including in third countries affected by wars or general emergencies, could be supplemented and
increased.
It called on all humanitarian actors, given the protracted nature of contemporary crises, to include education as an integral part of their
humanitarian response and to increase their commitment to education by mobilising the education cluster in the early stages of an emergency
and by ensuring that sufficient funds are dedicated to it
Parliament welcomed the announcement by the EU Commissioner for Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Management of his objective of dedicating
4 % of the EU humanitarian aid budget to education for children in emergency situations by 2019 . It stressed that, while an increase in
humanitarian funding is necessary, this would not be enough to address the financing gap, and called for the EU and other donors to increase
the profile of education in development cooperation in fragile states.
Prevention: Parliament called for the EU to support third-country government commitments to developing national legal frameworks for
resilience, prevention and disaster and risk management. Stresses the importance of the private sector as a potential source of innovative
financing for education.
It called on the Commission to be involved in the international platform that will create dedicated instruments for education in emergencies for
the World Humanitarian Summit in 2016.
Lastly, Parliament called for the EU and its Member States to promote the issue of education for children in emergencies and protracted crises
at the World Humanitarian Summit, ensuring that this theme has an adequate place in the outcome document. It underlined that, in light of the
growing number of humanitarian crises and the highest number of displaced people since World War II, the international community should
consider education to be a central element of its humanitarian response, as education is a catalyst which can make the overall response more
effective and contribute also to the medium- and longer-term development of affected populations.

