Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2259(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Implementation of the Food Contact Materials Regulation (EC)
No 1935/2004
See also Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 2003/0272(COD)
Subject
4.60.04.04 Food safety

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ENVI

Rapporteur

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Appointed
02/09/2015

SCHALDEMOSE
Christel
Shadow rapporteur

COLLIN-LANGEN Birgit

NICHOLSON James

JÄÄTTEENMÄKI Anneli

ECK Stefan

HÄUSLING Martin

PEDICINI Piernicola
D'ORNANO Mireille

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Health and Food Safety

ANDRIUKAITIS Vytenis Povilas

Key events
29/10/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

12/07/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

18/07/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

05/10/2016

Debate in Parliament

06/10/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

06/10/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

06/10/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0237/2016

Summary

T8-0384/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2259(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Implementation
See also Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 2003/0272(COD)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ENVI/8/03960

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE575.317

26/04/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE584.109

07/06/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0237/2016

18/07/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0384/2016

06/10/2016

EP

Summary

SP(2017)67

29/03/2017

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

2015/2259(INI) - 18/07/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted the own-initiative report by Christel SCHALDEMOSE (S&D, DK)
on the implementation of the Food Contact Materials (FCMs) Regulation ((EC) No 1935/2004.
Members acknowledged that the Framework Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 constitutes a solid legal basis, the objectives of which remain
relevant. They considered that the adoption of specific measures to overcome shortcomings that exist in the implementation and enforcement
of the legislation in place are needed.
Specific measures: the Framework Regulation lists 17 food contact materials and articles (FCMs) which may be covered by specific measures.
Out of the above 17, only 4 materials are subject to specific EU measures: plastics (including recycled plastics), ceramics, regenerated
cellulose, and active and intelligent materials.
The other 13 materials listed in Annex I, the possibility remains for Member States to adopt national provisions.
While the major focus should be on the adoption of specific measures for those 13 materials not yet regulated at EU level, all relevant
stakeholders point out that shortcomings exist in the implementation and enforcement of the legislation in place .
Members pointed out that, given the prevalence of the materials referred to on the EU market and the risk they pose to human health, the
Commission should forthwith prioritise the drawing-up of specific EU measures for paper and board, varnishes and coatings, metals and
alloys, printing inks and adhesives.
The report noted that special attention needs to be paid to those food contact materials whether directly or indirectly in contact with food with
a higher risk of migration, such as materials surrounding liquids and high-fat foods, and to materials that are in contact with food for a long
period of time.
Members urged the Commission, when drawing up the measures required, to take account of the European Implementation Assessment
conducted by the European Parliaments Research Service (DG EPRS) and of the national measures which are already in force or are being
prepared.
Risk assessment: aware of the important role played by EFSA (European Food and Safety Authority) in the risk assessment of substances for
use in FCMs regulated by specific measures; Members called on the Commission to increase the level of funding for EFSA. They called on
EFSA and the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) to cooperate and coordinate their work more closely.
The report stressed the need to:
continue with further scientific research into non-intentionally added substances (NIAS) as, in contrast to known hazardous
substances, their identity and structure, especially in plastics, are often unknown;
extend the concept of vulnerable groups to pregnant and breastfeeding women and to include the potential effects of low-dose
exposure and non-monotonic dose responses in the risk assessment criteria.
Members regretted that EFSA, in its current risk assessment procedure, does not take account of the so-called cocktail effect or the effect of
multiple concurrent and cumulative exposures from FCMs and other sources, which can cause adverse effects even if levels of the individual

substances in the mixture are low. They exhorted the EFSA to do so in future.
The Commission is called upon to ensure:
ensure coherence between the regulations on FCMs and biocidal products and to clarify the roles of ECHA and EFSA in this respect;
better coordination and a more coherent approach between the REACH and FCM legislation, in particular as regards substances
classified as CMRs (categories 1A, 1B and 2) or SVHCs (extremely concerning) under REACH.
Traceability: Members recommended that all FCMs, whether harmonised or non-harmonised, are accompanied by a declaration of conformity
(DoC) and the appropriate documentation. They regretted, however, that, even when they are mandatory, DoCs are not always available for
enforcement purposes, and their quality is not always high enough to ensure that they are a reliable source of compliance documentation.
The report insisted that imported FCMs from third countries must conform to EU standards, thus safeguarding public health and ensuring fair
competition.
The Commission is called upon to establish mandatory labelling of the intended presence of nanomaterials in FCMs and to establish
mandatory labelling of the composition of the FCMs.
Compliance, enforcement and controls: Members stressed the importance of developing EU guidelines for FCMs which would facilitate a
harmonised and uniform implementation and better enforcement in the Member States. Other non-legislative policy options, such as the
experience of industry self-assessment, should supplement measures to improve the enforcement of the Framework Regulation on FCMs.
The Commission are called upon to ensure that the Member States that have not already done so impose an obligation on all companies
producing or importing Food Contact Materials to officially register their business activity.
Member States should increase the frequency and efficiency of official controls, based on the risk of non-compliance as well as on the health
risks involved.
Lastly, the report called for more effective cooperation and coordination between the Member States and the Commission on the early warning
system for foodstuffs and feedingstuffs, so that risks to public health can be dealt with quickly and effectively.

2015/2259(INI) - 06/10/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 559 votes to 31, with 26 abstentions a resolution on the implementation of the Food Contact Materials
(FCMs) Regulation ((EC) No 1935/2004.
Members acknowledged that the Framework Regulation (EC) No 1935/2004 constitutes a solid legal basis, the objectives of which remain
relevant. They considered that the adoption of specific measures to overcome shortcomings that exist in the implementation and enforcement
of the legislation in place are needed.
Successes and gaps of the implementation of EU legislation: Members underlined that, while the major focus should be on the adoption of
specific measures for those 13 materials not yet regulated at EU level, all relevant stakeholders point out that shortcomings exist in the
implementation and enforcement of the legislation in place.
Taking account of the risks they pose to human health, the Commission should prioritise the drawing-up of specific EU measures for paper
and board, varnishes and coatings, metals and alloys, printing inks and adhesives.
Given the risk of migration of mineral oils into food from food contact materials and articles made of paper and board, Parliament supported,
pending the adoption of specific measures and a possible ban on mineral oils in inks, further research aimed at preventing such migration.
Members are of the opinion that the adoption of further specific measures at EU level would encourage business operators to develop safe
reusable and recycled FCMs, thereby contributing to the EUs efforts to establish a more effective circular economy.
The Commission is urged, when drawing up the measures required, to take account of the European Implementation Assessment conducted
by the European Parliamentary Research Service (EPRS) and of the national measures which are already in force or are being prepared.
Risk assessment: aware of the important role played by EFSA (European Food and Safety Authority) in the risk assessment, Parliament called
on the Commission to increase the level of funding for EFSA. It called on EFSA and the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) to cooperate
and coordinate their work more closely.
The resolution stressed the need to:
continue with further scientific research into non-intentionally added substances (NIAS) as, in contrast to known hazardous
substances, their identity and structure, especially in plastics, are often unknown;
extend the concept of vulnerable groups to pregnant and breastfeeding women and to include the potential effects of low-dose
exposure and non-monotonic dose responses in the risk assessment criteria.
Members regretted that EFSA, in its current risk assessment procedure, does not take account of the so-called cocktail effect or the effect of
multiple concurrent and cumulative exposures from FCMs and other sources, which can cause adverse effects even if levels of the individual
substances in the mixture are low. They exhorted the EFSA to do so in future.
The Commission is called upon to ensure:
ensure coherence between the regulations on FCMs and biocidal products and to clarify the roles of ECHA and EFSA in this respect;
better coordination and a more coherent approach between the REACH and FCM legislation, in particular as regards substances
classified as CMRs (categories 1A, 1B and 2) or SVHCs (extremely concerning) under REACH;
ensure that harmful substances phased out under REACH are also phased out in FCMs.
Parliament also called on the Commission to consider identifying Bisphenol A (BPA) as one of the substances classified as a substance of
very high concern (SVHC).

Traceability: Parliament recommended that all FCMs, whether harmonised or non-harmonised, are accompanied by a declaration of
conformity (DoC) and the appropriate documentation. It insisted that imported FCMs from third countries must conform to EU standards, thus
safeguarding public health and ensuring fair competition.
The Commission is called upon to establish mandatory labelling of the intended presence of nanomaterials in FCMs and to establish
mandatory labelling of the composition of the FCMs.
Compliance, enforcement and controls: Parliament stressed the importance of developing EU guidelines for FCMs which would facilitate a
harmonised and uniform implementation and better enforcement in the Member States. Other non-legislative policy options, such as the
experience of industry self-assessment, should supplement measures to improve the enforcement of the Framework Regulation on FCMs.
The Commission is called upon to ensure that the Member States that have not already done so impose an obligation on all companies
producing or importing Food Contact Materials to officially register their business activity.
Member States should increase the frequency and efficiency of official controls, based on the risk of non-compliance as well as on the health
risks involved.
Lastly, Parliament called for more effective cooperation and coordination between the Member States and the Commission on the early
warning system for foodstuffs and feedingstuffs, so that risks to public health can be dealt with quickly and effectively.

