Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2015/0128(COD)

Procedure completed

Arrangements for products originating in certain states which are part of the
African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group of States provided for in
economic partnership agreements. Recast
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 1528/2007
Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.20.04 Union Customs Code, tariffs, preferential arrangements, rules of
origin
6.30.01 Generalised scheme of tariff preferences (GSP), rules of origin
6.40.06 Relations with ACP countries, conventions and generalities

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
INTA

Rapporteur

International Trade

Appointed
21/09/2015

WAŁĘSA Jarosław
Shadow rapporteur

DE SARNEZ Marielle

BEGHIN Tiziana
Committee for opinion
DEVE

Development

Committee for opinion on the recast technique
JURI

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
Rapporteur for opinion

Legal Affairs

Appointed
25/08/2015

HAUTALA Heidi

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Trade

Commissioner
MALMSTRÖM Cecilia

Key events
10/06/2015

Legislative proposal published

24/06/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

25/01/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

28/01/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

12/04/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

12/04/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

COM(2015)0282

Summary

A8-0010/2016

Summary

T8-0094/2016

Summary

25/05/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

08/06/2016

Final act signed

08/06/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

08/07/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0128(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Recast

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 1528/2007

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 207-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

INTA/8/03680

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2015)0282

10/06/2015

EC

PE565.159

25/08/2015

EP

CES4775/2015

08/10/2015

ESC

PE569.640

12/10/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0010/2016

28/01/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0094/2016

12/04/2016

EP

Summary

Opinion on the recast technique
Economic and Social Committee: opinion, report
Committee draft report

Summary

Final act
Regulation 2016/1076
OJ L 185 08.07.2016, p. 0001 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

Delegated acts
2017/2789(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2017/2788(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2015/0128(COD) - 10/06/2015 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to undertake a codification of Council Regulation (EC) No 1528/2007 applying the arrangements for products originating in certain
states which are part of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group of States provided for in agreements establishing, or leading to the
establishment of, Economic Partnership Agreements.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.

ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: Council Regulation (EC) No 1528/20076 has been substantially amended several times. Since further amendments are to be
made, that Regulation should be recast in the interests of clarity. A codification of rules that have frequently been amended is also essential if
the law is to be clear and transparent.
CONTENT: the purpose of this proposal is to undertake a codification of Council Regulation (EC) No 1528/2007 of 20 December 2007. The
new Regulation will supersede the various acts incorporated in it, fully preserving the content of the acts being codified.
At the same time, it is also necessary to make certain substantive amendments to that Regulation in order to empower the Commission to
adopt delegated acts and to adapt the rules on the exceptional measures with limited territorial application.
Therefore, the proposal is being presented in the form of a recast.
Purpose of the Regulation: to recall, this Regulation applies the arrangements for products originating in certain states which are part of the
African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group of States provided for in agreements establishing, or leading to the establishment of, Economic
Partnership Agreements. It shall apply to products originating in the regions and states listed in Annex I. It calls for more favourable access to
the EU market rules for a number of products defined in the Regulation (notably the elimination of import duties on the Community market if
they originate from regions or states listed in Annex I of the Regulation). Such elimination shall be subject to the general safeguards
mechanisms.
The Regulation also sets the rules for defining the origin of the products from the regions or States concerned. However, these measures are
subject to changes under the present proposal.
Exceptional measures with limited territorial application: the Commission may, after having examined alternative solutions, authorise the
application of surveillance or safeguard measures restricted to the Member State or Member States concerned if it considers that such
measures applied at that level are more appropriate than measures applied throughout the Union. Those measures must be strictly limited in
time and must disrupt the operation of the internal market as little as possible.
Delegated acts: according to the proposal, the power to adopt acts in accordance with Article 290 of the TFEU should be delegated to the
Commission in respect of adding an Annex to this Regulation which sets out the regime applicable to products originating in South Africa once
the relevant trade provisions of the TDCA have been superseded by the relevant provisions of an agreement establishing, or leading to the
establishment of, an Economic Partnership Agreement.

2015/0128(COD) - 28/01/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on International Trade adopted the report by Jaros?aw WA??SA (EPP, PL) on the proposal for a regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council applying the arrangements for products originating in certain states which are part of the African, Caribbean and
Pacific (ACP) Group of States provided for in agreements establishing, or leading to the establishment of, Economic Partnership Agreements
(recast).
The Commission recommended the European Parliament to adopt its position at first reading, taking over the Commission proposal and taking
account of the recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament, the Council and the
Commission.
According to the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission, the
Commission proposal does not include any substantive amendments other than those identified as such in the proposal and as regards the
codification of the unchanged provisions of the earlier acts together with those amendments, the proposal contains a straightforward
codification of the existing texts, without any change in their substance.
It should be recalled that the Commission proposal concerns a codification and recast of the Council Regulation (EC) No 1528/2007 governing
imports of products originating in certain ACP countries. This temporary instrument provides duty-free quota-free access to the EU market for
products originating in non-LDC ACP countries in the run-up to the conclusion and application of respective WTO-compatible Economic
Partnership Agreements (EPAs) before the 1 October 2016.
The aim of the codification exercise is to ensure transparency, clarity and simplification of the EU legislation after an original legal instrument
has been amended numerous times. Since its adoption in 2007, the Market Access Regulation has already been amended nine times,
including the post-Lisbon alignment exercise under the "Trade Omnibus II" and subsequent Commission delegated regulations (see the Annex
III of the Commission proposal). Thus, codification is essential to ensure clarity and readability of the regulation.
The method of a recast is used because of the need for certain limited substantive changes in the existing Articles (in particular, the possibility
for the Commission to adopt delegated acts to set out the regime applicable to products originating in South Africa, under certain conditions
laid down in the Regulation).

2015/0128(COD) - 12/04/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 613 votes to 28, with 55 abstentions a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council applying the arrangements for products originating in certain states which are part of the African,
Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group of States provided for in agreements establishing, or leading to the establishment of, Economic
Partnership Agreements (recast).
The European Parliament adopted its position at first reading, taking over the Commission proposal and taking account of the
recommendations of the Consultative Working Party of the legal services of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission.
The Commission proposal concerns a codification and recast of the Council Regulation (EC) No 1528/2007 governing imports of products

originating in certain ACP countries. This temporary instrument provides duty-free quota-free access to the EU market for products originating
in non-LDC ACP countries in the run-up to the conclusion and application of respective WTO-compatible Economic Partnership Agreements
(EPAs) before the 1 October 2016. Annex I of the Regulation on market access currently concerns 27 countries.
According to the Consultative Working Party, the Commission proposal does not include any substantive amendments other than those
identified as such in the proposal. As regards the codification of the unchanged provisions of the earlier acts together with those amendments,
the proposal contains a straightforward codification of the existing texts, without any change in their substance.
The proposed Regulation:
provides that the rules of origin applicable to imports made under this Regulation should for a transitional period be those laid down in
Annex II. Those rules of origin should be superseded by those annexed to any agreement with the regions or states listed in Annex I when that
agreement is either provisionally applied, or enters into force, whichever is the earliest;
provides for the possibility of temporarily suspending the arrangements set out in this Regulation in the event of a failure to provide
administrative cooperation or of irregularities or fraud;
provided for general safeguard measures for the products covered by this Regulation;
allows, in view of the particular sensitivity of agricultural products, safeguard measures to be taken when imports cause or threaten to
cause disturbances in the markets for such products or disturbances in the mechanisms regulating those markets.
The power to adopt acts should be delegated to the Commission in respect of:
·

amending Annex I to this Regulation in order to add or to remove regions or states, and in respect of introducing technical
amendments to Annex II to this Regulation that are necessary as a result of the application of that Annex;

·

adding an Annex to this Regulation which sets out the regime applicable to products originating in South Africa once the relevant
trade provisions of the TDCA have been superseded by the relevant provisions of an agreement establishing, or leading to the
establishment of, an Economic Partnership Agreement.

2015/0128(COD) - 08/06/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to recast Council Regulation (EC) No 1528/2007 applying to products originating in certain states that are part of the African,
Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group of States provided for in agreements establishing, or leading to the establishment of, economic
partnership agreements.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/1076 of the European Parliament and of the Council applying the arrangements for products
originating in certain states which are part of the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Group of States provided for in agreements
establishing, or leading to the establishment of, economic partnership agreements (recast).
CONTENT: in the interests of legal clarity, this Regulation consists of a recast of Council Regulation (EC) No 1528/2007, ("Market Access
Regulation") governing imports of products originating in certain ACP countries. This temporary instrument provides duty-free, quota-free
access to the EU market for products originating in countries that are not part of the Least Developed Countries (LDC) of the ACP countries in
the run-up to the conclusion and application of WTO-compatible Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs). Annex I of the Market Access
Regulation includes 27 countries.
Duty-free and quota-free access is subject to certain general safeguard measures. In view of the particular sensitivity of agricultural products,
the Regulation allows safeguard measures to be taken when imports cause or threaten to cause disturbances in the markets for such products
or disturbances in the mechanisms regulating those markets.
The rules of origin applicable to imports made under the Regulation are, for a transitional period, those laid down in Annex II. Those rules of
origin should be superseded by those annexed to any agreement with the regions or states listed in Annex I when that agreement is either
provisionally applied, or enters into force, whichever is the earliest.
Delegated acts: the Commission may adopt delegated acts with a view to:
·

amending Annex I to the Regulation in order to add or to remove regions or states, and in respect of introducing technical
amendments to Annex II to this Regulation that are necessary as a result of the application of that Annex;

·

adding an Annex to this Regulation which sets out the regime applicable to products originating in South Africa once the relevant
trade provisions of the Agreement on Trade, Development and Cooperation (TDCA) have been superseded by the relevant
provisions of an agreement establishing, or leading to the establishment of, an EPA.

The power to adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 21 June 2013 (which may be tacitly
extended for the same period). Parliament or Council may raise objections to a delegated act within two months of the date of notification
(which may be extended by two months). If Parliament or Council raise objections, the delegated act may not enter into force.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 28.7.2016.

