Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2096(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU/Viet Nam Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Partnership and
Cooperation
See also 2013/0440(NLE)
Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.40.08 Relations with Asian countries
Geographical area
Vietnam

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
31/03/2015

LOCHBIHLER Barbara
Shadow rapporteur

PREDA Cristian Dan

GILL Neena

BASHIR Amjad

VAUTMANS Hilde

SCHOLZ Helmut

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

Key events
16/11/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

24/11/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

16/12/2015

Debate in Parliament

17/12/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

17/12/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

17/12/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2096(INI)

A8-0342/2015

Summary

T8-0468/2015

Summary

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure
See also 2013/0440(NLE)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 099-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/03367

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE560.909

30/06/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE567.732

18/09/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0342/2015

24/11/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0468/2015

17/12/2015

EP

Summary

2015/2096(INI) - 24/11/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Barbara LOCHBIHLER (Greens/EFA, DE) containing a motion for a
non-legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the conclusion, on behalf of the Union, of the Framework Agreement on
Comprehensive Partnership and Cooperation between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and Vietnam , of the other
part.
Members recalled that the Comprehensive Partnership and Cooperation Agreement aims to establish a modern, broad-based and mutually
beneficial partnership, based on shared interests and principles such as equality, mutual respect, the rule of law and human rights. They
stated that the EU is Vietnams biggest export market and is the largest ODA provider to Vietnam and there will be an EU budget increase for
this purpose of 30 % to EUR 400 million in 2014-2020.
A favourable agreement: Members welcomed the conclusion of the Agreement and underlined the major strategic importance held by Vietnam
as a crucial partner of the EU in South East Asia and ASEAN. Vietnam and the EU are urged to continue economic, trade and new technology
cooperation in multilateral fora; welcomes the near doubling of Vietnamese GDP per capita since 2010.
Human Rights: if Vietnam's economic growth is no doubt related to the implementation of the Agreement, Members hoped that it will also have
a favourable impact on respect for democratic principles and human rights. They welcomed the decision of the Vietnamese authorities to lift
the visa regime for citizens of five European countries and believes that this decision will stimulate stronger cooperation in the tourism sector.
Members welcomed the announcement by the Prime Minister of Vietnam of a master plan for implementing the recommendations of the
UNHRCs Universal Periodic Review (UPR), as well as the judicial reform strategy that should be concluded by 2020.
They encouraged the EU to continue support for Vietnams capacity development in promoting respect for good governance and the rule of law
and combating corruption. They called on Parliament and the Commission to evaluate in close consultation any human rights abuses in order
to ensure the proper democratic oversight of the implementation of the Comprehensive Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
Moreover, they called on the EU and Vietnam to work towards creating an instrument to monitor developments on human rights in the context
of the negotiations on the FTA.
They deplored the fact that more than 500 prisoners are estimated to be on death row and called on the Vietnamese Government to establish
an immediate moratorium on executions.
Members urged the ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court by Vietnam.
On the issue of workers rights, Members took note that the garment and textile industry, which employs more than two million workers, is
Vietnams largest export sector, and is concerned about the lack of mechanisms available for workers to defend their rights. They called for
Vietnam to ratify the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No 87 on Freedom of Association and Protection of the Rights to
Organise and Convention No 98 on the Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining.
Members also called for:
the respect the right to freedom of expression, association and assembly;
the respect for freedom of religion (for Buddhists, Hoa Hao followers of cults and Cao Dai, and Christians);
the fight against human trafficking;
resolute measures to protect children;
the fight against land grabbing;
measures against HIV/AIDS;
the defence of the rights of LGBTI people.
Members urged the Vietnamese authorities to thoroughly investigate the abuses made against journalists, bloggers and whistle-blowers and to
put in place greater anti-corruption efforts.

Sustainable development and respect for the environment: Members commended the inclusion in the future Free Trade Agreement of a
chapter on trade and sustainable development, commitments to the core labour standards and Conventions of the ILO and the conservation
and sustainable management of natural resources.
They expressed serious concern over environmental damage in Vietnam, in particular, pollution, deforestation and unsustainable mining
activities that destroy whole regions. They urged the Vietnamese Government to introduce measures to guarantee the effective enforcement of
legislation to protect the environment and biodiversity and called on the Commission to provide the necessary capacity-building support for this
purpose.
Members noted that the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment adopted a climate change adaptation strategy. They pointed out that
the country is engaged in developing biomass and solar energy and welcomes the strong focus of the EU aid package (2014-2020) on
sustainable energy development.
Furthermore, the Commission and the Member States are called upon, in view of the health and environmental legacy of the Vietnam War, to
consider setting up a fund to support victims and war veterans, and also to step up action through the dispatch of specialist missions to
decontaminate harmful substances and demine areas which even now, 40 years after the conflict has ended, continue to claim victims.
Members called on the government to reconsider its decision to build and operate Vietnams first nuclear power plant located in Ninh.
Conflict management: Members called on China and the neighbouring countries concerned including Vietnam to intensify efforts to defuse
tension in the contested area in the South China Sea.
They considered that the situation risks jeopardising major EU interests in the region, including in terms of global security and the freedom of
navigation of major maritime routes that are vital for EU trade. They urged the Commission and Vice-President / High Representative to
actively monitor the situation and support a solution to the dispute in accordance with international law.
Lastly, Members called for the establishment of a regular communication mechanism or forum between the EEAS and Parliament, so as to
ensure transparency and allow the latter to monitor the implementation of the Agreements objectives notably by providing Parliament with
information on the objectives pursued by EU actions and positions, and on all issues relating to Vietnam and by fully involving civil society.

2015/2096(INI) - 17/12/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 475 votes to 64, with 95 abstentions, a resolution containing a motion for a non-legislative resolution on
the draft Council decision on the conclusion, on behalf of the Union, of the Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Partnership and
Cooperation between the European Union and its Member States, of the one part, and Vietnam, of the other part.
Parliament recalled that the Comprehensive Partnership and Cooperation Agreement aims to establish a modern, broad-based and mutually
beneficial partnership, based on shared interests and principles such as equality, mutual respect, the rule of law and human rights. It stated
that the EU is Vietnams biggest export market and is the largest ODA provider to Vietnam and there will be an EU budget increase for this
purpose of 30 % to EUR 400 million in 2014-2020.
A favourable agreement: Parliament welcomed the conclusion of the Agreement and underlined the major strategic importance held by
Vietnam as a crucial partner of the EU in South East Asia and ASEAN. Vietnam and the EU are urged to continue economic, trade and new
technology cooperation in multilateral fora.
Human Rights: if Vietnam's economic growth is no doubt related to the implementation of the Agreement, Parliament hoped that it will also
have a favourable impact on respect for democratic principles and human rights. It welcomed the decision of the Vietnamese authorities to lift
the visa regime for citizens of five European countries and believed that this decision will stimulate stronger cooperation in the tourism sector.
Members welcomed the announcement by the Prime Minister of Vietnam of a master plan for implementing the recommendations of the
UNHRCs Universal Periodic Review (UPR), as well as the judicial reform strategy that should be concluded by 2020.
They encouraged the EU to continue support for Vietnams capacity development in promoting respect for good governance and the rule of law
and combating corruption. They called on Parliament and the Commission to evaluate in close consultation any human rights abuses in order
to ensure the proper democratic oversight of the implementation of the Comprehensive Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
However, contrary to the committees position, plenary did not call for the creation of an instrument to monitor developments on human rights in
the context of the negotiations on the FTA. However, it called on the Vice President/High Representative to ensure that the policies the EU and
its Member States pursue in the context of the implementation of the PCA and the future FTA with Vietnam help advance the respect for
human rights, the rule of law and good governance and called for capacity building to enhance the settlement of complaints by affected
individuals and communities. The Vietnamese Government to strengthen the involvement of civil society through the participation of
associations and NGOs in the countrys political, economic and social development.
Members deplored the fact that more than 500 prisoners are estimated to be on death row and called on the Vietnamese Government to
establish an immediate moratorium on executions.
Parliament urged the ratification of the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court by Vietnam.
Child prostitution: Parliament expressed concern about Vietnam being one of the major source countries for victims of human trafficking, and
about reports of large numbers of children, especially boys who are not protected by the law against sexual abuse. It urged Vietnam to develop
strong and effective child protection laws that protect all children regardless of their gender. The Commission is also called on to support
Vietnam in strengthening its capacities in the field of migration policies and the fight against human trafficking and organised crime and to
urgently ensure that key protection provisions set out in the EU Strategy towards the Eradication of Trafficking in Human Beings are fully
implemented.
On the issue of workers rights, Parliament took note that the garment and textile industry, which employs more than two million workers, is
Vietnams largest export sector, and is concerned about the lack of mechanisms available for workers to defend their rights. It called for
Vietnam to ratify the International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No 87 on Freedom of Association and Protection of the Rights to
Organise and Convention No 98 on the Right to Organise and Collective Bargaining.

Parliament also called for:
the respect the right to freedom of expression, association and assembly;
the respect for freedom of religion (for Buddhists, Hoa Hao followers of cults and Cao Dai, and Christians);
the fight against human trafficking;
resolute measures to protect children;
the fight against land grabbing;
measures against HIV/AIDS;
the defence of the rights of LGBTI people.
Parliament urged the Vietnamese authorities to thoroughly investigate the abuses made against journalists, bloggers and whistle-blowers and
to put in place greater anti-corruption efforts.
Sustainable development and respect for the environment: Parliament commended the inclusion in the future Free Trade Agreement of a
chapter on trade and sustainable development, commitments to the core labour standards and Conventions of the ILO and the conservation
and sustainable management of natural resources.
It expressed serious concern over environmental damage in Vietnam, in particular, pollution, deforestation and unsustainable mining activities
that destroy whole regions. It urged the Vietnamese Government to introduce measures to guarantee the effective enforcement of legislation
to protect the environment and biodiversity and called on the Commission to provide the necessary capacity-building support for this purpose.
Members noted that the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment adopted a climate change adaptation strategy. They pointed out that
the country is engaged in developing biomass and solar energy and welcomes the strong focus of the EU aid package (2014-2020) on
sustainable energy development.
Furthermore, the Commission and the Member States are called upon, in view of the health and environmental legacy of the Vietnam War, to
consider setting up a fund to support victims and war veterans, and also to step up action through the dispatch of specialist missions to
decontaminate harmful substances and demine areas which even now, 40 years after the conflict has ended, continue to claim victims.
Parliament called on the government to reconsider its decision to build and operate Vietnams first nuclear power plant located in Ninh.
Conflict management: Parliament called on China and the neighbouring countries concerned including Vietnam to intensify efforts to defuse
tension in the contested area in the South China Sea.
It considered that the situation risks jeopardising major EU interests in the region, including in terms of global security and the freedom of
navigation of major maritime routes that are vital for EU trade. It urged the Commission and Vice-President / High Representative to actively
monitor the situation and support a solution to the dispute in accordance with international law.
Lastly, in an amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament stressed that, according to Article 218(10) TFEU, Parliament must be immediately
and fully informed at all stages of the procedure concerning the Comprehensive Partnership and Cooperation Agreement; this should include
providing Parliament with extensive written information on the objectives pursued by EU actions and positions, in particular on the evolution in
the situation of human rights, freedom of expression and the rule of law in the country. It stressed furthermore, the fundamental role played by
EU Delegation Focal Points in the monitoring of human rights in the country.

