Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2341(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU Trust Fund for Africa: the implications for development and humanitarian
aid

Subject
6.30.02 Financial and technical cooperation and assistance
6.50 Emergency, food, humanitarian aid, aid to refugees, Emergency Aid
Reserve

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

DEVE Development
(Associated committee)

Appointed
13/10/2015

CORRAO Ignazio
Shadow rapporteur

WENTA Bogdan
Brunon

LIETZ Arne

DEVA Nirj

GOERENS Charles

ALBIOL GUZMÁN
Marina

HAUTALA Heidi
Committee for opinion
BUDG Budgets
(Associated committee)

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed
03/12/2015

GARDIAZABAL
RUBIAL Eider

Commission DG

Commissioner

International Cooperation and Development

MIMICA Neven

Key events
21/01/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

21/01/2016

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

21/06/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

29/06/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

12/09/2016

Debate in Parliament

A8-0221/2016

Summary

13/09/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

13/09/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

13/09/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0337/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2341(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

DEVE/8/05358

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE578.554

26/02/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE580.561

07/04/2016

EP

PE578.514

26/04/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0221/2016

29/06/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0337/2016

13/09/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)876

21/12/2016

Committee opinion

BUDG

2015/2341(INI) - 29/06/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Development adopted the own-initiative report by Ignazio CORRAO (EFDD, IT) on the EU Trust Fund for Africa: the
implications for development and humanitarian aid.
The Committee on Budgets, exercising its prerogative as associated committees in accordance with Article 54 of the Rules of Procedure, also
gave its opinion on the report.
Members recalled that the main goal of the EU Trust Fund for Africa (EUTF) is to help foster stability in the regions and contribute to better
migration management. It aims to address the root causes of destabilisation, forced displacement and irregular migration by promoting
resilience, economic opportunities, equal opportunities, security and development.
Financial allocation and budgetary aspects: Members regretted the fact that to date Member States' contributions have remained too low,
amounting only to a small fraction of the Union contribution and are thus far from reaching the official commitment, totalling only EUR 81.71
million in April 2016 (or 4.5 % of the projected EUR 1.8 billion). They called for fresh appropriations to be used wherever possible and for full
transparency to be ensured as to the origin and destination of funds.
Members encouraged the Member States to honour their pledges and to rapidly and effectively match the Union contribution in order to allow
the trust fund to develop its full potential.
Deploring the fact that the trust funds result in bypassing the budgetary authority and undermining the unity of the budget, Members consider
that setting up the EUTF is de facto tantamount to revising the ceilings for the current MFF by increasing Member State contributions. They
stressed that the creation of funding instruments outside the EU budget must remain exceptional as it bypasses the budgetary authority and
undermines budget unity.
Members noted that the EUs financial allocation for the EUTF for Africa currently comes mainly from the 11th EDF because the EU budget and
the MFF lack the resources and the flexibility needed to address the different dimensions of such crises. They called on the EU to agree to find
a more holistic solution for emergency funding in the framework of this years revision of the 2014-2020 MFF.
Members also observed that Parliament has demonstrated responsibility, as one arm of the budgetary authority, by agreeing to release
emergency funds. They deplored the fact, however, that, as a result of the proliferation of emergency instruments, the Community method is
being abandoned.

Role of the civil society, ONGs and local authorities: according to Members, civil society, non-governmental organisations (NGOs),
international organisations and diaspora communities should play a complementary and pivotal role. Open and participative consultation
processes prior to the definition of projects is called for as a key contribution to development needs assessment.
Transparency and clarity for better achievement of goals: Members warned against the serious risk of misuse of EU development aid, in
particular in conflict-affected countries where security, migration and development issues are closely interconnected. They emphasised
strongly that the ultimate purpose of EU development policy must be the reduction and eradication of poverty. They also stressed that a clear,
transparent, and communicable distinction must be made within the EUTF between the funding envelopes for development activities on the
one hand, and those for activities related to migration management, border controls and all other activities on the other.
EU policy coherence and commitment on human rights: Members called for the EU to show greater coherence when acting in the field of
international cooperation for development in the African region. They stated that the funds should reflect the principles of policy coherence for
sustainable development and complementarity between all development stakeholders, and should avoid any contradiction between
development aims and security, humanitarian and migration policies. The trust funds should contribute to achieving the long-term objectives of
ensuring peace and strengthening governance in recipient countries.
Objectives and follow-up: the report called on the Commission to systematically monitor how the EUTF funds are employed and how they are
allocated, and to increase Parliament's scrutiny powers over the EUTF. Members deplored the lack of clarity and transparency regarding the
funding criteria and the volume of funds available for civil society under the EUTF. They recalled the need for better communication between
the Commission, the Member States and Parliament in programming and implementing actions of the EUTF in general, in the interests of the
further planning of potential additional Trust Funds. They insisted on the need to guarantee, through detailed and regular reporting by the
Commission, Parliaments scrutiny as to how the Fund is being implemented. Transparency, communication and visibility are of the utmost
importance with a view to disseminating the results and involving and sensitising European private actors, local and regional authorities, NGOs
and civil society.
Lastly, Members recalled that EU migration policies should address the root causes of destabilisation, forced displacement and irregular
migration by promoting resilience, economic opportunities, equal opportunities, security and development.

2015/2341(INI) - 13/09/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 511 votes to 129, with 69 abstentions, a resolution on the EU Trust Fund for Africa: the implications for
development and humanitarian aid.
Parliament recalled that the main goal of the EU Trust Fund for Africa (EUTF) is to help foster stability in the regions and contribute to better
migration management. It aims to address the root causes of destabilisation, forced displacement and irregular migration by promoting
resilience, economic opportunities, equal opportunities, security and development.
Financial allocation and budgetary aspects: Parliament regretted the fact that to date Member States' contributions have remained too low,
amounting only to a small fraction of the Union contribution and are thus far from reaching the official commitment, totalling only EUR 81.71
million in April 2016 (or 4.5 % of the projected EUR 1.8 billion). It called for fresh appropriations to be used wherever possible and for full
transparency to be ensured as to the origin and destination of funds.
While welcoming the intention to disburse funds more quickly and flexibly in an emergency situation, Parliament criticised the fact that the
Commission has diverted appropriations from the objectives and principles of the basic acts to channel them through the EUTF , as this is in
breach of the financial rules, and furthermore jeopardises the success of long-term Union policies. It called, therefore, for fresh appropriations
to be used wherever possible and for full transparency to be ensured as to the origin and destination of funds.
It noted that in the field of external action, EUTFs are mainly designed to enable a swift response to a specific emergency or post-emergency
crisis by leveraging the contribution of EU Member States and other donors while increasing the global visibility of European efforts. In an
amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament stressed the volatility of voluntary contributions and urged the Member States to honour their
pledges and to rapidly and effectively match the Union contribution, in order to allow the EUTF to develop its full potential.
Members also deplored the fact that the trust funds result in bypassing the budgetary authority and undermining the unity of the budget.
It recalled that Member State contributions make up 85 % of the Union budget. However, the setting up the EUTF is de facto tantamount to
revising the ceilings for the current MFF by increasing Member State contributions.
It stressed, therefore, that the creation of funding instruments outside the EU budget must remain exceptional. In addition, Parliament is not
represented on the Strategic Board, despite the fact that substantial funds come from the Union budget.
Members observed that Parliament has demonstrated responsibility by agreeing to release emergency funds. They deplored the fact,
however, that, as a result of the proliferation of emergency instruments, the Community method is being abandoned.
EDF contribution: Parliament noted that the EUs financial allocation for the EUTF for Africa currently comes mainly from the 11th EDF because
the EU budget and the MFF lack the resources and the flexibility needed to address the different dimensions of such crises promptly and
comprehensively. It called for the EU to agree to find a more holistic solution for emergency funding in the framework of this years revision of
the 2014-2020 MFF.
It condemned any use of EDF and ODA funds for migration management and control of any other actions without development objectives.
Parliament stressed that the use of the EDF to finance the EUTF for Africa may have an impact on the aid recipient African countries which are
not covered by the Trust Fund, and in particular the least developed countries (LDCs). However, despite the already low levels of development
assistance to LDCs which have declined for the second year in a row in 2014, it called on the Commission and the Member States,
accordingly, to make sure that aid is not diverted away from the poorest countries to cover the cost of the current crises.
Role of the civil society, NGOs and local authorities: according to Members, local government authorities must be consulted as full partners as
long as there are full guarantees of efficiency and good governance.
Parliament called for respect for the principle of subsidiarity and ownership also in this field of action and that local government bodies, local

civil society, NGOs and international organisations should be strongly involved in the planning, implementation and evaluation phases of the
EUTF.
In this regard, Parliament called on the Commission to clarify and formalise the consultation procedures with these stakeholders so as to
ensure their effective participation in the discussions.
Parliament strongly believes that the EUTF should focus not only on economic development but also on grassroots projects specifically aimed
at improving quality, equity and universal accessibility of basic services.
Transparency and clarity for better achievement of goals: Parliament warned against the serious risk of misuse of EU development aid, in
particular in conflict-affected countries where security, migration and development issues are closely interconnected. It emphasised strongly
that the ultimate purpose of EU development policy must be the reduction and eradication of poverty. It also stressed that a clear, transparent,
and communicable distinction must be made within the EUTF between the funding envelopes for development activities on the one hand, and
those for activities related to migration management, border controls and all other activities on the other.
EU policy coherence and commitment on human rights: Parliament called for the EU to show greater coherence when acting in the field of
international cooperation for development in the African region. It stated that the funds should reflect the principles of policy coherence for
sustainable development and complementarity between all development stakeholders, and should avoid any contradiction between
development aims and security, humanitarian and migration policies. The trust funds should contribute to achieving the long-term objectives of
ensuring peace and strengthening governance in recipient countries.
Objectives and follow-up: Parliament called on the Commission to systematically monitor how the EUTF funds are employed and how they are
allocated, and to increase Parliament's scrutiny powers over the EUTF. It deplored the lack of clarity and transparency regarding the funding
criteria and the volume of funds available for civil society under the EUTF. It recalled the need for better communication between the
Commission, the Member States and Parliament in programming and implementing actions of the EUTF in general, in the interests of the
further planning of potential additional Trust Funds. It insisted on the need to guarantee, through detailed and regular reporting by the
Commission, Parliaments scrutiny as to how the Fund is being implemented. Transparency, communication and visibility are of the utmost
importance with a view to disseminating the results and involving and sensitising European private actors, local and regional authorities, NGOs
and civil society.
Funds and migration: Members recalled that EU migration policies should address the root causes of destabilisation, forced displacement and
irregular migration by promoting resilience, economic opportunities, equal opportunities, security and development by working more closely
with third countries to improve cooperation on incentives for return to and reintegration in the countries of origin of migrants.
Parliament stressed that instability and physical insecurity are prominent causes of forced displacement, and therefore supported a
conflict-sensitive approach to implementation of the Fund that would prioritise conflict prevention, state-building, good governance and the
promotion of the rule of law. It stated that the EUTF is a great opportunity for the EU, enabling it to reinforce its cooperation and political
dialogue with its African partners, in particular concerning the effective implementation of return and readmission agreements.

