Procedure file
Basic information
2015/0199(NLE)

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure completed

EU/Peru Agreement: short-stay visa waiver

Subject
6.40.10 Relations with Latin America, Central America, Caribbean islands
7.10.04 External borders crossing and controls, visas
Geographical area
Peru

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
26/10/2015

GABRIEL Mariya
Shadow rapporteur

GUILLAUME Sylvie

STEVENS Helga

HYUSMENOVA Filiz

MICHEL Louis

VERGIAT
Marie-Christine

VALERO Bodil
Committee for opinion
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Migration and Home Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
AVRAMOPOULOS Dimitris

Key events
14/09/2015

Initial legislative proposal published

07/03/2016

Legislative proposal published

10/03/2016

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

14/04/2016

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

24/05/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

COM(2015)0439

Summary

12099/2015

Summary

02/06/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

05/07/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

05/07/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

20/09/2016

Act adopted by Council after consultation
of Parliament

20/09/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

30/09/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0197/2016

Summary

T8-0295/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/0199(NLE)

Procedure type

NLE - Non-legislative enactments

Procedure subtype

Consent by Parliament

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 218-p6a; Treaty on the
Functioning of the EU TFEU 077-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/04502

Documentation gateway
Document attached to the procedure

12097/2015

04/03/2015

CSL

Initial legislative proposal

COM(2015)0439

14/09/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

COM(2015)0437

14/09/2015

EC

Legislative proposal

12099/2015

07/03/2016

CSL

Committee draft report

PE573.186

13/04/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0197/2016

02/06/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0295/2016

05/07/2016

EP

Summary

Summary

Summary

Final act
Decision 2016/1744
OJ L 264 30.09.2016, p. 0027 Summary

2015/0199(NLE) - 14/09/2015 Initial legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Peru on the short-stay visa waiver.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: Regulation (EU) No 509/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council amended Regulation (EC) No 539/2001 listing
the third countries whose nationals must be in possession of visas when crossing the external borders of the Member States and those whose
nationals are exempt from that requirement. The Regulation was adopted on 20 May 2014 and entered into force on 9 June 2014.
Regulation (EU) No 509/2014 transferred 19 countries to Annex II, which lists the third countries whose nationals are exempt from the visa

requirement. Those 19 countries are: Colombia, Dominica, Grenada, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, Peru, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Timor-Leste, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, the United Arab Emirates and
Vanuatu.
Colombia and Peru were, according to Recital 5 of Regulation (EU) No 509/2014 and the joint declaration issued at the time of adoption, s
ubject to a specific procedure which required a further assessment of those countries against the relevant criteria , before the Commission
could present to the Council recommendations for decisions authorising the opening of negotiations on visa waiver agreements with those two
countries.
In October 2014, the Commission adopted a report broadly assessing the situation of Peru. The Commission concluded that the significant
improvement of the Peruvian economic and social situation in recent years provided justification that Peruvians should be granted visa-free
access to the Member States' territory. In addition, the visa waiver agreement contains the necessary safeguards to suspend or terminate the
agreement should this be required to avoid security or migration risks for the Union.
In March 2015, the Commission presented a Recommendation to the Council to authorise it to start negotiations on visa waiver agreements
with Colombia and Peru. On 19 May 2015, the Council addressed negotiating directives to the Commission. The negotiations with Peru were
opened on 20 May 2015 in Brussels. The agreement was initialled by the chief negotiators on 9 June 2015.
The Commission considered that the objectives set by the Council in its negotiating directives were attained and that the draft visa waiver
agreement is acceptable to the Union.
CONTENT: the Commission proposes that the Council approve the Agreement between the European Union and Peru on the short-stay visa
waiver.
The content of the agreement may be summarised as follows:
Purpose and duration of stay: the agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of Peru
when travelling to the territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period.
In order to safeguard equal treatment of all EU citizens, a provision has been included in the agreement stating that Peru may suspend or
terminate the agreement only in respect of all the Member States of the European Union and that the Union may also only suspend or
terminate the agreement in respect of all of its Member States.
The agreement takes into account the situation of the Member States that do not yet apply the Schengen acquis in full. As long as they are not
part of the Schengen area without internal borders, the visa waiver confers a right for the nationals of Peru to stay for 90 days in any 180-day
on the territory of each of those Member States (currently Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus and Romania), independently of the period calculated for
the whole Schengen area.
Scope: the visa waiver covers all categories of persons (ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all
kinds of purposes, except for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity. For this latter category, each Member State and also Peru remain free
to impose the visa requirement on the citizens of the other Party in accordance with the applicable Union or national law. In order to ensure
harmonised implementation, a joint declaration is attached to the agreement on the interpretation of the category of persons travelling for the
purpose of carrying out a paid activity.
Biometric passports: the Agreement includes a number of declarations:
on the introduction of biometric passports by Peru, declaring that Peru commits to issuing biometric passports by 31 December 2015
at the latest and that failure to introduce biometric/passports by that date constitutes sufficient grounds for suspension of the
agreement;
on cooperation concerning irregular migration with a commitment to conclude a readmission agreement upon request by either Party,
in particular in case of an increase of irregular migration and in problems regarding the readmission of irregular migrants. Failure to
conclude a readmission agreement upon request constitutes sufficient grounds for suspension of the agreement.
Territorial application: in the case of France and the Netherlands, the visa waiver would entitle nationals of Peru to stay only in those Member
States? European territories.
The provisions of the Agreement do not apply to the United Kingdom and Ireland.
The Agreement establishes a Joint Committee for the management of the Agreement, which shall adopt its rules of procedure.

2015/0199(NLE) - 07/03/2016 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to conclude the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Peru on the short-stay visa waiver.
PROPOSED ACT: Council Decision.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: Council may adopt the act only if Parliament has given its consent to the act.
BACKGROUND: the Commission has negotiated on behalf of the European Union an agreement with the Republic of Peru on the short-stay
visa waiver.
In accordance with a Council Decision, the Agreement has been signed and is applied on a provisional basis. It is now necessary to approve
the Agreement on behalf of the EU.
CONTENT: the Agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of Peru when travelling to
the territory of the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period. The visa waiver covers all categories of
persons (ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all kinds of purposes, except for the purpose of
carrying out a paid activity.
This Decision constitutes a development of the provisions of the Schengen acquis. Therefore, the provisions of the future Agreement shall not

apply to Ireland or the United Kingdom.
The Agreement sets up a Joint Committee of experts for the management of the Agreement. The Union is to be represented within that Joint
Committee by the Commission, which should be assisted by the representatives of the Member States.
For further details on the main elements of this Agreement, please refer to the summary of the initial proposal dated from 14.09.2015.

2015/0199(NLE) - 02/06/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted the report by Mariya GABRIEL (EPP, BG) on the draft Council decision on
the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Peru on the short-stay
visa waiver.
The committee recommended the European Parliament to give its consent to the conclusion of the Agreement.
To recall, the agreement signed on 14 March 2016 and applied provisionally pending the consent of the European Parliament - provides for
visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of Peru when travelling to the territory of the other Contracting Party
for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period.
The visa waiver covers all categories of persons (ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all kinds of
purposes, except for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity.
The report is accompanied by a short justification which states that the agreement marks a significant milestone in the deepening of relations
between the European Union and Peru and is an additional way of stepping up economic and cultural relations and intensifying political
dialogue on various issues, including human rights and fundamental freedoms.
On an economic level: the agreement will boost tourism and help to intensify trade and investment relations. Peru has recorded one of the
highest rates of economic growth in Latin America (5% in 2013, 2.4% in 2014). The EU is the Perus third-largest trade partner in terms of
imports (mainly machinery and transport equipment) and the principal destination of its exports (agri-food and mining products). Furthermore,
the EU continues to be the biggest investor in Peru, accounting for over 50% of total foreign direct investment in sectors such as the extractive
industries, banking and finance.
As regards the political and institutional situation, Peru is a relatively stable democracy which, like the European Union, upholds the values and
principles of democracy, good governance, respect for human rights and the rule of law. The agreement will make it possible to pursue a
balanced, regular, in-depth political dialogue on human rights and on specific issues such as the situation of women.
On the question of mobility, data on entry refusals, arrests and returns shows that irregular migration has been a risk factor in recent years in
the case of Peru. At the same time, however, a marked improvement regarding the situation has been observed The vast majority of
Schengen visa applicants were granted short-stay visas, the rejection rate being around 6.1% in 2014 and 3.0% in 2015. In addition, 43% of
applicants were granted multiple-entry visas in 2014. These figures reflect the Member States increased trust in the applicants. The agreement
also contains a joint declaration on cooperation on illegal immigration, in which the EU and Peru stress their commitment regarding the
readmission of their irregular migrants.
Peru may also become a key partner in the fight against organised crime, including drug trafficking and human trafficking, which can be
important areas of cooperation.
As regards the implementation and monitoring of the agreement, the rapporteur:
called on the Commission to observe any developments in relation to the criteria on clandestine immigration, public policy and
security, and also the Unions external relations with the third countries concerned, including, in particular, considerations relating to
respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms;
called on the Commission and the authorities of Peru to ensure full reciprocity of the visa waiver, which should permit equal treatment
of all citizens, particularly all citizens of the Union;
encouraged the Commission to review the composition of the joint management committees for future agreements so that the
European Parliament may be involved in the work of the Joint Committee.
Lastly, the rapporteur also queried the practice of signing visa waiver agreements and applying them provisionally before the European
Parliament has approved them, a practice which is liable to reduce Parliaments room for manoeuvre.

2015/0199(NLE) - 05/07/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 611 votes to 59, with 21 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Peru on the short-stay visa
waiver.
In line with the recommendation made by the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, the European Parliament gave its
consent to the conclusion of the Agreement.
The Agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of Peru when travelling to the territory of
the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period. The visa waiver covers all categories of persons (ordinary,
diplomatic, service/official and special passport holders) travelling for all kinds of purposes, except for the purpose of carrying out a paid
activity.
The provisions of the Agreement shall not apply to the United Kingdom or Ireland.

2015/0199(NLE) - 20/09/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to conclude the Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Peru on the short-stay visa waiver.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Council Decision (EU) 2016/1744 on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Agreement between
the European Union and the Republic of Peru on the short-stay visa waiver.
CONTENT: with this Decision, the Agreement between the European Union and Peru on the short-stay visa waiver is approved on behalf of
the Union.
To recall, the Commission negotiated on behalf of the European Union an Agreement with Peru on the short-stay visa waiver. This Agreement
was signed in 2015 and is applied on a provisional basis as from 15 March 2016.
The agreement provides for visa-free travel for the citizens of the European Union and for the citizens of Peru when travelling to the territory of
the other Contracting Party for a maximum period of 90 days in any 180-day period . A joint declaration on the interpretation of this period is
attached to the agreement.
The visa waiver covers all categories of persons (holders of ordinary, diplomatic, service/official and special passports) travelling for all kinds of
purposes, except for the purpose of carrying out a paid activity. For this latter category, each Member State and also Peru remain free to
impose the visa requirement on the citizens of the other Party in accordance with the applicable Union or national law. In order to ensure
harmonised implementation, a joint declaration is attached to the agreement on the interpretation of the category of persons travelling for the
purpose of carrying out a paid activity.
The Member States and Peru reserve the right to refuse entry into and short stay in their territories if one or more of these conditions is not
met.
The Agreement sets up a Joint Committee of experts for the management of the Agreement. The Union is to be represented within that Joint
Committee by the Commission, which should be assisted by the representatives of the Member States.
This Decision constitutes a development of the provisions of the Schengen acquis in which the United Kingdom and Ireland do not take part.
Therefore, these two countries are not bound by it or subject to its application.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 20.9.2016.

