Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2118(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Implementation of the Directive 2011/36/EU on preventing and combating
trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims from a gender
perspective
See also Directive 2011/36/EU 2010/0065(COD)
Subject
7.30.30.02 Action to combat violence, trafficking in human beings and
migrant smuggling

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

FEMM Women?s Rights and Gender Equality
(Associated committee)

Appointed
13/10/2014

BEARDER Catherine
Shadow rapporteur

CORAZZA BILDT Anna
Maria

HONEYBALL Mary

GERICKE Arne

BJÖRK Malin

URTASUN Ernest
Committee for opinion
LIBE Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs
(Associated committee)

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed
02/07/2015

BJÖRK Malin

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

AVRAMOPOULOS Dimitris

Key events
21/05/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

21/05/2015

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

19/04/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

27/04/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

12/05/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

12/05/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0144/2016

Summary

T8-0227/2016

Summary

12/05/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2118(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Implementation
See also Directive 2011/36/EU 2010/0065(COD)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

FEMM/8/03507

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE576.788

01/02/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE578.660

02/03/2016

EP

PE575.345

12/04/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0144/2016

27/04/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0227/2016

12/05/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)486

23/09/2016

Committee opinion

LIBE

2015/2118(INI) - 27/04/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Womens Rights and Gender Equality adopted the own-initiative report by Catherine BEARDER (ALDE, UK) on
implementation of the Directive 2011/36/EU on preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims from a gender
perspective.
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, exercising the prerogative of an associated committee in line with Article 54 of the
Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament, was also consulted to give an opinion on the report.
To recall, trafficking in human beings (THB) is a violation of fundamental human rights under Article 5 of the Charter on Fundamental Rights of
the EU, as well as a violation of the victims personal integrity and a serious organised crime that undermines the state and the rule of law. It
has been addressed at many levels of governance, most notably in the EU with Directive 2011/36/EU on preventing and combating trafficking
in human beings and protecting its victims, which established a legal framework to better enable criminal prosecutions against traffickers.
The current refugee crisis has shown up the lack of proper tools at a European level for jointly combating THB, especially when its aim is the
sexual exploitation of women and children.
The report noted that women and girls make up 80 % of registered victims of THB and children make up approximately 16 % of registered
victims. 70 % of the identified victims of THB and 70 % of suspected traffickers in the EU are EU nationals.
THB is a complex transnational phenomenon that can be tackled effectively only if the EU institutions and Member States work together in a
coordinated manner in order to prevent forum shopping by criminal groups and individuals.
Addressing the gender dimension of THB in the implementation of the directive: Members noted that Directive 2011/36/EU was due to be
transposed into Member States national laws by 6 April 2013, and that all Member States except one have notified the Commission of the
transposition of this directive into national law. Members States should speed up the full and correct enforcement of Directive 2011/36/EU. The
gender dimension must be consistently monitored in the implementation of EU anti-trafficking legislation.
Women and men, girls and boys are vulnerable in different ways, and are often trafficked for different purposes, and that prevention,
assistance and support measures must therefore be gender-specific. Members welcomed the Commissions creation of a webpage against
trafficking that contains a database of EU-funded projects in the EU and elsewhere, up-to-date information on EU legal and political
instruments, measures to combat people trafficking in the Member States, funding possibilities and EU initiatives.
They considered that asylum seekers, refugees and migrants are particularly vulnerable to trafficking and that special attention should be
given to the trafficking of women, children and other vulnerable groups. The Commission and the Member States are called upon to
investigate the link between the increasing numbers of refugees arriving and THB.

Gender perspective in the prevention of THB: Members stressed the need for a gender perspective approach based on four key strategies:
prevention;
prosecution;
victim protection;
multi-level partnership.
They also stressed the need for a consistent approach to prosecution of offences related to human trafficking, and for the Member States to
step up their investigations and prosecutions. Criminal penalties for crimes of human trafficking, modern slavery and exploitation should be put
in place. Increased cross-border cooperation and collaboration with the relevant EU agencies is stressed.
Members called on Justice and Home Affairs (JHA) agencies such as Eurojust, Europol, the FRA, Frontex, CEPOL and the EASO to develop
a sustained programme of improving gender balance in decision-making relevant to trafficking.
Members states are called upon to take more proactive preventative actions such as information and awareness-raising campaigns, training
specifically designed for men, targeted workshops with vulnerable groups and education activities in schools, including promoting equality,
combating sexist stereotypes and gender-based violence, as equal treatment should be an objective of the whole of society.
The EU is called upon to pay attention to and make visible the new forms of trafficking and exploitation of human beings, including
reproductive exploitation and trafficking in new-born children.
Forced marriage can also be regarded as a form of trafficking in human beings if it contains an element of exploitation of the victim.
The gender dimension of assistance and support to, and protection of, victims: Members expressed concern that not all victims are able to
access services easily or have knowledge of them. Victims of THB require specialised services, including access to safe short- and long-term
accommodation, witness protection schemes, healthcare and counselling, translation and interpretation services, etc.
The Commission is asked to come forward with a European strategy for combating gender violence, containing a legislative proposal on
violence against women that includes THB.
Member States are called upon to:
establish hotlines which victims of human trafficking and exploitation can call to seek assistance and advice;
provide free legal aid, including legal assistance and representation, psychological and medical support, and information on the rights
to assistance and health care;
make legal aid available to victims of trafficking not only in criminal proceedings, but also in any civil, labour or immigration/asylum
proceedings in which they are involved.
Assessment of other gender-sensitive measures taken in the implementation of the Directive: noting that the current EU Strategy towards the
Eradication of THB comes to an end in 2016, Members called on the Commission to evaluate the current strategy and to introduce a new one
that follows a human-rights-based approach, focusing on victims, includes a clear gender dimension and contains concrete actions in this
regard, adequately and effectively addresses prevention, and continues to discourage the demand that fosters all forms of trafficking.
The report called on the Member States to collect more detailed and up-to-date data by compiling reliable statistical information gathered from
all the main actors, by ensuring that the data is homogeneous and disaggregated by gender, age, type of exploitation (within the subsets of
types of THB), country of origin and destination, and by including internally trafficked people, in order to better identify potential victims and
prevent crime. Member States should increase data sharing in order to better assess the gender dimension and recent trends in THB and
combat trafficking more effectively.
Despite the clear definition of THB given in the Directive, a number of different definitions have been adopted in Member States national
legislation. The Commission called on the Commission to conduct research on this and to report on what these differences in definition mean
in practical terms for the application of the Directive.

2015/2118(INI) - 12/05/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 391 votes to 43, with 53 abstentions, a resolution on the implementation of the Directive 2011/36/EU on
preventing and combating trafficking in human beings and protecting its victims from a gender perspective.
To recall, trafficking in human beings (THB) is a violation of fundamental human rights under Article 5 of the Charter on Fundamental Rights of
the EU, as well as a violation of the victims personal integrity and a serious organised crime that undermines the state and the rule of law. It
has been addressed at many levels of governance, most notably in the EU with Directive 2011/36/EU on preventing and combating trafficking
in human beings and protecting its victims, which established a legal framework to better enable criminal prosecutions against traffickers.
The current refugee crisis has shown up the lack of proper tools at a European level for jointly combating THB, especially when its aim is the
sexual exploitation of women and children.
Parliament noted that women and girls make up 80 % of registered victims of THB and children make up approximately 16 % of registered
victims. 70 % of the identified victims of THB and 70 % of suspected traffickers in the EU are EU nationals.
THB is a complex transnational phenomenon that can be tackled effectively only if the EU institutions and Member States work together in a
coordinated manner in order to prevent forum shopping by criminal groups and individuals.
Addressing the gender dimension of THB in the implementation of the directive: Parliament noted that Directive 2011/36/EU was due to be
transposed into Member States national laws by 6 April 2013, and that all Member States except one have notified the Commission of the
transposition of this directive into national law. Members States should speed up the full and correct enforcement of Directive 2011/36/EU.
Parliament emphasised that the EUs legal and political framework recognises that trafficking is a gender-specific phenomenon and called on
Member States to adopt gender-specific measures. The gender dimension must be consistently monitored in the implementation of EU
anti-trafficking legislation.

Women and men, girls and boys are vulnerable in different ways, and are often trafficked for different purposes, and that prevention,
assistance and support measures must therefore be gender-specific. Parliament welcomed the Commissions creation of a webpage against
trafficking that contains a database of EU-funded projects in the EU and elsewhere, up-to-date information on EU legal and political
instruments, measures to combat people trafficking in the Member States, funding possibilities and EU initiatives.
It considered that asylum seekers, refugees and migrants are particularly vulnerable to trafficking and that special attention should be given to
the trafficking of women, children and other vulnerable groups. The Commission and the Member States are called upon to investigate the link
between the increasing numbers of refugees arriving and THB.
Parliament considered that greater consideration should be paid to the situation of transgender victims, who are considered as a vulnerable
group and are particularly at risk of falling into the hands of traffickers. It believes that this vulnerability factor should be taken into account
when Member States conduct individual risk assessments, so as to ensure that victims of trafficking receive appropriate protection and care.
Adequate training on the specificities of transgender victims should be provided to officials so as to be able to identify them more proactively
and adapt assistance services to meet their needs.
Gender perspective in the prevention of THB: Parliament stressed the need for a gender perspective approach based on four key strategies:
prevention;
prosecution;
victim protection;
multi-level partnership.
It also stressed the need for a consistent approach to prosecution of offences related to human trafficking, and for the Member States to step
up their investigations and prosecutions. Criminal penalties for crimes of human trafficking, modern slavery and exploitation should be put in
place. Increased cross-border cooperation and collaboration with the relevant EU agencies is stressed. It called on Justice and Home Affairs
(JHA) agencies such as Eurojust, Europol, the FRA, Frontex, CEPOL and the EASO to develop a sustained programme of improving gender
balance in decision-making relevant to trafficking.
The resolution also pointed out that it is also important for destination countries to ensure that women migrants who have been granted legal
residency in the destination countries have access to language teaching and other means of social integration, education and training in
particular, with the aim of enabling them to exercise their rights as citizens.
Parliament also called on the Members states to take more proactive preventative actions such as information and awareness-raising
campaigns, training specifically designed for men, targeted workshops with vulnerable groups and education activities in schools, including
promoting equality, combating sexist stereotypes and gender-based violence, as equal treatment should be an objective of the whole of
society.
It also highlighted that owing to the coercive and deceptive nature of the crime, victims may be unable to recognise their own vulnerability. It
called on Member States to implement Articles 11 to 17 of the Directive 2011/36/EU concerning protection and support of victims with a
gender-sensitive approach. Parliament is strongly critical of the fact that it is not already a criminal offence to use the services of trafficked
persons across all Member States.
The EU is called upon to pay attention to and make visible the new forms of trafficking and exploitation of human beings , including
reproductive exploitation and trafficking in new-born children.
In general, Parliament considered that victims of trafficking should receive appropriate protection and care.
Prostitution: Parliament called for better implementation and monitoring of Directive 2011/36/EU, so as to ensure the non-prosecution of and
non-application of sanctions or penalties to victims of THB, and emphasised that this includes the non-application of sanctions or penalties to
people in prostitution and non-punishment for irregular entry or residence in countries of transit and destination.
It noted the lack of a common understanding among the Member States about what constitutes demand for exploitation, and called on the
Commission and the Member States to propose guidelines on the punishment of the client based on the Nordic Model, while raising
awareness about all forms of THB, especially sexual exploitation, and making other forms of exploitation like domestic servitude visible.
Parliament emphasised the data which confirm the deterrent effect that criminalisation of the purchase of sexual services has had in Sweden.
It highlighted the normative effect of this model of regulation and its potential to change social attitudes in order to reduce overall demand for
the services of victims of THB. In addition, Parliament called for campaigns to discourage demand for the sexual services of trafficked persons.
It is of the opinion that demand reduction can be achieved through legislation that shifts the criminal burden onto those who purchase the
sexual services of trafficked persons rather than onto those who sell it.
Parliament is also concerned at the growing phenomenon of sexual grooming and recalled that the victims are often in a state of emotional
dependence, which hinders investigative work, as they are less easily identified as victims of trafficking in human beings and often refuse to
testify against the people grooming them.
The gender dimension of assistance and support to, and protection of, victims: Parliament expressed concern that not all victims are able to
access services easily or have knowledge of them. Victims of THB require specialised services, including access to safe short- and long-term
accommodation, witness protection schemes, healthcare and counselling, translation and interpretation services, etc. The Commission is
asked to come forward with a European strategy for combating gender violence, containing a legislative proposal on violence against women
that includes THB.
Member States are called upon to:
establish hotlines which victims of human trafficking and exploitation can call to seek assistance and advice;
provide free legal aid, including legal assistance and representation, psychological and medical support, and information on the rights
to assistance and health care;
make legal aid available to victims of trafficking not only in criminal proceedings, but also in any civil, labour or immigration/asylum
proceedings in which they are involved.
Parliament stressed that the cumulative effect of different types of discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation or gender identity makes
LGBTI people particularly vulnerable to trafficking in human beings. It underlined the importance for all Member States to recognise

systematically the right to access to safe abortion services for female victims of THB whose pregnancy is a result of their exploitation.
Plenary also called on the Member States to ensure that EU and third-country nationals who are victims of trafficking are entitled to residence
permits.
Assessment of other gender-sensitive measures taken in the implementation of the Directive: noting that the current EU Strategy towards the
Eradication of THB comes to an end in 2016, Parliament called on the Commission to evaluate the current strategy and to introduce a new one
that follows a human-rights-based approach, focusing on victims, includes a clear gender dimension and contains concrete actions in this
regard, adequately and effectively addresses prevention, and continues to discourage the demand that fosters all forms of trafficking.
The resolution called on the Member States to collect more detailed and up-to-date data by compiling reliable statistical information gathered
from all the main actors, by ensuring that the data is homogeneous and disaggregated by gender, age, type of exploitation (within the subsets
of types of THB), country of origin and destination, and by including internally trafficked people, in order to better identify potential victims and
prevent crime.
Member States should increase data sharing in order to better assess the gender dimension and recent trends in THB and combat trafficking
more effectively.
Parliament called on the Commission to ensure that anti-trafficking is given greater priority in the European Agenda on Migration (
COM(2015)0240), so as to facilitate the engagement of victims in the prosecution of traffickers.
Despite the clear definition of THB given in the Directive, a number of different definitions have been adopted in Member States national
legislation. Parliament called on the Commission to conduct research on this and to report on what these differences in definition mean in
practical terms for the application of the Directive. It also urged the Commission, taking into account that the Istanbul Convention is an
effective tool to prevent and combat violence against women, including trafficking, and to protect and assist the victims, to promote the
Member States ratification of the Convention.

