Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2127(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

European Investment Bank (EIB) - Annual report 2014

Subject
8.40.07 European Investment Bank

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
CONT

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

Appointed
16/06/2015

PIRINSKI Georgi
Shadow rapporteur

HAYES Brian

CZARNECKI Ryszard

DLABAJOVÁ Martina

DE JONG Dennis

STAES Bart

VALLI Marco
KAPPEL Barbara
Committee for opinion
INTA

Rapporteur for opinion

International Trade

Appointed
15/06/2015

JADOT Yannick
BUDG

Budgets

08/06/2015
GARDIAZABAL
RUBIAL Eider

ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

11/05/2015
PAPADIMOULIS
Dimitrios

REGI

Regional Development

17/06/2015
JAKOVČIĆ Ivan

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Economic and Financial Affairs

MOSCOVICI Pierre

Key events
11/06/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

23/02/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

08/03/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,

A8-0050/2016

Summary

single reading
27/04/2016

Debate in Parliament

28/04/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

28/04/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

28/04/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0200/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2127(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/03637

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE565.145

22/10/2015

EP

Committee opinion

REGI

PE567.790

13/11/2015

EP

Committee opinion

INTA

PE567.827

20/11/2015

EP

PE572.929

04/12/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

ECON

PE567.658

08/12/2015

EP

Committee opinion

BUDG

PE571.413

10/12/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0050/2016

08/03/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0200/2016

28/04/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)485

22/09/2016

2015/2127(INI) - 08/03/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted an own-initiative report by Georgi PIRINSKI (S&D, BG) on the European Investment Bank (EIB)
Annual Report 2014.
Members recalled that the core task of the EIB, is to support financially projects in the interest of the Union that contribute to the balanced
development of the internal market and to social, economic and territorial cohesion, and thus strengthen European integration.
The EIBs investment programme should underpin the EU policy objectives in the following way:
Prioritising investments to accelerate recovery and enhance productivity: Members encouraged the EIB to continue in its efforts to increase the
low level of investment in the EU.
Members welcomed the fact that in 2014, the EIB funded 285,000 small and medium-sized enterprises, thus safeguarding 3.6 million jobs, and
signed contracts for a total of 413 projects within the EU worth EUR 69 billion and 92 new projects outside the EU for a total of EUR 7.98
billion. They were delighted that the volume of signatures achieved by the EIB in 2014 is at its highest level since 2009, but stressed that
signature levels have further potential.
The EIB was called on to:
provide increased technical support at pre-approval stage for Member States that have a lower success rate for project approval;

focus on investments in the real economy in order to stimulate jobs and growth in the EU;
target its operations at generating investments that enhance economic recovery and productive employment;
give decisive priority to the long-term effect of investments, regarding not only financial indicators but also, above all, their contribution
to sustainable development and to a better quality of life by means of further improvements in the field of employment, social
standards and the environment.
The report emphasised that project funding approval should be based on adequate financial and risk analysis, financial viability and sound
budgetary management. Projects approved for EIB funding should offer clear added value to the European economy.
Promoting youth employment, innovation and SMEs: Members encouraged the EIB to continue investing in education, skills development and
jobs for young people and called on the EIB to report comprehensively on the results achieved by its Investing for Youth initiative.
Noting that SMEs in many parts of Europe face extreme difficulties accessing necessary finance, Members welcomed, in this context, the
greater emphasis the EIB is placing on supporting SMEs. They emphasised the importance of the EIB in facilitating partnerships and
strengthening support instruments for funding micro, small and medium-sized enterprises activity and for innovative start-ups. They called
furthermore on the EIB to cooperate more closely with regional public institutions with a view to optimising the financing possibilities for SMEs.
Enhancing environmental sustainability and climate action: the report noted that out of the 84 environment projects signed in 2014 inside the
EU, amounting to a total of EUR 12.6 billion, sustainable transport projects accounted for EUR 5.1 billion, renewable energy and energy
efficiency projects for EUR 3.7 billion, and protection of the environment projects for EUR 3.8 billion.
The report welcomed the launch in 2014 of new innovative instruments to support climate action, such as the Private Finance for Energy
Efficiency instrument and the Natural Capital Financing Facility.
Members encouraged the EIBs commitment to supporting initiatives helping the EU both to stay a front-runner and to fulfil its own
long-standing carbon market ambitions. They called for a review of the share of EIB investments in climate action, as the 25% share has
already been reached.
Promoting economic and social cohesion and convergence: EUR 19.9 billion, or 29% of total EIB financing inside the EU in 2014, were for
operations supporting cohesion. Members regretted, however, that there is no information about the number of projects supported by the EIB
Group under the relevant sectors. They urged the EIB to include in its future annual reports detailed information about the contribution and
results achieved towards implementing the objectives of cohesion policy.
The report called for EIB financing to be deployed towards the areas most affected by high unemployment, and for more social infrastructure
projects. EIB financing should focus primarily on those countries which are lagging behind in terms of infrastructure quality and development,
bearing in mind, however, the principle of sound financial management and viability of projects.
Members were concerned by the tendency to finance infrastructure such as motorways, which encourage fossil fuel consumption and
therefore run counter to the Unions long-term objectives of moving towards a carbon-free economy. They called for increased support to
projects covered by the EU macro-regional strategies.
European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI): Members welcomed the new EFSI, emphasising the need for the EFSI to function in an
effective, fully transparent and fair way. They recommended close cooperation and overview of EFSI operations by Parliament and the
European Court of Auditors.
The report stressed that the EFSI should benefit all Member States without sectoral and regional pre-allocation, and should also be consistent
with ongoing regional or local investment initiatives; emphasises that EFSI funding should also benefit small-scale projects.
Furthermore, it recommended that Member States designate national promotional banks and closer cooperation between the EIB and national
promotional banks, financial institutions and investment platforms, in order to pool and share expertise and know-how as well as to better align
EIB actions with Member States policy priorities.
Members recalled that the EFSI guarantee was meant to enable the EIB to take more risks while maintaining its triple-A rating. They stressed
that they will be extremely vigilant in monitoring compliance with this criterion.
In addition, the report called on the EIB:
to seriously assess the financial, social and environmental impact of the Project Bonds Initiative;
to update the external dimension of EIB interventions by paying particular attention to third countries and regions outside the EU
suffering from conflict and extreme poverty and continuing to actively promote sustainable growth in developing countries; Members
encouraged the EIB to develop and deploy the necessary comprehensive approach in response to the severe challenges generated
by the flow of migrants to Europe;
to enhance the EIBs governance, transparency and control framework.
The EIB is called on to: i) to update its policies in the context of the ex-ante assessments of undertakings which are the subject of judicial
investigations, as well as policies on anti-money laundering and on combating the financing of terrorism and organised crime; ii) guarantee
maximum transparency and publicity regarding the system of contracts and subcontracts; iii) to develop more stringent rules on conflicts of
interest; iv) to ensure that companies participating in projects co-financed by the EIB should be required to adhere to the principle of equal pay
and pay transparency and to the principle of gender equality.

2015/2127(INI) - 28/04/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 468 votes to 87 with 66 abstentions a resolution on the European Investment Bank (EIB) Annual Report
2014.
Members recalled that the core task of the EIB, is to support financially projects in the interest of the Union that contribute to the balanced
development of the internal market and to social, economic and territorial cohesion, and thus strengthen European integration, by fostering an
increase in jobs and competitiveness.

The EIBs investment programme should underpin the EU policy objectives in the following way:
Prioritising investments to accelerate recovery and enhance productivity: Parliament encouraged the EIB to continue in its efforts to increase
the low level of investment in the EU.
Members welcomed the fact that in 2014, the EIB funded 285,000 small and medium-sized enterprises, thus safeguarding 3.6 million jobs, and
signed contracts for a total of 413 projects within the EU worth EUR 69 billion and 92 new projects outside the EU for a total of EUR 7.98
billion. They observed, however, that in 2014 59.4 % of all EIB-signed projects were allocated to the top five EU economies, while the share of
the other 23 Member States stood at only 30.3 %. They encouraged the EIB to implement a more balanced lending policy towards Member
States, given the intensity of both the current and the long-term challenges facing the Union.
The EIB was called on to:
focus on investments in the real economy in order to stimulate jobs and growth in the EU;
take into consideration when implementing its policies the fact that the unemployment rate is very high, particularly among young
people;
target its operations at generating investments that enhance economic recovery and productive employment, accompanied by
consistent support to Member States aimed at increasing absorption capacities where necessary
give decisive priority to the long-term effect of investments, regarding not only financial indicators but also, above all, their contribution
to sustainable development and to a better quality of life by means of further improvements in the field of employment, social
standards and the environment.
The resolution emphasised that project funding approval should be based on adequate financial and risk analysis, financial viability and sound
budgetary management. Projects approved for EIB funding should offer clear added value to the European economy. Investment, structural
reforms and sound budgetary policies must be part of an overall strategy.
Promoting youth employment, innovation and SMEs: Parliament encouraged the EIB to continue investing in education, skills development
and jobs for young people and called on the EIB to report comprehensively on the results achieved by its Investing for Youth initiative.
Noting that SMEs in many parts of Europe face extreme difficulties accessing necessary finance, Members welcomed, in this context, the
greater emphasis the EIB is placing on supporting SMEs. They emphasised the importance of the EIB in facilitating partnerships and
strengthening support instruments for funding micro, small and medium-sized enterprises activity and for innovative start-ups. They called
furthermore on the EIB to cooperate more closely with regional public institutions with a view to optimising the financing possibilities for SMEs,
and develop an effective communication policy addressing potential private beneficiaries, as an integral part of its advisory function.
Enhancing environmental sustainability and climate action: Parliament noted that out of the 84 environment projects signed in 2014 inside the
EU, amounting to a total of EUR 12.6 billion, sustainable transport projects accounted for EUR 5.1 billion, renewable energy and energy
efficiency projects for EUR 3.7 billion, and protection of the environment projects for EUR 3.8 billion. Signed operations for the climate action
cross-cutting objective amounted to 24 % of total EIB financing inside the EU.
In this context, Members:
welcomed the launch in 2014 of new innovative instruments to support climate action, such as the Private Finance for Energy
Efficiency instrument and the Natural Capital Financing Facility;
encouraged the EIBs commitment to supporting initiatives helping the EU both to stay a front-runner and to fulfil its own long-standing
carbon market ambitions;
called for a review of the share of EIB investments in climate action, as the 25% share has already been reached.
Promoting economic and social cohesion and convergence: Parliament recalled that EUR 19.9 billion, or 29% of total EIB financing inside the
EU in 2014, were for operations supporting cohesion. It urged the EIB to include in its future annual reports detailed information about the
contribution and results achieved towards implementing the objectives of cohesion policy.
The resolution called for EIB financing to be deployed towards the areas most affected by high unemployment , and for more social
infrastructure projects. EIB financing should focus primarily on those countries that are lagging behind in terms of infrastructure quality and
development, bearing in mind, however, the principle of sound financial management and viability of projects.
Members were concerned by the tendency to finance infrastructure such as motorways, which encourage fossil fuel consumption and
therefore run counter to the Unions long-term objectives of moving towards a carbon-free economy. They called on the EIB to include a
compulsory ex-ante assessment of environmental, economic and social added value in the process for selecting projects to be funded inside
and outside the EU. They also called for increased support to projects covered by the EU macro-regional strategies.
European Fund for Strategic Investments (EFSI): Parliament welcomed the new EFSI, emphasising the need for the EFSI to function in an
effective, fully transparent and fair way. It recommended close cooperation and overview of EFSI operations by Parliament and the European
Court of Auditors.
The resolution stressed that the EFSI should benefit all Member States without sectoral and regional pre-allocation, and should also be
consistent with ongoing regional or local investment initiatives; emphasises that EFSI funding should also benefit small-scale projects.
Furthermore, it recommended that Member States designate national promotional banks and closer cooperation between the EIB and national
promotional banks, financial institutions and investment platforms, in order to pool and share expertise and know-how as well as to better align
EIB actions with Member States policy priorities.
Members recalled that the EFSI guarantee was meant to enable the EIB to take more risks while maintaining its triple-A rating. They stressed
that they will be extremely vigilant in monitoring compliance with this criterion.
In addition, the Parliament called on the EIB:
to seriously assess the financial, social and environmental impact of the Project Bonds Initiative;
to update the external dimension of EIB interventions by paying particular attention to third countries and regions outside the EU
suffering from conflict and extreme poverty and continuing to actively promote sustainable growth in developing countries;
Members encouraged the EIB to develop and deploy the necessary comprehensive approach in response to the severe challenges

generated by the flow of migrants to Europe, and they called for stronger conditionality for financing linked to respect for human rights
and freedom of expression;
to enhance the EIBs governance, transparency and control framework. The EIB was called on to: i) to update its policies in the context
of the ex-ante assessments of undertakings which are the subject of judicial investigations, as well as policies on anti-money
laundering and on combating the financing of terrorism and organised crime; ii) guarantee maximum transparency and publicity
regarding the system of contracts and subcontracts; iii) to develop more stringent rules on conflicts of interest; iv) to ensure that
companies participating in projects co-financed by the EIB should be required to adhere to the principle of equal pay and pay
transparency and to the principle of gender equality.

