Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2063(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Prevention of radicalisation and recruitment of European citizens by terrorist
organisations

Subject
7.30.20 Action to combat terrorism

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
LIBE

Rapporteur

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
26/02/2015

DATI Rachida
Shadow rapporteur

GOMES Ana

KIRKHOPE Timothy

PAGAZAURTUNDÚA
RUIZ Maite

SPINELLI Barbara

LAMBERT Jean

WINBERG Kristina
Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
02/03/2015

TANNOCK Charles
CULT

Culture and Education

04/05/2015
DZHAMBAZKI Angel

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Migration and Home Affairs

AVRAMOPOULOS Dimitris

Key events
12/03/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

19/10/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

03/11/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

24/11/2015

Debate in Parliament

25/11/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

A8-0316/2015

Summary

25/11/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

25/11/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

T8-0410/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2063(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Strategic initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

LIBE/8/02968

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE551.967

01/06/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE560.923

03/07/2015

EP

Committee opinion

CULT

PE557.258

17/09/2015

EP

Committee opinion

AFET

PE560.548

18/09/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0316/2015

03/11/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0410/2015

25/11/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)105

05/04/2016

2015/2063(INI) - 03/11/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Rachida DATI (EPP, FR) on the prevention of
radicalisation and recruitment of European citizens by terrorist organisations.
The report noted that more than 5000 European citizens have joined terrorist organisations and other military formations in Iraq and Syria. This
phenomenon is speeding up and taking on significant proportions in certain Member States. The recent terrorist attacks highlight the security
threat which is posed by the presence and movement of these foreign fighters who are often EU nationals, in Europe and in its neighbourhood.
Given the acceleration of this phenomenon, the aim of this report is to make recommendations for a European strategy for preventing
radicalisation and recruitment of EU citizens by terrorist organisations.
The report focused on the following issues:
European added value in the prevention of terrorism: emphasising that terrorism cannot and should not be associated with any specific
religion, nationality or civilisation, the report called for a comprehensive study on the effectiveness of national and EU measures aimed at
preventing and combating terrorism. The Commission is invited to:
establish as a priority an action plan to implement and evaluate the EU strategy for combating radicalisation and recruitment to
terrorism, on the basis of the exchange of best practice and the pooling of skills within the European Union, the evaluation of
measures undertaken in the Member States and cooperation with third countries and international organisations;
contribute to and support the development by Member States of an effective and intensive communication strategy on preventing the
radicalisation and recruitment of European citizens and of non-EU nationals residing in the EU by terrorist organisations.
Member States should coordinate their strategies and share the information and experience at their disposal, to implement good practices at
both national and European level, to cooperate with a view to taking new steps in combating radicalisation and recruitment to terrorism.
Preventing violent extremism and terrorist radicalisation in prisons: stressing that prisons remain one of several environments which are a
breeding ground for the spread of radical and violent ideologies and terrorist radicalisation, the report called on the Commission to encourage
the exchange of best practices among the Member States in order to counter the increase of terrorist radicalisation in Europes prisons and
called on Member States to take immediate action against prison overcrowding.
The Commission is called upon to propose guidelines based on best practices on measures to be implemented in European prisons aimed at
the prevention of radicalisation and of violent extremism, on a basis of full respect for human rights. Members encouraged the establishment of
educational programmes with adequate funding in European prisons in order to promote critical thinking, religious tolerance, and reintegration

into society of inmates.
Preventing online terrorist radicalisation: recalling that the internet and social networks are significant platforms for the fuelling of radicalisation
and fundamentalism, Members underlined the role of education and public awareness campaigns in preventing radicalisation online. They
called for an effective strategy for the detection and removal of illegal content inciting to violent extremism, while respecting fundamental rights
and freedom of expression, and in particular for contributing to the dissemination of effective discourse to counter terrorist propaganda.
The competent authorities should ensure that websites that incite hatred are monitored more strictly. Members supported the introduction of
measures enabling all internet users to easily and quickly flag illegal content circulating on the internet and on social media networks and to
report it to the competent authorities, including through hotlines. Every Member State should set up a special unit tasked with flagging illegal
content on the internet and with facilitating the detection and removal of such content. Members called for a reinforcement of the tools
available to the EU to combat cybercrime.
Preventing radicalisation through education and social inclusion: Members recalled the crucial role that schools play in helping to promote
integration within society and develop critical thinking, and to promote non-discrimination. They called on the Member States to encourage
educational establishments to provide courses and academic programmes aimed at strengthening understanding and tolerance, especially
with regard to different religions, the history of religions, philosophies and ideologies. They stressed the need to teach fundamental values and
democratic principles of the Union such as human rights.
Member States are urged to ensure that educational programmes on internet use exist in every school. Furthermore, teachers should be
empowered to take an active stand against all forms of discrimination and racism.
The report highlighted the importance of combining deradicalisation programmes with measures such as establishing partnerships with
community representatives, investment in social and neighbourhood projects aimed at disrupting economic and geographical marginalisation,
and mentoring schemes for alienated and excluded young people considered at risk of radicalisation.
Members considered it vital to set up an alert system for assistance and guidance in every Member State which would allow families and
community members to obtain support or to easily and swiftly flag the development of sudden behavioural change that might signal a process
of terrorist radicalisation or an individuals departure to join a terrorist organisation.
Stepping up the exchange of information on terrorist radicalisation in Europe: whilst reiterating their commitment to work towards the
finalisation of an EU directive on passenger name records (PNR) by the end of 2015 , Members suggested that a holistic, ambitious and
comprehensive strategy on counterterrorism and the fight against organised crime, involving foreign policy, social policy, education policy, law
enforcement and justice, is required.
The report insisted on the absolute necessity of stepping up the expedient and effective exchange of relevant information between the law
enforcement authorities in the Member States and between Member States and the relevant agencies, in particular by optimising the use of
and contributions to the Schengen Information System (SIS) and Visa Information System (VIS).
Strengthening deterrents against terrorist radicalisation: Members believed that measures aimed at preventing the radicalisation of European
citizens and their recruitment by terrorist organisations will not be fully effective until they are accompanied by an effective, dissuasive and
articulated range of criminal justice measures in all Member States. Through effectively criminalising terrorist acts carried out abroad with
terrorist organisations, Member States will equip themselves with the tools needed to eliminate terrorist radicalisation among European
citizens.
Members called for reinforced capacities for Eurojust's Coordination Centre, which should play a critical role in promoting the joint action of
Member States judicial authorities in the collection of evidence and enhance the effectiveness of prosecutions of crimes related to terrorism.
They also called for the EU to work on the setting-up of judicial and law enforcement cooperation agreements with third countries to facilitate
the collection of evidence in said countries, provided that fundamental rights are safeguarded by all parties.
Preventing the departure and anticipating the return of radicalised European citizens: Members reiterated that the EU should improve the
effectiveness of its external border controls, whilst making good use of existing instruments such as the SIS and the VIS. Member States
should share good practices with regard to exit and return checks and the freezing of financial assets of citizens, in the context of preventing
citizens from taking part in terrorist activities in conflict areas in third countries and of how to manage their return to the EU.
Strengthening links between internal and external security in the EU: Members stressed the vital importance of the EU establishing close
cooperation with third countries, notably transit countries and destination countries, in order to be able to identify EU citizens and
non-European residents leaving to fight for terrorist organisations or returning thereafter.
The EU should increase its cooperation with regional partners in order to curb arms trafficking, targeting in particular the countries where
terrorism originates, and to follow closely the export of armaments that could be exploited by terrorists. Members also called for foreign policy
tools and engagement with third countries to be strengthened with a view to countering the financing of terrorist organisations.
Dismantling terrorist networks: the report underlined that money laundering, tax evasion and other fiscal crimes are in some cases major
sources of terrorism funding. Tracking and combating crimes affecting the EUs financial interests must therefore be a priority.
Members called for a harmonised approach to the definition as a criminal offence of hate speech, online and offline, whereby radicals incite
others to disrespect and violate fundamental rights.

2015/2063(INI) - 25/11/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 548 votes to 110 with 36 abstentions, a resolution on the prevention of radicalisation and recruitment of
European citizens by terrorist organisations.
Parliament noted that more than 5000 European citizens have joined terrorist organisations and other military formations, particularly ISIS
(Daesh), Jahbat al-Nusra and others outside the European Union, especially in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) region. The recent
terrorist attacks in France, Belgium, Tunisia and Copenhagen highlight the security threat which is posed by the presence and movement of
these foreign fighters who are often EU nationals, in Europe and in its neighbourhood.

1) European added value in the prevention of terrorism: Parliament condemned the terrorist attacks that killed and wounded hundreds of
people in Paris on 13 November 2015, highlighting once more the urgent need for coordinated action by the Member States and the European
Union to prevent radicalisation and fight against terrorism.
At the same time, emphasising that terrorism cannot be associated with any specific religion, nationality or civilization, it condemned the use of
stereotypes and xenophobic and racist discourse and practices by individuals and collective authorities which, directly or indirectly, link the
terrorist attacks to the refugees who are currently fleeing their countries in search of a safer place, escaping from war and acts of violence
which occur in their home countries.
Parliament invited the Commission to:
establish as a priority an action plan to implement and evaluate the EU strategy for combating radicalisation and recruitment to
terrorism, on the basis of the exchange of best practice and the pooling of skills within the European Union, the evaluation of
measures undertaken in the Member States and cooperation with third countries and international organisations on a basis of full
respect for international human rights conventions
contribute to and support the development by Member States of an effective and intensive communication strategy on preventing the
radicalisation and recruitment of European citizens and of non-EU nationals residing in the EU by terrorist organisations.
Members called on Member States to coordinate their strategies and share the information and experience at their disposal and to cooperate
with a view to taking new steps in combating radicalisation and recruitment to terrorism. They stressed the importance of strengthening cross
border cooperation among law enforcement authorities to this regard, and of providing adequate resources and training to police forces
working on the ground.
2) Preventing violent extremism and terrorist radicalisation in prisons: stressing that prisons remain one of several environments which are a
breeding ground for the spread of radical and violent ideologies and terrorist radicalisation, Parliament called on the Commission to encourage
the exchange of best practices among Member States in order to counter the increase of terrorist radicalisation in Europes prisons and called
on Member States to take immediate action against prison overcrowding.
The Commission was called upon to propose guidelines based on best practices on measures to be implemented in European prisons aimed
at the prevention of radicalisation and of violent extremism, and to consider the separation of inmates recruited by terrorist organisations from
other inmates as a possible measure to prevent radicalization.
Members encouraged the establishment of educational programmes with adequate funding in European prisons in order to promote critical
thinking, religious tolerance, and reintegration into society of inmates.
3) Preventing online terrorist radicalisation: recalling that the internet and social networks are significant platforms for the fuelling of
radicalisation and fundamentalism, Members underlined the role of education and public awareness campaigns in preventing radicalisation
online. They called for an effective strategy for the detection and removal of illegal content inciting to violent extremism, while respecting
fundamental rights and freedom of expression, and in particular for contributing to the dissemination of effective discourse to counter terrorist
propaganda.
Competent authorities should ensure that websites that incite hatred are monitored more strictly. Member States should consider legal actions,
including criminal prosecutions, against internet and social media companies and service providers which refuse to comply with an
administrative or judicial request to delete illegal content or content praising terrorism on their internet platforms. Refusal cooperate should be
considered an act of complicity that can be equated to criminal intent or neglect.
Members supported the introduction of measures enabling all internet users to easily and quickly flag illegal content circulating on the internet
and on social media networks and to report it to the competent authorities, including through hotlines. Every Member State should set up
a special unit tasked with flagging illegal content on the internet and with facilitating the detection and removal of such content. Members
called for a reinforcement of the tools available to the EU to combat cybercrime.
4) Preventing radicalisation through education and social inclusion: Parliament recalled the crucial role that schools play in helping to promote
integration within society and develop critical thinking, and to promote non-discrimination. It called on the Member States to encourage
educational establishments to provide courses and academic programmes aimed at strengthening understanding and tolerance, especially
with regard to different religions, the history of religions, philosophies and ideologies. It stressed the need to teach fundamental values and
democratic principles of the Union such as human rights.
Member States are urged to ensure that educational programmes on internet use exist in every school. Furthermore, teachers should be
empowered to take an active stand against all forms of discrimination and racism.
Parliament recommended:
combining deradicalisation programmes with measures such as establishing partnerships with community representatives, investment
in social and neighbourhood projects aimed at disrupting economic and geographical marginalisation;
engaging in an intercultural dialogue with the various communities, with a view to helping achieve better understanding and prevention
of radicalisation;
drawing attention to the issue of the training of religious leaders which should take place in Europe where possible - with regard to
preventing incitement to hatred and violent extremism in places of worship in Europe, and ensuring that those leaders share European
values;
setting up an alert system for assistance and guidance in every Member State which would allow families and community members to
obtain support or to easily and swiftly flag the development of sudden behavioural change that might signal a process of terrorist
radicalisation or an individuals departure to join a terrorist organisation;.
5) Stepping up the exchange of information on terrorist radicalisation in Europe: whilst reiterating their commitment to work towards the
finalisation of an EU directive on passenger name records (PNR) by the end of 2015, Parliament suggested that a holistic, ambitious and
comprehensive strategy on counterterrorism and the fight against organised crime, involving foreign policy, social policy, education policy, law
enforcement and justice, is required.
The resolution insisted on the absolute necessity of stepping up the expedient and effective exchange of relevant information between the law
enforcement authorities in the Member States and between Member States and the relevant agencies, in particular by optimising the use of

and contributions to the Schengen Information System (SIS) and Visa Information System (VIS) and reinforcing the role of EU entities such as
Europol, Eurojust and the European Police College (Cepol).
6) Strengthening deterrents against terrorist radicalisation: Members believed that measures aimed at preventing the radicalisation of
European citizens and their recruitment by terrorist organisations will not be fully effective until they are accompanied by an effective,
dissuasive and articulated range of criminal justice measures in all Member States. Through effectively criminalising terrorist acts carried out
abroad with terrorist organisations, Member States will equip themselves with the tools needed to eliminate terrorist radicalisation among
European citizens.
Members called for reinforced capacities for Eurojust's Coordination Centre, which should play a critical role in promoting the joint action of
Member States judicial authorities in the collection of evidence and enhance the effectiveness of prosecutions of crimes related to terrorism.
They also called for the EU to work on the setting-up of judicial and law enforcement cooperation agreements with third countries to facilitate
the collection of evidence in said countries, provided that fundamental rights are safeguarded by all parties.
7) Preventing the departure and anticipating the return of radicalised European citizens: Parliament reiterated that the EU must step up its
external border controls as a matter of urgency, on a basis of full compliance with fundamental rights. However, it stressed that it will be
impossible to effectively track entry and exit in the EU unless Member States implement the mandatory and systematic controls at the EUs
external borders.
In these circumstances, Member States should:
make good use of existing instruments such as the SIS, SIS II and VIS systems, including with reference to stolen, lost and falsified
passports;
give their border guards systematic access to the Europol information system, which may contain information on people suspected of
terrorism;
share good practices with regard to exit and return checks and the freezing of financial assets of citizens;
be able to confiscate the passports of their citizens planning to join terrorist organisations at the request of the competent judicial
authority, according to their national laws and in full compliance with the principle of proportionality;
ensure that foreign fighters are put under judicial control and, where necessary, in administrative detention upon their return to
Europe, until such time as due judicial prosecution takes place.
8) Strengthening links between internal and external security in the EU: Members stressed the vital importance of the EU establishing
close cooperation with third countries, notably transit countries and destination countries, in order to be able to identify EU citizens and
non-European residents leaving to fight for terrorist organisations or returning thereafter.
The EU should increase its cooperation with regional partners in order to curb arms trafficking, targeting in particular the countries where
terrorism originates, and to follow closely the export of armaments that could be exploited by terrorists. Members also called for foreign policy
tools and engagement with third countries to be strengthened with a view to countering the financing of terrorist organisations.
9) Dismantling terrorist networks: Parliament underlined that money laundering, tax evasion and other fiscal crimes are in some cases major
sources of terrorism funding. Tracking and combating crimes affecting the EUs financial interests must therefore be a priority.
Terrorist organisations such as IS/Daesh and Jabhat al-Nusra have accrued substantial financial resources in Iraq and Syria from smuggling
oil, selling stolen goods, kidnapping and extortion, seizing bank accounts and smuggling antiquities. Members called, therefore, for the
countries and the intermediaries contributing to this black market to be identified and their activities brought to a halt as a matter of urgency.
Members called for a harmonised approach to the definition as a criminal offence of hate speech, online and offline, whereby radicals incite
others to disrespect and violate fundamental rights.
Lastly, Parliament called on the Council to create a blacklist of European jihadists and jihadist terrorist suspects.

