Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2061(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EEA-Switzerland: obstacles with regard to the full implementation of the
internal market

Subject
6.40.01 Relations with EEA/EFTA countries
Geographical area
Switzerland

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO

Rapporteur

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Appointed
21/01/2015

SCHWAB Andreas
Shadow rapporteur

GRAPINI Maria

TREBESIUS Ulrike

TØRNÆS Ulla

DURAND Pascal
Committee for opinion
EMPL

Rapporteur for opinion

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
11/03/2015

SANDER Anne
ITRE

European Commission

Industry, Research and Energy

Commission DG

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
Commissioner

Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs BIEŃKOWSKA Elżbieta

Key events
12/03/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

16/07/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

24/07/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

09/09/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

09/09/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

09/09/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information

A8-0244/2015

Summary

T8-0313/2015

Summary

Procedure reference

2015/2061(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

IMCO/8/02964

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE551.920

30/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE554.974

12/05/2015

EP

PE552.049

23/06/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0244/2015

24/07/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0313/2015

09/09/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)748

24/02/2016

Committee opinion

EMPL

2015/2061(INI) - 24/07/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted an own-initiative report by Andreas SCHWAB (EPP, DE) entitled
EEA-Switzerland: Obstacles with regard to the full implementation of the internal market.
To recall, the four European Free Trade Association (EFTA) member states (Iceland, Lichtenstein, Norway and Switzerland) constitute major
trade partners of the European Union (EU), Switzerland and Norway being respectively the fourth and the fifth most important EU trade
partners by volume. Relations between the EU and three EFTA member states (Iceland, Lichtenstein and Norway) are based on the European
Economic Area (EEA), which provides for participation in the internal market.
Switzerlands participation in the EEA Agreement was contested by a popular vote in 1992 and therefore relations between Switzerland and the
EU are currently based on more than 100 sectoral agreements that provide for a far-reaching degree of integration.
Implementation of Single Market legislation: Members considered the EEA Agreement a key factor for economic growth and the most
far-reaching, comprehensive instrument to extend the single market to third countries. Strong relations between the EU, the EEA EFTA
countries and Switzerland went beyond economic integration and the extension of the single market, and contributed to stability and prosperity
to the benefit of all citizens and businesses.
The report welcomed the considerable efforts made with regard to improving the swift incorporation of the relevant EU acquis into the EEA
Agreement. It pointed out that the EEA EFTA states were involved in many EU programmes and agencies and in practical cooperation
measures, such as the Internal Market Information System (SOLVIT).
Members stressed that single market legislation must be properly transposed, implemented and enforced in order to bring about its full
benefits in the EU Member States and EEA EFTA states.
The committee was concerned by the facts that (i) Liechtensteins transposition deficit increased from 0.7 % to 1.2 %; (ii) Iceland (a candidate
country) had a transposition deficit of 2.8 %, which was the highest of all the states concerned; (iii) Norways transposition deficit had increased
to 2%. However, Members welcomed the opening of negotiations on association agreements with the Principality of Andorra, Principality of
Monaco, and Republic of San Marino.
Swiss Confederation: commending the strong, continuously flourishing and longstanding relations between the EU and Switzerland, the report
welcomed the opening of the negotiations in May 2014 for an institutional framework as a precondition for the further development of a
bilateral approach. It stressed that without such a framework agreement no further agreements on Swiss participation in the internal market
would be concluded. The Swiss Government was urged to step up its efforts to progress with the negotiations on the outstanding issues.
Members took note of the outcome of the popular initiative of 9 February 2014 Against Mass Immigration, but considered that the decisions
taken on 11 February 2015 by the Swiss Federal Council in relation to its implementation of a draft implementing law and new flanking
measures ran counter to obligations stemming from the Free Movement of Persons Agreement (FMPA). They reiterated that the free
movement of persons was one of the fundamental freedoms and a pillar of the single market and that it always had been an inseparable part
of and precondition for the bilateral approach between the EU and Switzerland. Accordingly, they fully supported the EUs rejection of July
2014 of the Swiss Authorities request to renegotiate the FMPA with a view to introducing a quota or a national preference system.
Moreover, following the suspension of the negotiations on Swiss participation in the ERASMUS+ programme, the report called on Switzerland
and the EU to make every effort to satisfy the requirements laid down for their participation in the programme.
Regarding the implementation in 2013 of Directive 2005/36/EC on the recognition of professional qualifications, the committee recalled that

this was long overdue and called for a swift incorporation of Directive 2013/55/EU in the annex to the agreement on freedom of movement.
Lastly, it called for the obstacles to cross-border professional mobility to be removed in order to deepen the internal market. Members
stressed, to that end, the importance of promoting language learning and providing better information and practical support to jobseekers, in
particular through the EURES network, in Switzerland and in all the EEA countries.

2015/2061(INI) - 09/09/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 482 votes to 116 with 48 abstentions, a resolution entitled EEA-Switzerland: Obstacles with regard to
the full implementation of the internal market.
To recall, the four European Free Trade Association (EFTA) member states (Iceland, Lichtenstein, Norway and Switzerland) constitute major
trade partners of the European Union (EU), Switzerland and Norway being respectively the fourth and the fifth most important EU trade
partners by volume. Relations between the EU and three EFTA member states (Iceland, Lichtenstein and Norway) are based on the European
Economic Area (EEA), which provides for participation in the internal market.
Switzerlands participation in the EEA Agreement was contested by a popular vote in 1992 and therefore relations between Switzerland and the
EU are currently based on more than 100 sectoral agreements that provide for a far-reaching degree of integration.
Implementation of Single Market legislation: Parliament considered the EEA Agreement a key factor for economic growth and the most
far-reaching, comprehensive instrument to extend the single market to third countries. Strong relations between the EU, the EEA EFTA
countries and Switzerland went beyond economic integration and the extension of the single market, and contributed to stability and prosperity
to the benefit of all citizens and businesses.
Members welcomed the considerable efforts made with regard to improving the swift incorporation of the relevant EU acquis into the EEA
Agreement. They pointed out that the EEA EFTA states were involved in many EU programmes and agencies and in practical cooperation
measures, such as the Internal Market Information System (SOLVIT).
Parliament stressed that single market legislation must be properly transposed, implemented and enforced in order to bring about its full
benefits in the EU Member States and EEA EFTA states.
Transposition deficits: Parliament was concerned by the facts that (i) Liechtensteins transposition deficit increased from 0.7 % to 1.2 %; (ii)
Iceland (a candidate country) had a transposition deficit of 2.8 %, which was the highest of all the states concerned; (iii) Norways transposition
deficit had increased to 2%. However, Members welcomed the opening of negotiations on association agreements with the Principality of
Andorra, Principality of Monaco, and Republic of San Marino.
Swiss Confederation: commending the strong, continuously flourishing and longstanding relations between the EU and Switzerland, the
resolution welcomed the opening of the negotiations in May 2014 for an institutional framework as a precondition for the further development
of a bilateral approach. It stressed that without such a framework agreement no further agreements on Swiss participation in the internal
market would be concluded. The Swiss Government was urged to step up its efforts to progress with the negotiations on the outstanding
issues.
Members took note of the outcome of the popular initiative of 9 February 2014 Against Mass Immigration, but considered that the decisions
taken on 11 February 2015 by the Swiss Federal Council in relation to its implementation of a draft implementing law and new flanking
measures ran counter to obligations stemming from the Free Movement of Persons Agreement (FMPA).
Parliament reiterated that the free movement of persons was one of the fundamental freedoms and a pillar of the single market and that the
latter always had been an inseparable part of and precondition for the bilateral approach between the EU and Switzerland. Accordingly, it fully
supported the EUs rejection of July 2014 of the Swiss Authorities request to renegotiate the FMPA with a view to introducing a quota or a
national preference system.
It noted with concern reports concerning the application by some firms and cantons of a national preference system, and pointed out that such
a practice was at odds with the agreement on freedom of movement.
Stressing that reciprocity and fairness between the EEA and Switzerland were necessary with regard to their use of the single market,
Parliament deplored the introduction and subsequent consolidation of unilateral flanking measures by Switzerland in the context of the
agreement on the free movement of persons, such as the charging of fees to cover administrative costs, the requirement to give bank
guarantees or a combination of such measures, as these were seriously hampering the provision of services in Switzerland under the
agreement, in particular by SMEs. Parliament called on Switzerland, accordingly, to revise these measures in order to bring them into line with
the agreement on freedom of movement.
Moreover, following the suspension of the negotiations on Swiss participation in the ERASMUS+ programme, Parliament called on Switzerland
and the EU to make every effort to satisfy the requirements laid down for their participation in the programme.
Regarding the implementation in 2013 of Directive 2005/36/EC on the recognition of professional qualifications, Members recalled that this
was long overdue and called for a swift incorporation of Directive 2013/55/EU in the annex to the agreement on freedom of movement.
Lastly, Parliament called for the obstacles to cross-border professional mobility to be removed in order to deepen the internal market. It
stressed, to that end, the importance of promoting language learning and providing better information and practical support to jobseekers, in
particular through the EURES network, in Switzerland and in all the EEA countries.

