Procedure file
Basic information
2015/2326(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Monitoring the application of Union law. 2014 annual report

Subject
8.50.01 Implementation of EU law

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
15/09/2015

HAUTALA Heidi
Shadow rapporteur

KAUFMANN
Sylvia-Yvonne

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

MARINHO E PINTO
António
Committee for opinion
INTA

ECON

International Trade

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Economic and Monetary Affairs

17/12/2015
TREMOSA I
BALCELLS Ramon

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

17/09/2015
KOZŁOWSKA-RAJEWICZ
Agnieszka

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

AFCO

Constitutional Affairs

PETI

ANNEMANS Gerolf

Petitions

20/04/2016
03/12/2015

WIKSTRÖM Cecilia

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Secretariat-General

TIMMERMANS Frans

Key events
09/07/2015

Non-legislative basic document published

26/11/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

COM(2015)0329

Summary

05/09/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

09/09/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

06/10/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

06/10/2016

Debate in Parliament

06/10/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

06/10/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0262/2016

Summary

T8-0385/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2015/2326(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/05074

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2015)0329

09/07/2015

EC

PE569.846

18/02/2016

EP

Committee draft report

PE578.513

25/02/2016

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE578.824

05/04/2016

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

Summary

Committee opinion

PETI

PE576.696

22/04/2016

EP

Committee opinion

ECON

PE578.521

28/04/2016

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0262/2016

09/09/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0385/2016

06/10/2016

EP

Summary

2015/2326(INI) - 09/07/2015 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to present the 2014 annual report on monitoring the application of Union law.
CONTENT: this annual report from the Commission reviews the Member States performance on key aspects of the application of EU law and
highlights the main enforcement policy developments of 2014.
Detecting and resolving problems: before infringement proceedings are started, the Commission first opens bilateral discussions with the
Member State concerned via EU Pilot (a Commission initiative aimed at asking Member States to answer questions and to find solutions to
problems related to the application of EU law):
777 EU Pilot investigations were launched in 2014 (in 2013, 1023 were started). Environment, energy, and mobility/transport were the
three policy areas with the most potential infringements. 3715 new complaints were registered in 2014. The Member States primarily
concerned were Italy, Spain and Germany.
By way of petitions and questions, in 2014 the European Parliament alerted the Commission to shortcomings in the way Member
States implement and apply EU law. These include the fields of environment, transport, health and consumers and taxation.
In 2014, the number fell back to its 2011 level: 1208 new files were opened (a fall of approximately 20%). Of the 1336 processed EU
Pilot files in 2014, the Commission closed 996. This is a 75% resolution rate for the Member States, up from 70% in 2013.

Infringement procedure
Pre-litigation phase: in 2014, the Commission launched 893 new procedures by sending a letter of formal notice. The overall decrease
in the number of formal infringement procedures in the last five years (from nearly 2900 to 1347) reflects the effectiveness of
structured dialogue via the EU Pilot in resolving potential infringements quickly, to the benefit of people and businesses. Statistics
confirm that Member States make serious efforts to settle their infringements before the Court hands down its ruling.
Referrals to the Court of Justice: the Court delivered 38 judgments under Article 258 TFEU in 2014, of which 35 (92%) were in favour
of the Commission. Environment (10), taxation (8) and enterprise and industry (5) were the subject of the most judgments delivered by
the Court during 2014. Member States frequently take the necessary measures to comply with the judgment of the Court promptly.
In the coming year, the Commission aims to strengthen cooperation with Member States to prevent infringements from arising and speed up
correction of breaches of EU law where necessary.
Transposition of directives: late transposition of directives by Member States remains a persistent problem. Combating late transposition is
therefore a long-established priority for the Commission.
There were fewer directives to transpose in 2014 than in the previous year i.e. 67 compared with 74 in 2013) but more than in 2012 (56).
However, there was a significant increase in new late transposition infringements in 2014 compared with the previous year: 585 new late
transposition infringements were launched in 2014 compared with 478 in 2013.
The rising number of infringements relating to late transposition shows that prompt transposition continues to be a challenge in numerous
Member States and requires an effective response by the Commission. Timely and correct transposition of EU law into national legislation and
a clear domestic legislative framework should be a priority for the Member States.
Once directives are adopted, the Commission will use the period before the transposition deadline expires to focus on providing
assistance to Member States on implementation.
After the transposition deadline expires, the Commission will strengthen enforcement of EU law based on structured and systematic
transposition and conformity checks of national legislation.
Policy developments: in 2014, the Commission continued its efforts to inform people better about their rights under EU law and to ensure that
they find suitable mechanisms of redress, if they consider these rights have been breached. These efforts focused on providing better access
to information on the application of EU law, on problem-solving instruments (such as SOLVIT) for EU citizens and businesses in Member
States and on improving the handling of complaints from EU citizens and businesses about breaches of EU law.
The Commission also provides implementation plans to make it easier to apply the Union law effectively and on time, while fully recognising
that applying the Union law is the responsibility of Member States. The implementation plans are drafted at an early stage when drafting new
legislation.
Better Regulation Agenda: the Commission will focus on ensuring the clarity, operability and enforceability of EU legislation. This objective
cannot be achieved without an active contribution from all parties involved in the EUs legislative process. Increased attention will be paid to
aspects of implementation, management and enforcement, both when the Commission drafts proposals and throughout the legislative
process.
Lastly, with its Regulatory Fitness and Performance Programme (REFIT), and Communication of June 2014, the Commission set out an
ambitious agenda with almost 200 individual actions to simplify and reduce the regulatory burden, repeal existing regulation and withdraw
proposals for new regulation.

2015/2326(INI) - 09/09/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Heidi HAUTALA (Greens/EFA, FI) following the annual report of 2014 on
monitoring the application of Union law.
Members stressed the Commissions essential role in overseeing the application of EU law. They called on the Commission to continue its
active role in developing various tools to improve EU law implementation, in the Member States, and to provide data, in addition to that on the
implementation of EU directives, on implementation of EU regulations in its next annual report.
Role of Parliament and stakeholders: while recalling that the role of monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of EU law lies with the
Commission, Members acknowledged that Parliament also has a crucial role to play in this regard by exercising political oversight of the
Commissions enforcement actions. They suggested that it could contribute further to the timely and accurate transposition of EU legislation by
sharing its expertise in the legislative decision-making process through pre-established links with national parliaments.
The report also stressed the important role of the social partners, civil society organisations and other stakeholders in creating legislation and
in monitoring and reporting shortcomings in the transposition and application of EU law by the Member States. It called on the European
institutions to agree on more suitable timetables for the implementation of regulations and directives, whereby due account is taken of
necessary scrutiny and consultation periods.
Candidate countries: Members felt that Parliament itself should play a stronger role in the analysis of how accession countries and countries
with association agreements with the European Union comply with EU law, and provide those countries with suitable assistance.
More transparency: the report noted that the increase in the number of new EU Pilot files during the period under examination, and the
decrease in the number of open infringement cases, show that the EU Pilot system has proved its usefulness, and has had a positive impact. It
reiterated, however, that the enforcement of EU law is neither sufficiently transparent nor subject to any real control by the complainants and
the interested parties. Members regretted that, despite repeated requests, Parliament still has inadequate access to information about the EU
Pilot procedure and pending cases.
Pointing out that sincere cooperation between the Commission and Parliament is an obligation incumbent on them both, Members called for
the Framework Agreement on Relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission to be revised so as to enable
information about EU Pilot procedures to be supplied in the form of a (confidential) document to the parliamentary committee responsible.

In this context, the report also underlined that the Committee on Legal Affairs has set up a new Working Group on Administrative Law, which
could be a source of inspiration for the Commission, to show that a regulation on the administrative procedure of the Unions administration
would be both useful and feasible to enact.
The Commission was asked to present a legislative proposal on a European law of administrative procedure and to make compliance with EU
law a real political priority, to be pursued in close collaboration with Parliament.

2015/2326(INI) - 06/10/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 490 votes to 61, with 57 abstentions, a resolution following the annual report of 2014 on monitoring the
application of Union law.
Members stressed the Commissions essential role in overseeing the application of EU law. They called on the Commission to continue its
active role in developing various tools to improve EU law implementation, in the Member States, and to provide data, in addition to that on the
implementation of EU directives, on implementation of EU regulations in its next annual report.
Role of Parliament and stakeholders: while recalling that the role of monitoring and evaluation of the implementation of EU law lies with the
Commission, Members acknowledged that Parliament also has a crucial role to play in this regard by exercising political oversight of the
Commissions enforcement actions. They suggested that it could contribute further to the timely and accurate transposition of EU legislation by
sharing its expertise in the legislative decision-making process through pre-established links with national parliaments.
Parliament also stressed the important role of the social partners, civil society organisations and other stakeholders in creating legislation and
in monitoring and reporting shortcomings in the transposition and application of EU law by the Member States.
It appreciated the importance attributed in the Commissions annual report to petitions submitted by citizens, businesses and civil society
organisations.
Better enforcement: Parliament welcomed the fact that the new Interinstitutional Agreement on better law-making contains provisions that aim
to improve the implementation and application of EU law and to encourage more structured cooperation in this respect. It supported the call,
expressed in the agreement, for better identification of national measures that are not strictly related to Union legislation (a practice known as
gold plating).
Members called on the European institutions to agree on more suitable timetables for the implementation of regulations and directives,
whereby due account is taken of necessary scrutiny and consultation periods.
Candidate countries: Members felt that Parliament itself should play a stronger role in the analysis of how accession countries and countries
with association agreements with the European Union comply with EU law, and provide those countries with suitable assistance. It is
suggested that Parliament should draft proper reports, not simply resolutions, on all candidate countries in response to the annual progress
reports released by the Commission.
More transparency: Parliament noted that the increase in the number of new EU Pilot files during the period under examination, and the
decrease in the number of open infringement cases, show that the EU Pilot system has proved its usefulness, and has had a positive impact. It
reiterated, however, that the enforcement of EU law is neither sufficiently transparent nor subject to any real control by the complainants and
the interested parties. Members regretted that, despite repeated requests, Parliament still has inadequate access to information about the EU
Pilot procedure and pending cases.
Pointing out that sincere cooperation between the Commission and Parliament is an obligation incumbent on them both, Parliament called for
the Framework Agreement on Relations between the European Parliament and the European Commission to be revised so as to enable
information about EU Pilot procedures to be supplied in the form of a (confidential) document to the parliamentary committee responsible.
In this context, the resolution also underlined that the Committee on Legal Affairs has set up a new Working Group on Administrative Law,
which could be a source of inspiration for the Commission, to show that a regulation on the administrative procedure of the Unions
administration would be both useful and feasible to enact.
The Commission was asked to present a legislative proposal on a European law of administrative procedure and to make compliance with EU
law a real political priority, to be pursued in close collaboration with Parliament.

