Main BCPs between
EB-RAN countries and the EU
Regional borders
NORWAY

Common borders

Pan-European Transport Corridors

SWEDEN

Eastern Borders
Annual Risk Analysis 2013
FINLAND

ESTONIA

LATVIA
LITHUANIA

POLAND

CZECH
REPUBLIC
SLOVAKIA

USTRIA
HUNGARY
ROMANIA

Source: Open source data, ESRI geodata

Eastern Borders
Annual Risk Analysis 2013

1 of 42

Frontex official publications fall into four main categories: risk analysis, training, operations
and research, each marked with a distinct graphic identifier. Risk analysis publications
bear a triangular symbol formed by an arrow drawing a triangle, with a dot at the centre.
Metaphorically, the arrow represents the cyclical nature of risk analysis processes and its
orientation towards an appropriate operational response. The triangle is a symbol of ideal
proportions and knowledge, reflecting the pursuit of factual exactness, truth and exhaustive
analysis. The dot at the centre represents the intelligence factor and the focal point where
information from diverse sources converges to be processed, systematised and shared as
analytical products. Thus, Frontex risk analysis is meant to be at the centre and to form
a reliable basis for its operational activities.

European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
Rondo ONZ 1
00-124 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu
Warsaw, July 2013
Risk Analysis Unit
Frontex reference number: 7108/2013

DISCLAIMERS
This is a Frontex staff working document. This publication or its contents do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of Frontex concerning the legal status of
any country, territory or city or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers
or boundaries. All maps and charts included in this report are the sole property of Frontex and
any unauthorised use is prohibited. Frontex disclaims any liability with respect to the boundaries, names and designations used on the maps. The contents of open-source boxes are unverified and presented only to give context and media representation of irregular-migration
phenomena.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013 has been prepared by the Frontex Risk Analysis
Unit. During the course of developing this product, many colleagues at Frontex and outside
contributed to it and their assistance is hereby acknowledged with gratitude.

2 of 42

Table of contents
Executive summary #5
1. Background and methodology #7
1.1.	Data collection and additional information #7
1.2. Quality of available data #8
1.3. Application of the Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model #8
2. S
 ituation at the common borders – the context #10
2.1. Border controls #13
2.2. Institutional factors affecting border controls #17
2.3. The main migratory movements in the region #18
3. Annual risk assessment #21
3.1. 	Risk of cross-border smuggling and exploitation of green/blue borders as a
point of entry for smuggled goods #22
3.2. 	Risk of significant irregular migration flows from non-CIS countries #28
3.3. 	Risk of sustained irregular migration flows from CIS countries #32
4. Outlook #36
5. Statistical annex #37

3 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

List of abbreviations used
ARA			 Annual Risk Analysis
BCP			border-crossing point
CBŚ			 Centralne Biuro Śledcze (Polish Central Bureau of Investigation)
CCTV			closed-circuit television
CIRAM		 Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model
CIS			 Commonwealth of Independent States
EB				Eastern Borders
EBC			 Eastern Borders Conference
EB-RAN		 Eastern Borders Risk Analysis Network
EDF-RAN European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network
FSKN			 Russian Federal Service for Control of Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
EU 			 European Union
EUR 			euro
FMS			 Federal Migration Service of the Russian Federation
FRAN 		 Frontex Risk Analysis Network
GDP			 gross domestic product
GPS			 Global Positioning System
JO 			 Joint Operation
LBTA			 local border traffic agreement
MS		
Member State
OCG			 organised crime group
OECD		Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
RFI			 request for information
SIS 			 Schengen Information System
UAH			Ukrainian hryvnia
UEFA			 Union of European Football Associations
UK 			 United Kingdom
UNODC		 United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
USD			 United States dollar
VIN			 Vehicle Identification Number
VIS			 Visa Information System
WTO			 World Trade Organization

4 of 42

Executive summary
In 2012, border security at the borders between Member States and Belarus, Ukraine,
Moldova and the Russian Federation (common borders) was shaped by several interlinking factors.
First, overall regular passenger flows continued to grow in 2012, most notably at the
Polish-Russian (+70%) and Norwegian-Russian (roughly +30%) borders. The growth was
driven by expanding legal travel channels and
long-term economic developments in the
Russian Federation, both encouraging the
mobility of people and goods.
Second, and somewhat connected to regular
passenger flows, the smuggling of excise and
illicit goods remained a major threat to border security. Data collected within the Eastern European Borders Risk Analysis Network
(EB-RAN), as well as during Frontex-coordinated Joint Operations, indicate that the
smuggling of tobacco products and petrol was
especially common. Additionally, cross-border criminal activities also included attempts
to smuggle stolen vehicles and, perhaps to
a lesser extent, illicit drugs. Smuggling occurred primarily through official border-crossing points (BCPs); however, a variety of modi
operandi were also detected at green borders
(between BCPs).
Third, there were more irregular movements
of people across the common borders in 2012.
This observation in substantiated by an increasing number of detected illegal bordercrossings between BCPs, more refusals of
entry issued by Member States and more detections of people trying to exit the EU while

no longer fulfilling conditions of stay (the socalled illegal stay on exit).
Member States reported 1 597 detections of
illegal border-crossing between BCPs, or 52%
more compared to 2011, mostly due to Somalis, Afghans and Vietnamese arriving from
Ukraine or Belarus. However, Georgians remained the most frequently detected nationality with a 21% share of the total number of
detections.
Although most detections of illegal bordercrossing occurred at the Slovakian-Ukrainian border, the growth of detections was
most pronounced in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland. Regardless of this growth,
the detections of illegal border-crossing
along the 6 000-kilometre common borders accounted for only 2% of all illegal border-crossings at the EU’s external borders
during 2012.
On the other hand, more than one-third (34%)
of all refusals of entry into the EU in 2012 were
issued by Member States’ authorities at the
common borders. Out of almost 40 000 (up
from 30 848 in 2011) refusals of entry, Poland’s
share was 70% of this total.
The phenomenon of migrants detected for
illegal stay on exit to Ukraine from Hungary
or Poland also grew during 2012. This could
be somewhat related to worsening job opportunities in traditional destination Member States for Ukrainian migrants (e.g. Italy,
Spain and Poland). Hungary and Poland indicated that some detected overstayers had
entered the EU as early as in 2003.

5 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

6 of 42

1. Background and methodology
The European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the EU
(Frontex) created the concept of Eastern Borders Conference (EBC) in August 2008. The
EBC was designed as a regular activity/forum
where specific challenges related to irregular migration at the eastern borders of the
EU could be addressed by the FRAN (Frontex Risk Analysis Network) and the relevant
neighbouring third countries.
By 2009 Frontex had signed cooperation arrangements with Ukraine, the Russian Federation, Moldova and Belarus. Subsequently,
Frontex proposed to set up a permanent
Eastern European Borders Risk Analysis Network (EB-RAN), to be comprised of the competent Border Control Authorities from the
four countries and the Risk Analysis Unit of
Frontex. Additional agreements were later
signed allowing for the establishment of regular information exchange and joint analytical activities: with Moldova in March 2009
(Cooperation Plan), with Ukraine in November 2010 (Mechanism on information exchange for risk analysis cooperation) and
with Belarus in November 2010 (Memorandum on regular exchange of information
and joint analytical activities). Importantly,
the Russian Federation opted to stay out of
the EB-RAN.*

1.1. Data collection and
additional information
The core of this risk analysis consists of the
EB-RAN and monthly statistical data from
neighbouring FRAN members: Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary and Romania (only common
borders) covering the year 2012. There are five

key indicators of irregular migration: (1) detections of illegal border-crossing, (2) detections of facilitators, (3) detections of illegal
stay, (4) refusals of entry and (5) asylum applications. The last indicator used in previous reports (detections of false documents)
is now covered by the European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network (EDFRAN) with its statistical templates. Unlike
previous years, instead of the FRAN indicator on the use of false documents reported
by Member States, EDF-RAN templates are
only reported by Member State BCPs, which
resulted in a lower number of reported cases.
In addition, this Eastern Borders Annual Risk
Analysis (EB-ARA) will follow the notion of
risk as defined by the updated Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model (CIRAM), introduced in 2012.
As the statistical data from the Russian Federation were not broken down by border section, they were used only as a background
material.
All EB-RAN countries were addressed, prior
to the expert meeting of 21 March 2013, with
a Request for Information (RFI) covering the
main risks defined in 2012 in accordance with
CIRAM methodology. Answers were received
from Ukraine, Moldova and Belarus.
Other sources were used, in particular, bimonthly analytical reports from Member
States, FRAN Quarterlies, Tailored Risk Analyses produced in 2012 and Frontex reporting
from different Joint Operations coordinated
by Frontex.
Open sources were also effectively exploited.
Among others, these sources included reports
issued by government agencies, EU institu-

* Even though the Russian
Federation stays out
of the Eastern Borders
Risk Analysis Network,
whenever EB-RAN
countries are mentioned
in the report, the term
covers Ukraine, Moldova,
the Russian Federation
and Belarus, unless
otherwise indicated.

7 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

tions and international or non-governmental organisations.

sionally vary from data published officially
by national authorities.

This Annual Risk Analysis builds up on the
knowledge from three Eastern Borders Annual Overviews from 2010–2012.

The use of slightly adapted FRAN monthly
statistical templates by EB-RAN countries
created some compatibility issues between
the FRAN and EB-RAN data sets. In particular, reasons for refusals of entry (Indicator 4)
are standardised for FRAN members (Schengen Borders Code), but vary among EB-RAN
members according to national legislation.
Detections of illegal border-crossing at BCPs
(Indicator 1B), as reported by EB-RAN countries, should also be analysed with caution
since they may also include figures on persons using forged documents (Indicator 6). It
should also be taken into consideration that
figures for illegal stay (Indicator 3) refer only
to detections at the border on exit of persons
overstaying in a particular country.

1.2. Quality of available data
Consistent with other law-enforcement indicators, variation in administrative data related
to border control depends on several factors.
In this case, the number of detections of illegal border-crossing and refusals of entry are
both functions of the amount of effort spent
detecting migrants and the flow of irregular
migrants. For example, increased detections
of illegal border-crossing might be due to an
actual increase in the flow of irregular migrants or they may in fact be an outcome of
more resources made available to detect migrants. In exceptional cases, an influx of resources may produce an increase in reported
detections while effectively masking the actual decrease in the flow of migrants resulting from a strong deterrent effect.
Similar issues should be taken into account
regarding the number of detections of crossborder crime at the borders. Higher numbers
of detections at a particular BCP might indicate a surge in criminality, but may also be
the result of more efficient border controls
and/or the presence of specialists whose expertise in a certain area (e.g. the identification of stolen vehicles) may raise the number
of detections.
The statistical data used for this analysis
should not be considered as official statistics but rather as information management
to support the planning of joint operational
activities. The data might, therefore, occa-

8 of 42

1.3. Application of the Common
Integrated Risk Analysis Model
A key development in the CIRAM update released in 2011 is the adoption of the management approach to risk analysis that defines
risk as a function of threat, vulnerability and
impact (see Fig. 1). Such an approach endeavours to emphasise risk analysis as a key tool in
ensuring the optimal allocation of resources
within the constraints of budget, staff and
efficiency of equipment. According to the
model, a ‘threat’ is a force or pressure acting upon the external borders that is characterised by both its magnitude and likelihood;
‘vulnerability’ is defined as the capacity of a
system to mitigate the threat, and ‘impact’
is determined as the potential consequences
of the threat. In this way, the structured and
systematic breakdown of risk is presented in
the risk assessment chapter.

Figure 1. Common Integrated Risk Analysis Model (CIRAM)

risk
Threat

Vulnerability

Magnitude and
likelihood

Level of vulnerability
(EU, Member State
of entry/destination)

Modus operandi

Who, where, when

Trends and predictions
(increase, decrease,
stable, historical)

Push factors

Border permeability
(terrain, infrastructure,
capabilities, flows)
Operational activities
(staff, training,
interoperability)
Effectiveness of
countermeasures

Impact
Level of impact of the threat
(EU, Member State
of entry/destination)

Border and internal security

Ability to manage
legitimate passenger flow
at border

Humanitarian impact

Pull factors

Routes (difficulty and distance),
access to facilitation

9 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

2. S
 ituation at the common
borders – the context
Table 1. Summary of FRAN, EB-RAN* and selected Member States** indicators for 2012
EU Totals

EU MSs (eastern land
borders only)

% of EU total

EB-RAN

Indicator
Illegal border-crossing between BCPs

77 437

1 597

2.1%

591

5

0.8%

6

Facilitators

7 720

39

0.5%

96

Illegal stay

344 928

7 761

2.3%

32 373

Refusals of entry

115 305

39 749

34%

28 588

Applications for asylum

272 208

30 460

11%

271

False travel documents

n.a.

n.a.

n.a.

236

Return decision issued

269 949

36 973

14%

n.a.

Effective returns

159 490

20 461

13%

n.a.

Clandestine entries

* 2012 data from Belarus, Moldova and Ukraine
** Norway, Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia, Hungary and Romania

10 of 42

3 702

Figure 2. EB-RAN and FRAN indicators – common borders
Monthly detections of facilitators reported by EB-RAN
and FRAN neighbouring countries

Monthly applications for international protection reported by EB-RAN countries
35

80

2010
2011
2012

30

2010
2011
2012

70
60

25

50

20

40

15

30

10

20

5

10

0

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

0

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

700

4 000
3 500

600

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

2010
2011
2012

4 500

2010
2011
2012

Jun

Monthly detections of illegal stayers reported by EB-RAN
and FRAN neighbouring countries

Monthly detections of illegal border-crossing between BCPs reported
by EB-RAN and FRAN neighbouring countries

800

May

3 000

500

2 500

400

2 000

300

1 500

200

1 000

100

500
0

0

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Monthly applications for international protection reported
by EB-RAN and FRAN neighbouring countries
4 000

2010
2011
2012

3 500

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Monthly detections of persons using fraudulent documents
to illegally enter the territories of EB-RAN countries

60

2010
2011
2012

50

3 000

40

2 500
2 000

30

1 500

20

1 000

10

500
0

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

0

Jan

Mar

Apr

May

9 000

2010
2011
2012

300

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

2010
2011
2012

8 000
7 000

250

Jun

Monthly refusals fo entry reported by EB-RAN
and FRAN neighbouring countries

Monthly detections of illegal border-crossing at BCPs reported
by EB-RAN and FRAN neighbouring countries

350

6 000

200

5 000

150

4 000
3 000

100

2 000

50
0

Feb

1 000

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

0

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Source: WB-RAN and FRAN data as of 18 February 2013

11 of 42

Oct

Nov

Dec

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

General map of the region
Main BCPs between
EB-RAN countries and the EU
Regional borders
NORWAY

Common borders
Pan-European Transport Corridors

SWEDEN

FINLAND

ESTONIA

LATVIA
LITHUANIA

POLAND

NY

CZECH
REPUBLIC
SLOVAKIA
AUSTRIA
HUNGARY
ROMANIA

ALY

Source: Open source data, ESRI geodata

Figure 3. Common borders stretch from the Barents Sea in the north to the Black Sea in the south

12 of 42

2.1. Border controls
Regular passenger flows
The total number of regular border-crossings at the common borders was 69 million
in 2012 (FRAN data). There was a significant
growth recorded especially at some border
sections between Members States and the
Russian Federation. Depending on the border section, the main reasons for growth include the following factors: (a) increased visa
issuance by Member States, (b) implementation of local border traffic agreements (LBTA),
and (c) overall growth of shopping-related
cross-border travel by both EU and EB-RAN
country nationals.
The Polish-Ukrainian section remained the
busiest common border with roughly 15 million border-crossings (+8%). However, here
the number of border-crossings has not yet
reached the level of the period before Poland’s
Schengen membership. At this border section,
the peak volume of traffic was recorded in
2006 with 19.4 million border-crossings. Traffic volume dropped to 11.6 million in 2009,
but the local border traffic agreement with
Ukraine has now partially compensated for
this drop. According to the latest data available from the Polish Border Guard, there were
4.3 million border-crossings made under the
LBTA in the first three quarters of 2012 alone.
The Polish-Russian border recorded the most
significant growth of +70% (4.1 million). Likewise, the traffic grew almost 30% in yearon-year terms at the Norwegian-Russian
border (from a low base though). At both
these border sections, local border traffic
agreements (LBTA) came into effect during
the summer of 2012.
Growth also continued at the Finnish-Russian border (+13%, 12 million), even though it
was slower than in the previous year (+27%
in 2011). Finnish visa issuance in the Russian

Figure 4. Shares of different border sections
on the total number of regular border
crossings
ROU-UKR
3%

LTU-RUS
4%
POL-RUS
6%

SVK-UKR
4%

LVA-BLR
1%

POL-UKR
22%

ROU-MDA
6%
FIN-RUS
17%

EST-RUS
8%
LTU-BLR
9%

POL-BLR
13%

Source: ARA 2013, RFI for passenger data

Federation reached roughly 1.3 million visas
in 2012, the majority of which were multiple entry one-year visas. However, the main
long-term factor behind the growth of border traffic at Russian borders is economic
growth and the rising purchasing power of
Russian citizens that has facilitated foreign
travel and cross-border mobility in general.
Therefore, the growth of border traffic was
mainly driven by the increased border-crossing by Russian nationals making short-stay
visits in Finland. For example, according to
surveys conducted at the Finnish side of the
border, 77% of the Russian nationals told that
their reason to enter Finland was shopping.
Indeed, it is estimated that Russian tourists
spent over EUR 1 billion on goods and services in Finland during 2012.
The impact of customs regulations and
changes to the prices of goods, such as petrol, on the volume of border traffic at some
border sections is difficult to predict. By and
large, judging on the increased visa issuance, local border traffic agreements and
the growing number of Russian nationals

13 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

Regular passenger flows at common borders in 2012
Russian Federation

Finland

Norway

Estonia

Finland

Latvia

Russian Federation

Lithuania

Border sections with less
than 30% share of EU nationals

Russian Fed.

2.5 million border crossings
Belarus

Poland

Ukraine
Slovakia

Moldova

Hungary

Romania

Croatia
Bosnia &
Herzegovina

Serbia

Source: ARA 2013, RFI for passenger data

Figure 5. Regular border traffic at the common borders

obtaining passports for foreign travel (see
box), there seems to be a potential for further growth of cross-border traffic at the
common borders in 2013. There is also a potential for growth in regular passenger ferry

14 of 42

traffic between St. Petersburg and Helsinki,
and between Tallinn and Stockholm, facilitated in part by the 72-hour visa-freedom in the Russian Federation for cruise
passengers.

Composition of regular passenger flows
There are significant variations between different border sections at the common border in terms of composition of passenger
flow. The Polish-Belarusian border had the
lowest share of EU nationals (11%) among the
border sections. This is mostly due to two
factors. First, there is a large volume of transit traffic going through this section, such
as international railway connections from
Moscow, via Minsk, to Poland. Second, this
border section has the busiest lorry traffic
among Polish borders with a million registered border-crossings, followed by the
border with Ukraine (0.7 million crossings).
Heavy lorries are mainly operated by nonEU nationals.

Estonia
Norway

Latvia
Lithuania

Finland
Belarus
Poland

Russian
Federation

LBTA in force
LBTA signed, not ratified
250 000 border-area
residents affected

Ukraine

Slovakia
Hungary

The Polish-Ukrainian border section recorded
a 19% share of EU nationals. In this case,
Ukrainian local border traffic users represent a large share of border-crossers (shopping tourism). At the Estonian-Russian and
Finnish-Russian border, the share of EU nationals was almost 30% of the total regular
traffic, at least partly due to the growing
shopping-related travel by Russian nationals.

Romania
Serbia
Source: Open sources

Figure 6. Local border traffic agreements between eastern border
Member States and neighbouring countries

Interest in international travel grows in the Russian Federation
One important factor increasing the travel potential in the Russian Federation is the growth
in the number of passports. The Russian Migration Service (FMS) informed that in 2012
Russians applied for and were issued about 7 million passports, of which 4.8 million were
of the new biometric type. The FMS also confirmed that the first Russian passports with
fingerprints would be issued starting from 1 July, 2013. However, the FMS continues to issue
both the old type of passports valid for five years and the new biometric ones, which are
valid for ten years.
While the total number of passports in the Russian Federation was estimated at only about
20 million just a few years ago, at the present issuance rate this number will more than
double in less than a decade. The growing number of passports will strongly increase
the potential for cross-border traffic towards the EU.

15 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

Figure 7. Share of EU nationals within the total volume of regular
border-crossings by border sections
EU citizens

non-EU citizens

100%
90%

firmations, the customs office in Biała Podlaska alone issued 0.75 million. The volume of
4 million vehicles crossing the Polish-Belarusian border includes 1 million cargo vehicles
and 15 000 cargo trains. This border section
has also the highest share of passenger trains
at EU external borders (6 160).*

80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

* http://www.mf.gov.pl/
documents/764034/1394761/
Biuletyn+za+IIII+kwarta%C5%82+2012r

LVA-RUS

SVK-UKR

LVA-BLR

ROU-UKR

POL-RUS

ROU-MDA

LTU-RUS

LTU-BLR

FIN-RUS

EST-RUS

POL-UKR

POL-BLR

0%

Increasing regular passenger flow – especially when connected to tourism – does
not pose a security risk as such. However,
the growth of traffic creates challenges
for the infrastructure and personnel of
BCPs. This requires efforts from the border authorities on both sides of the border to plan and coordinate resources and
the development of infrastructure in the
most efficient way.
Regular flow of goods
The economic growth of eastern border
countries has resulted in an increased volume of imports, which in turn is reflected as
increased cargo traffic at the common borders. In the Russian Federation alone the
value of imports has grown from USD 76.1 billion in 2003 to USD 323.2 billion in 2011. The
Russian Federation’s WTO membership is expected to enhance its imports further in the
long term. A large part of these imports are
transported through Pan-European Corridors
that connect the Western and Eastern Europe, as well as North and South via Belarus,
Ukraine and Moldova (see Fig. 3).
The data concerning the number of issued export goods’ confirmations by Poland shows,
for example, that of the total 1.4 million con-

16 of 42

At the Finnish-Russian borders the number of lorries crossing the border has not
yet reached the levels of 2008, when over
500 000 lorries with cargo left for the Russian Federation through Finnish borders. One
of the main reasons is the expansion of major Russian ports in the Gulf of Finland, such
as Ust-Luga, which have taken part of the
traffic previously transiting through Finland
straight to the Russian Federation.
Indeed, the Baltic will remain the Russian
Federation’s main sea route for foreign trade
in the coming years, both in terms of imports
and exports. The Russian Federation’s Baltic
ports already handle nearly half of the imports
arriving by sea. Major capacity growth is expected in Ust-Luga as well as at the ports of
St. Petersburg and Bronka. While the growth
of traffic to Russian ports is likely to take
some pressure off the land borders, it will
increase the need for maritime cooperation
between coast guards in the region.
Additionally, Baltic countries receive a significant volume of cargo traffic transiting to
the Kaliningrad Oblast, using special permissions for border-crossing (Facilitated Transit
Document and Facilitated Rail Transit Document). In both cases these documents introduced by Council Regulation (EC) 693/2003
allow direct transit overland to third-country nationals travelling between two parts
of their country (which are not geographically contiguous).
As in the case of passenger traffic, cargo traffic at the common borders does pose a challenge to the capacity of different BCPs. Some

Figure 8. E
 stonian example of web-portal indented to speed-up the
customs checks and shortens the queues of lorries

Enhanced cooperation and sharing of tasks
between border guards and customs officers is another effective measure. At the Nuijamaa BCP in Finland this has made it possible
to introduce ‘one-stop-checks’ of commercial and vehicle traffic, whereby one officer
inspects both transported goods and travel
documents (first-line checks). The use of common databases and information systems by
the Customs, Border Guards and traffic police made the use of resources more efficient,
while also increasing the speed of border
checks.

© estonianborder.eu

solutions to this challenge can be offered by
technology: automated border checks, which
have already been launched at some BCPs at
the Finnish border with the Russian Federation, full use of possible advanced passenger
information and web-portals allowing vehicles waiting for customs control to register
in advance (see Fig. 8).

Visa liberalisation process
The EU is currently engaged in visa dialogues
with the Russian Federation, Ukraine and
the Republic of Moldova. As witnessed in
the case of other LBTAs, important changes
in the level of border traffic intensity can be
expected should visa obligations be abolished
for the three mentioned countries.

Increasing visa issuance

According to the European Commission, Moldova has progressed on its commitments
related to the liberalisation of the visa regime. In case of Ukraine, the process has
been delayed. However, the European Commission noted the legislative progress made
by Ukraine in 2013.

There were 5 556 941 short-term visas issued by Member States (excluding the UK
and Ireland) in the Russian Federation during 2011.** The number represents a 24% increase compared to the previous year. This
significant increase is similar to the increase
of 28% observed between 2009 and 2010.
In total, short-term visas issued in the Russian Federation accounted for 41% of all category C visas issued by Member States in
2011. Ukraine followed with 1 270 157 visas
issued in 2011, marking an increase of 20%
compared to 2010.

Visa dialogue between the EU and the Russian Federation entered into an implementation phase of the Common Steps*, which
were agreed on at the end of 2011. Field missions were implemented both by the EU and
the Russian Federation. While the timetable
leading to actual negotiations and to possible visa liberalisation is not yet determined,
a preliminary analysis of its impact shows
that visa liberalisation between the Russian
Federation and the EU would be, up to this
date, the single largest institutional change
affecting the common borders.

Finland issued by far the largest number of visas (1 182 876) in the Russian Federation, followed by Spain (699 815), Italy (579 492) and
Greece (513 223). Poland was the biggest issuer of visas in Ukraine (369 893).

Steady growth of traffic at the Finnish-Russian land border coupled with the recent figures from the Polish-Russian land border
suggest that the potential for a further increase in regular traffic is substantial.

2.2. Institutional factors
affecting border controls

* For more information
on Common Steps please
visit http://ec.europa.
eu/dgs/home-affairs/
what-is-new/news/
news/2013/20130311_02_
en.htm
** At the time of writing
of this report data on
EU visa issuance for 2012
were not yet available.
Visa data are collected
on the basis of the place
where the application
is made rather than
the nationality of the
visa applicant. Thus, for
instance, applications
made in the Russian
Federation do not
necessarily concern
only Russian nationals.
However, the data can be
used as the most suitable
approximation of the
number of visas issued to
citizens of that country.

17 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

In addition, the nature of the border checks
would change since the vetting of travellers
would become the full responsibility of border authorities. This would affect most border
checks performed at those border sections
that currently receive the most travellers
crossing the border under visa obligation (i.e.
Estonia-Russian Federation, Finland-Russian Federation).
UEFA Football Championship 2012
The UEFA Football Championship hosted by
Poland and Ukraine in June-July 2012 was the
most important mass sporting event affecting the common borders during that year.
Both countries simplified border checks by
the setting up of one-stop controls at the
BCPs on the Polish side of the border to facilitate border-crossing for the supporters.
Ukraine and Moldova launched a common
operation and reported incidents to Frontex.
Additionally, Ukraine, in cooperation with Belarus and the Russian Federation, prepared
simplifications for passengers at its borders
with these countries.
During the event the main challenges for border authorities were how to tackle problems
with expected increases in regular traffic and
how to prevent potential disturbances caused
by supporters at the BCPs. Simplifications in
border controls agreed between Poland and
Ukraine ensured the smooth functioning of
border checks for supporters going to the
matches. In addition, the presence of Guest
Officers from the countries participating in
the sporting event had a positive effect on
the supporters.
Similarly to previous experiences during
other big sporting events, information from
the Frontex-coordinated Joint Operation
EuroCup 2012 suggested no increase in the
number of incidents linked to trafficking
in human beings or migrants trying to use

18 of 42

false documents under the pretence that
they were football supporters.

2.3. The main migratory
movements in the region
There are two main migratory systems affecting both EB-RAN countries and the
neighbouring Member States in the area.
They are driven by several factors, such as
economic development, demand for labour,
wage differences, geography and important
historical or linguistic ties. Importantly, the
first one attracts migrants to the Russian
Federation, while the other draws migrants
to the EU. These migratory movements are
mostly legal, however, they do include irregular elements such as illegal border-crossing,
illegal work, abuse of social benefits system
and overstaying.
Destination: the Russian Federation
The Russian Federation remains by far the
main destination country for CIS-country
migrants. This preference may be explained
by good work opportunities, close historic
and linguistic ties, large migrant communities existing in the Russian Federation, cheap
travel options and relatively easy legal entry
into the Russian Federation.
The growth of the Russian economy and
structural changes in labour demand have
transformed the Russian labour market over
the past decade. Sectors such as construction and services have grown substantially
and are increasingly dependent on foreign
labour, which is readily available in Central
Asia and the South Caucasus, as well as in
Moldova and Ukraine.
Estimates of the size of the foreign labour force
(both legal and irregular) in the Russian Federation vary. The Russian Federal Migration
Service puts the number of irregular labour
migrants in the Russian Federation at 4 mil-

lion.* According to the OECD, irregular and
temporary migrants make up roughly 7% (or
about 4.25 million) of the Russian Federation’s
75-million-strong workforce, a larger share
than in any other OECD member country.
Pull factors for irregular migrants to seek employment in the Russian Federation are strong
due to important wage differences between
the origin and destination countries. For example, the average monthly income in Tajikistan was roughly USD 100 in 2012 (OECD
data), while in the Russian Federation the average monthly wage was already over USD
800 in 2011. Moreover, many Central Asian
countries are heavily dependent on exporting labour. According to Tajikistan’s Finance
Ministry, in 2012 Tajik migrants working in the
Russian Federation sent home USD 3.8 billion
in remittances, which is a 31% year-on-year
increase and equals 47% of the country’s GDP.
Russian migration policies have aimed to regulate irregular migration by introducing heavier fines for employers using illegal workforce,
and long entry bans for migrants detected
working illegally in the Russian Federation.
In December 2012, compulsory Russian language tests were introduced as a precondition for receiving a work permit in the service
sector (such as public utilities, trade and consumer services).
On the other hand, the New Migration Policy Concept adopted in 2012 does acknowledge the need of a foreign workforce in the
Russian Federation and clearly aims at better and more simplified processes for regulating highly-skilled migration.
Destination: the EU
This migratory system is driven by the economic situation in the originating countries,
seasonal demand for labour in the destination countries and wage differences between
them. The destination countries in the EU

can be divided into those in the immediate
proximity (Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Romania) and those hosting significant diasporas from Ukraine and
Moldova (Italy, Spain, the UK, Germany). This
distinction is important in terms of intended
duration of migration, with those preferring
neighbouring Member States clearly engaged
in a more circular migratory pattern. Europe’s economic crisis entered its third year
in 2012 and a modest recovery is forecast for
2013: it can be assessed that the labour demand in many Member States will remain
low, thus influencing labour migration from
CIS countries.

* EU-Russia visa
dialogue, member state
experts’ report, mission
to the Russian Federation
block 2 – illegal
migration, 28 November
– 7 December 2012

Situation in major migration source and
transit countries
n Georgia
Georgia has become one of the most important source countries of irregular migration
through the common borders. Recent migratory flows from Georgia to the EU seem
to be driven by worsening economic situation in Georgia and increasingly limited options for Georgians to work and/or settle in
the Russian Federation, traditionally their
most popular labour migration choice. Official data indicate that Georgia has an economically active population of 1.95 million
(labour force; GeoStat) and 295 000 unemployed. Although according to official statistics (GeoStat) the unemployment rate was
16.5% in 2011, some surveys point to much
higher rates in reality.
When travelling towards the EU, most wouldbe migrants from Georgia transit through
Belarus. The main reason for choosing Belarus as a transit country is the visa-free regime between Georgia and Belarus. Belarus
is also the main transit country for Georgian
labour migrants going to the Russian Federation due to non-existent border controls between Belarus and the Russian Federation.

19 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

The EU started to become a major migration destination for Georgian nationals after
2009, when some EU countries simplified labour regulations for workers. Many migrants
from Georgia heading towards the EU also
applied for asylum in the first wave of migration, very often claiming that they were
discriminated against because of their religion (Yezidi). However, further interviews in
Poland showed that such statements were
unsubstantiated.

smuggling activities and facilitation of irregular migration.

n Ukraine

Ukraine also remained the main transit country for irregular migrants from Somalia, Afghanistan and Eritrea. Migrants from non-CIS
countries mainly travel to Ukraine through
legal travel channels with student, business
or tourist visas, transiting from the Russian
Federation and often also crossing the border
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine
illegally with the help of facilitators.

Ukraine is the central transit and origin
country of irregular migration at the common borders. Migration for labour purposes is common in Ukraine and, similarly
to Georgians, Ukrainian migrants target both
Member States and the Russian Federation/
Belarus. The main driver for migration is the
difference in wages: the average monthly
wage in Ukraine during 2012 was UAH 3 000
(~EUR 275).
Eurostat data suggests that almost 650 000
Ukraine-born persons were legally residing
in the EU at the end of 2010. Almost 90% of
them were registered in only six Member
States: Italy, Germany, the Czech Republic,
Spain, Hungary and Poland. Higher wages,
frequent regularisation programmes and a
large diaspora are often mentioned as important factors for choosing these Member
States as destinations.
The Zakarpatia region, with slightly more
than one million inhabitants, is one of the
regions with the highest share of labour migrants. Their preference is to migrate to the
Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia, due
to language similarities with Ukrainian. The
lack of employment opportunities in the border areas can also be considered as a factor
enticing the local population to take part in

20 of 42

In 2007 Poland introduced a procedure that
allows labour migrants from Ukraine (as well
as Belarus, the Russian Federation, Moldova
and Georgia) to work legally in Poland without the need to obtain a work permit. This
simplified access to the Polish labour market
is valid for no longer than six months within
a 12-month period.

n Belarus
Use of Belarus as a transit country for irregular migration has become increasingly common in recent years. In 2011 Belarus was an
important transit country for Georgians due
to factors such as the Belarusian visa-free
regime with Georgia, lack of border controls
at the Belarusian-Russian border, as well as
good travel connections, i.e. relatively cheap
flights from Tbilisi to Minsk (EUR 179 one-way
flight by Belavia). In 2012 the route was increasingly used also by other nationalities,
such as Afghans and Vietnamese.
An additional issue in Belarus appeared to be
corruption, as reported in the media and acknowledged by the Belarusian president himself. As disclosed during a trial that begun in
September 2012 in Poland, some officers of
the State Border Service may have been involved in the smuggling of 1 300 migrants to
Poland between 2000 and 2008.

© Frontex, 2012

3. Annual risk assessment
This risk assessment is guided by the CIRAM
working definition of risk as a function of
three main components: threat, vulnerability and impact. A systematic examination of
each component allows for classifying risks
into categories of significance. Establishing a
general context in which border authorities
from EB-RAN countries and the neighbouring Member States operated during 2012 is
therefore important for identifying the main
border security risks.

Each identified risk is described in detail. At
the beginning of the section devoted to each
risk, a summary risk table is added to offer a
quick overview of the issues at stake.

To narrow down the selection, a detailed
analysis of the available monthly statistical
data (both FRAN and EB-RAN), Frontex operational data, bi-monthly reports and previous
EB-RAN annual risk analyses was performed.

2. Risk of significant irregular migration flows
from non-CIS countries;

The following three main risks should be
considered:
1. Risk of cross-border smuggling and exploitation of green/blue borders as a point
of entry for smuggled goods;

3. Risk of sustained irregular migration flows
from CIS countries.

21 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

3.1.	Risk of cross-border smuggling and exploitation of green/blue
borders as a point of entry for smuggled goods

Risk name

Risk of cross-border smuggling and exploitation of green/blue borders as a
point of entry for smuggled goods

Threat

Smuggling of tobacco, oil products and other excise goods to EU countries and trafficking of stolen
vehicles on exit from Europe

Impact

Queues and safety measures at BCPs
Loss of tax revenue, health hazard

Mitigation

Regular cooperation of Member States with EB-RAN countries; joint operations of border
control authorities, customs services, police forces and EB-RAN countries targeted at dismantling
organised crime groups dealing with smuggling of cigarettes and stolen vehicles.

3.1.1. Description of the threat
EB-RAN data, as well as information from
Frontex-coordinated Joint Operations indicate that smuggling of tobacco products,
trafficking in stolen vehicles and, to lesser
extent, smuggling of drugs and petroleum
products remain the most significant threat
to border security at the common borders.
Smuggling of tobacco
Smuggling of tobacco products continues to
be a lucrative business for those involved. According to the observations made during the
Frontex-coordinated Joint Operation Focal
Points Land 2012, the common borders are
one of the most important entry points for
smuggled cigarettes into the EU, followed by
the Balkan Peninsula.

* Illicit cigarettes and
hand-rolled tobacco in
18 European countries:
a cross-sectional survey.
Tobacco Control,
published online first, 10
December 2012

22 of 42

Available information from Romania, Lithuania and Poland suggests that most smuggled cigarettes are sold on the local markets
(60–70%). This is supported also by a recent
academic study* which suggested that the
proportion of illicit cigarettes in the EU was
higher among countries sharing a land or
sea border with Ukraine, the Russian Federation, Belarus or Moldova. In this research
the highest share of illicit cigarettes among
EU countries at the common borders was
recorded in Latvia (37.8%) and the lowest in

Finland (1.9%). Interestingly, the study did
not find any direct correlation between the
price difference and the prevalence of illicit
cigarettes. This suggests that other factors,
including the ease and cost of operating in
a country, industry participation, the level
of organisation of the criminal groups, the
likelihood of being caught, and the corruption levels are also important factors
affecting the smuggling and marketing of
illicit cigarettes.
Modi operandi of tobacco smugglers at the
common borders remain quite diverse and
it is difficult to assess possible changes in
this respect. Smuggling methods range from
operations carried out by individuals (the
so-called ‘ant smugglers’) to large scale enFigure 9. Tobacco smuggling by route

Eastern
Balkans
49%

Eastern
Borders
49%

Source: JO Focal Points Land

Western
Balkans
5%

The JO Focal Points Land 2012 reported the
highest number of smuggling incidents at
the Polish-Belarusian border, followed by the
Polish-Ukrainian border and the RomanianMoldovan border. However, as the JO Focal
Points Land 2012 has shown, border sections
with the highest number of detected incidents did not necessarily record the highest
amounts of smuggled cigarettes, i.e. at these
BCPs the cigarettes were mostly smuggled
in small quantities.
At some other border sections there are indications that tobacco smuggling through
BCPs is getting more organised and the detected amounts of cigarettes tend to be
larger. According to the Finnish Customs,
detections of cigarettes roughly doubled in
2012 in comparison with the last year (42.5
million cigarettes). Smugglers typically hide
their cigarettes in passenger cars. In one accident, as many as 250 cartons were found
stuffed into the hollow structures of a passenger vehicle.
There are also cases of organised ‘ant smuggling’. For example, a busload of people are
given a carton each and ordered/asked
to bring them ‘legally’ across the border,
where they are reclaimed for further resale purposes.
Depending on weather conditions and the
season, a variety of vehicles, such as off-road
cars, horse carts or sleighs and snow scooters, are used for the transport of cigarettes
to the vicinity of the border line, where they
are subsequently carried to the other side.
At border rivers, smugglers often use small
boats or rafts and have GPS devices to track
the delivery.

© Polish Border Guard, Podlaski Regional Division

terprises involving organised groups using
trains and lorries, where larger amounts of
cigarettes may be hidden.

Cigarette smuggling case leading to
several charges in Poland
The Eastern Borders Annual Overview
2012 presented a case from September
2011 reported by the Polish Border Guard
where two lorries were discovered fully
packed with smuggled cigarettes. In
2012, after a year-long investigation,
Police Central Bureau of Investigation
(CBŚ) charged 17 persons, all Polish nationals. According to the investigation,
cigarettes worth EUR 15 million were
smuggled in 2010–2012 from the Russian Federation, Lithuania and Belarus.
The main destination was Poland and,
to lesser extent, other Member States.
CBŚ assessed that the criminal group’s
income was around EUR 400 000.
The investigation started after border authorities detected the first shipment in Suwałki in March 2011 in a lorry,
which, according to the international
consignment documents, was carrying colouring agents for tyres. In
reality, the lorry was packed with
cigarettes worth of EUR 1.3 million.

New developments
Considering the transport modality of smuggled cigarettes, there seems to be a shift

23 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

Smuggling of vehicles

OTHER
35%

BMW
25%

DAF
3%

VW
19%

OPEL
4% TOYOTA
LEXUS AUDI
4%
6%
4%

Source: JO Focal Points data

Figure 10. The main routes used for the smuggling of stolen vehicles in 2012

away from the use of passenger trains to
cargo trains. While passenger trains were
traditionally used for smuggling cigarettes in
specially-built secret compartments, Member States bordering Belarus reported an increasing number of cigarettes hidden in loads
of cargo (wood, coal). Belarusian media also
indicated Latvia as the most common direction of such smuggling activities.
A new modus operandi was also identified
involving the use of cargo planes. Namely,
a crew of a Russian cargo plane smuggled
about 4 million cigarettes to Finland on their
weekly flights to the country during 2012, resulting in substantial losses in tax revenue.
The total number of detected cigarette smuggling cases at the green borders is unknown

24 of 42

but is believed to be considerable, especially at
some border sections, such as the Belarusian
border with Latvia and Lithuania. In the northern part of the common borders (Finnish and
Norwegian borders with the Russian Federation) no detections of illegal border-crossing
connected with smuggling were made. However, an increasing risk of smuggling by small
pleasure or fishing boats was mentioned in
connection to the blue borders in the Baltic Sea.
Organised crime groups have even resorted
to creating purpose-built tunnels. In early July
2012, Slovak authorities discovered a 700-metre smuggling tunnel leading from the western Ukrainian town of Uzhgorod into Slovak
territory. The tunnel was used for smuggling
cigarettes. It was a sophisticated construction and contained basic railway tracks for

Further information received from the Slovak
authorities contradicted initial media reports
and confirmed that the tunnel had not been
used for trafficking human beings or smuggling irregular migrants. The cigarettes seized
during the police operation were intended for
distribution in the Slovak market as well as
in other Member States, primarily the Czech
Republic and Germany. The investigation of
two Slovak suspects is still ongoing.
Smuggling of vehicles
The main destinations for stolen vehicles, according to Europol, are the Russian Federation, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, Belarus, Ukraine,
Pakistan and North Africa. Destinations are
strongly dependent on the organised crime
groups composed of the nationals from these
countries.
While vehicles were stolen across the EU, the
Schengen Information System (SIS) indicated
the highest number of vehicles were stolen
in France, Germany, the Netherlands, Belgium and Italy.
In the course of the JO Focal Points Land,
197 stolen cars, vans, lorries, trailers and
motorbikes were identified through their
vehicle identification number (VIN), with
Volkswagen and Mercedes being the most
popular brands. During 2012, the PolishUkrainian border section reported most
of the cases.
The most commonly used modus operandi, like
in the previous year, consisted in the use of
falsified documents. This was followed by
the smuggling of vehicles dismantled into
parts, transportation of vehicles on a platform trailer or a train, abuse of lease agreements and, less frequently, altering the VIN.

© Belarusian State Border Service

swift transportation of contraband under
the border. During their raid, the Slovak police also seized 2.5 million cigarettes.

Used cars smuggled from Lithuania to Belarus
In September 2012, the Belarusian State Border Service on its
official website presented the case of the detection of five
cars. The cars were detected while being smuggled through
the green border from Lithuania to Belarus. The cars were not
stolen and the reason for smuggling them through the green
border was an attempt to evade tax and customs duties.
In the past two years Moldova has reported an increasing
number of cars detected at the BCPs heading to Moldova
with false notary documents or false registration documents. In the case of Moldova, cars with Lithuanian number plates were smuggled through the Russian Federation
and Ukraine to Moldova.
In the course of 2012 Latvian authorities also reported an increased use of high-quality counterfeit vehicle registration
documents at the border section with the Russian Federation. This method was employed by vehicle smugglers to
circumvent duties payable upon import/export to Belarus, exploiting the absence of border and customs checks
between the Russian Federation and Belarus.

As presented in Figure 10, the most common
brands detected at the common borders on
exit from the EU were Volkswagen, BMW,
Mercedes and Audi. Focal Points data also
suggest a shift from luxury cars to cheaper
compact cars, which were mostly stolen and
frequently disassembled into parts. According to open sources, the top brands at the re-

25 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

gional borders (between Ukraine, Moldova,
Belarus and the Russian Federation) were
BMW, Volkswagen, Audi, Lexus and Toyota.
Smuggling of petroleum products
Smuggling of petroleum products is mainly
reported both at the common borders and
the Ukrainian border with the Russian Federation. Modi operandi used differ depending on the region: at the border with the
EU smugglers, who are mainly EU nationals, carry fuel in additionally constructed
fuel tanks, canisters or in tanker lorries. At
the Ukrainian-Russian border fuel is mostly
smuggled in barrels.
In 2012, Polish customs authorities detected a
facility where Belarusian smugglers unloaded
the smuggled fuel. The facility was protected
by CCTV cameras and equipped with devices
allowing for loading and unloading the fuel.
Some 3 000 litres of fuel were found in the
storage tanks. According to the Polish Organisation of Oil Industry and Trade around
5–7% of the total oil market in Poland consists of smuggled fuel.

* The number of
detections made during
the JO Focal Points
Land at major BCPs
was low in 2012. Only
six cases (Terespol,
Grzechotki and Narva)
were reported (two
cases of amphetamine,
three cases of marihuana
and one case of 256 g of
hashish).

26 of 42

According to Estonian sources, around 12
million litres of cheap petrol is smuggled
each year from the Russian Federation to
Estonia. In response to small-scale smuggling of petrol, Estonian Customs started
to control persons who crossed the border
to the Russian Federation most frequently
during 2012. These measures implemented
by Estonian Customs led to a 90% decrease
(by mid-June 2012) in traffic linked to petrol smuggling.
Smuggling of drugs
The smuggling of drugs, as indicated by the
number of detected cases at common borders, remains relatively limited*. According
to the UNODC, part of the drugs smuggled

Heroin detected at the PolishUkrainian border
Ukrainian border guards detected 9.5 kg
of heroin at the BCP Rava Ruska-Hrebenne at the end of May 2012. A Polish
national, who was suspected of smuggling, explained that he was not the
owner of the drugs and that he was
travelling to Lviv to buy the tickets for
the UEFA European Championship 2012.
According to his story his van had broken down on the way to Lviv and was repaired there. The Polish national stated
that he was unaware of drugs hidden
in the fuel tank. The heroin, packed
in 20 parcels, was attached to the
inner walls of the fuel tank.

on the so-called northern route from Afghanistan and Tajikistan/Kyrgyzstan towards
the Russian Federation are transported further across the common borders to the EU.
However, there is no data available to Frontex that would allow assessing the extent of
this phenomenon. The biggest shipment of
heroin through the common borders was reported by Ukrainian and Polish open sources
in May 2012 (see box).
On the other hand, the Russian Federation is
a major destination for illicit drug trafficking
from Central Asia. According to the Russian
Federal Service for Control of Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (FSKN), a total of nearly
4.5 tonnes of Afghan heroin and highly concentrated hashish were seized in the Russian
Federation in 2011. The removal of customs
barriers between the states participating in
the Customs Union with the Russian Federation may have further facilitated the transport of illicit shipments through Central Asia
to the Russian market.

The Russian Federation – and, perhaps to a
lesser extent, Belarus and Ukraine – have become also destination countries for synthetic
drugs (e.g. amphetamines) and cocaine smuggled from and through the EU. Interestingly,
hashish is also smuggled to the Russian Federation transiting through EU countries. This
is mostly due to the diversification of the Russian drug market and a growing demand for
‘high quality’ narcotics in the country.
The only border section, where drug detections seem to be more frequent is the border
between Ukraine and the Russian Federation.
According to open sources, 46 incidents of

drugs smuggling, where mainly marihuana
was smuggled from Ukraine to the Russian
Federation, were detected from January to
December 2012 at this border section. Most
of the cases were reported in trains going
from different Ukrainian cities to Moscow. The
amount of detected drugs varied from 10 g to
4–5 kg. This may indicate that drugs arrive in
Ukraine not through common borders with
the EU, but directly to Ukrainian harbours or
airports from which they are further transported to the Russian Federation. According
to official Ukrainian sources, the amount of
seized drugs grew in 2012 to 194 kg.

27 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

3.2.	Risk of significant irregular migration flows from non-CIS
countries
Risk name

Risk of significant irregular migration flows from non-CIS countries

Threat

Document fraud, abuse of legal travel channels, illegal border-crossing, new OCGs producing false
documents

Impact

More second-line checks
Staff redirected to surveillance
Abuse of social benefits system
Internal security problems

Mitigation

Focus on main identified modi operandi, cooperation with neighbouring countries and with
destination countries on ongoing investigations against facilitators/OCGs

3.2.1. Description of the threat
Illegal border-crossing between BCPs
In 2012, Member States reported 886 detections of illegal border-crossing by migrants
arriving from non-CIS countries. All detections were made at common borders in the
direction of the EU. In terms of yearly comparison, this represented a worrying 179% increase in relation to 2011 and additional 237%
compared to 2010.
According to data from both sides of the common borders, the most active border section
in 2012 was the border between Slovakia and
Ukraine (+57% compared to 2011). This border section was followed by the LithuanianBelarusian border with (+242% compared to
2011), the Romanian-Moldovan border (+228%
compared to 2011) and the Polish-Belarusian
border (+568% compared to 2011).
There is no obvious single reason for the rise
in detections in 2012. Rather, the trend was
produced by a combination of factors that
include more active facilitation networks (in
Moscow and elsewhere), changes in border
assets deployed (Belarus, see box) and several different pull and push factors depending on the detected nationality.

28 of 42

The northern end of the common borders
(Finland, Norway) remained more peaceful
in terms of illegal border-crossings. This is
at least partly due to the close cooperation
and efficient work of the Russian Border Service both at the border and the pre-frontier
areas. Top nationalities of the migrants detected by Russian authorities were Syrians
and Algerians (53%).
Main nationalities
Somalis and Afghans remained the main detected nationalities in 2012 accounting together for 47% of the total for non-CIS group
on both sides of the common borders. However, two other nationalities emerged to
account for 21% of all detections – namely
Vietnamese (187 detections) and Bangladesh
nationals (100 detections).
Somali nationals were the largest group of
non-CIS migrants with numbers on both sides
of the common borders up by 70% compared
to 2011. However, Somalis were almost exclusively reported at the Slovakian-Ukrainian
border (93% of all detected Somalia nationals on both sides of the common borders).
Ukrainian border authorities stress that some
Somali migrants were often detected repeatedly; sometimes the same migrant was

Diplomatic dispute between the EU and Belarus
In February 2012, an ongoing diplomatic dispute between
the EU and Belarus escalated further. Ambassadors from
Member States were ordered to leave the country soon after the EU had included an additional 200 persons from the
Belarusian public administration on the entry ban list. A Belarusian foreign ministry spokesman later said that the ambassadors were no longer welcome in Belarus.

prevented from illegally entering Slovakia as
many as three times.
Afghan nationals were the second most commonly detected nationality, with a 15% increase compared to 2011. In terms of routing,
there was a partial shift away from Slovakian-Ukrainian border towards Belarusian
borders with Poland, Lithuania and towards
the Moldovan border with Romania.

At the same time, the Belarusian State Border Service (SBS)
received new duties during March 2012. It was tasked to prioritise the control of the traffic in the direction to Belarus
and to relax the checks towards the EU. The new tasking
resulted in a redeployment of State Border Service officers from the border with Poland to the one with Ukraine.
As explained by the SBS, Belarus wanted to strengthen its
border control with Ukraine during the UEFA Euro 2012. The
dispute between Belarus and the EU affected local cooperation between border authorities of Belarus and the neighbouring Member States. Furthermore, at the beginning of
April 2012, both Lithuania and Poland started to report increasing number of Georgian and Afghan nationals crossing
illegally the green borders from Belarus.

The number of detected Vietnamese nationals grew significantly from 34 in 2011 to 187 in
2012, which made Vietnamese the third most
commonly detected nationality in 2012. The
Lithuanian-Belarusian border, the EstonianRussian border and the Polish borders with
Belarus and Ukraine were the most affected.
Vietnamese migrants indicated Germany and
Poland as their destination countries.
It is likely that some Vietnamese nationals
may have worked in the Russian Federation
prior to attempting illegal border-crossing
into the EU. Low salaries and hard working
conditions as well as problems with working
permits may have contributed to their decision to leave the Russian Federation for the
EU. Namely, Russian media reported cases
of Vietnamese irregular workers detected

Detected migrants stated that they had travelled on trains
and/or buses from Afghanistan, via the Russian Federation
(Moscow) to Belarus. In Belarus they were contacted by
facilitators offering help with illegal border-crossing for
USD 2 000–12 000.

Figure 11. Comparison of monthly detections of illegal border-crossing by non-CIS nationals
in 2011 and 2012 at the eastern land borders
2012

JO EuroCup 2012

2011

120

60

0
Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Source: FRAN data on Easter Border route, as for 13 March 2013

29 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

Top five non-CIS nationalities detected illegally crossing
the common borders between BCPs
2011

42

193

2012

Vietnam

74%

31%

342
Somalia

93%

15

100

Afghanistan

201

268

Eritrea

328

7

50

50%

Bangladesh

60%

Source: FRAN data as of 20 March 2013

Figure 12. The share of detections of given nationality at selected border sections in relation
to the total number of detections of that nationality at the common borders

in large clothes factories. In some cases they
were confined to their working places and
had no freedom of movement.
In September 2012, Belarusian media published news on a camp of irregular migrants
from Vietnam. The camp was detected in a

30 of 42

forested area close to the three-border section (Belarusian-Lithuanian-Polish) of Grodno
region. Officers found a group of 36 Vietnamese persons, all around 30 years old. They had
neither passports nor money. The Vietnamese had arrived from Moscow, travelling by
regular buses.

The Romanian-Moldovan border was the
main entry point for Bangladeshis, followed
by the Slovakian-Ukrainian border. The rest
of the cases were reported at the borders of
Ukraine with Hungary and Poland. All detections of Bangladeshi nationals at the Romanian-Moldovan border occurred in the first
half of 2012, after which the phenomenon
stopped completely. Migrants had travelled
legally to Moldova by air and subsequently
contacted facilitators to illegally cross the
border to Romania.
New developments
Ukraine remains the main transit country for
non-CIS irregular migrants aiming to reach
the EU through the common borders. However, there is a notable growth in the use of
routes transiting Belarus to Lithuania and
Poland and from the Russian Federation towards Baltic Member States.
Attempts of clandestine border-crossings by
Vietnamese nationals at the BCPs should also
be mentioned as a new phenomenon. In October 2012, Poland reported one case with
three Vietnamese hidden in a lorry detected
at the Polish-Belarusian border. The second
case that involved two groups of Vietnamese detected at the border between Belarus
and Poland was reported by the Belarusian
media in December 2012. Four migrants were
hidden under a lorry trailer, which they had
most likely boarded at a service station. The
second group of migrants was detected close
to the road leading to the BCP in question.

European Union Document-Fraud Risk
Analysis Network
Despite the recognised seriousness of
document fraud, until recently there
was no regular or consolidated information exchange among Member States
and there were no overall analyses of
trends in the field of document fraud at
the EU level. To address this information
gap and following on from the success
of an earlier pilot study, the European
Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network (EDF-RAN) was formed
in early 2012 to serve as a platform
for information exchange among
Member States.

The third significant development was a 47%
drop (compared to 2011) of detected document fraudsters from non-CIS countries while
trying to enter the EU across the common
borders (from 1 106 in 2011 to 586 in 2012).
Most continued to be nationals the Democratic Republic of Congo and Cameroon. In
addition to the drop, there was also a shift
away from Russian to Ukrainian borders with
Member States. The enhanced cooperation of
Latvian authorities with their Russian partners as well as with the transport companies
(railways) likely caused this shift.

31 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

3.3.	Risk of sustained irregular migration flows from CIS countries
* For the purposes of
this document, Georgian
nationals are grouped
together with CIS
nationals even though
Georgia is not a member
of the Commonwealth of
independent States (CIS).

32 of 42

Risk name

Risk of sustained irregular migration flows from CIS countries*

Threat

Document fraud, illegal border-crossing, abuse of legal travel channels

Impact

More second-line checks
Rising demand for fraudulent travel and supporting documents
Growth of informal economy
Loss of tax revenue

Mitigation

Cooperation with neighbouring countries and with destination countries; allocation of resources;
change of old surveillance systems to new ones or installation in locations where the surveillance
systems are currently not present

3.3.1. Description of the threat

Abuse of legal travel channels

Illegal border-crossing between BCPs

Overstaying

The prevailing modi operandi for the illegal border-crossing of migrants from CIS countries
are very different from non-CIS nationals.
They mainly cross the border in small groups
(of two–three persons) or individually. CIS
migrants also rarely use facilitation services;
they are prepared and equipped with maps,
compasses, change of clothes and they are
able to communicate in Russian language.

Overstaying the validity of visa is a common
modus operandi used by CIS migrants. Some
7 761 overstayers (mostly Ukrainians) or 12%
more compared to 2011 were detected exiting the EU at the common land borders during 2012. The main affected border section
was the border between Poland and Ukraine
(+27% compared to 2011) and border between
Hungary and Ukraine (+17% compared to 2011).

There were 1 615 CIS nationals detected making an illegal border crossing at the common
borders in 2012. The overall number, while
10% lower compared to 2011, hides significant
variations among different border sections.

The most affected regional borders were
those between Ukraine and the Russian Fed-

Among the common borders, the LithuanianBelarusian border was ranked first with 353
detections, followed by the Slovakian border with Ukraine with 290 and the PolishUkrainian border with 195 detections. The
Latvian-Belarusian border reported the highest increase with a staggering 419% (135 detections) rise compared to 2011. The shift of
this irregular flow from Ukraine to Belarus
was mainly caused by Georgians using direct
flights from Tbilisi to Minsk on their way towards Lithuania. Other sections that saw increases included the Estonian-Russian border
and the Polish-Belarusian border.

Migrants travelling on this route often
use falsified entry/exit stamps to conceal the fact that they had overstayed.
They are mainly reported at the Polish
and Slovak borders with Ukraine (together 67% of all detected false entry/
exit stamps along the common borders
in 2012). The main reason for falsifying
these stamps is to fabricate evidence
that the migrant had not overstayed
on his/her last visit when applying
for a new visa.

False entry/exit stamps

Visas issued to EB-RAN nationals in 2011 by issuing Member State
Russian Federation
Ukraine
Belarus
Moldova
In circles total visas issued
by given Member State

1 1 95 31 5

FINLAND
POLAND
830 7 1 7

BULGARIA

SPAIN
7 52 864

ITALY

639 592

658 67 6

Source: European Commission 2012

Figure 13. Visas issued in 2011 to nationals of the Russian Federation, Ukraine, Belarus and
Moldova by issuing Member State*

eration. All other regional borders reported
a stable trend of detections of overstayers
(6 361 in 2011 compared to 6 713 in 2012). Russians were the top nationality detected for
overstaying on exit from Ukraine to the Russian Federation (a 52% share), followed by
Azerbaijan, Armenia and Uzbekistan nationals (together a 38% share).

Detections of overstayers at Moldovan and
Ukrainian airports increased by 32% compared to 2011 (from 9 100 in 2011 to 12 000
in 2012). The profile shows different nationalities with the most reported nationalities
being Georgian, Uzbek, Armenian, Azeri, Chinese and Turkish.

* VIS data are collected
on the basis of the place
where the application
is made, and not on
the citizenship of the
visa applicant. Thus, for
instance, applications made
in the Russian Federation
do not necessarily concern
only Russian nationals.
However, the data can
used as the most suitable
approximation of the visas
issued to citizens of that
country.

33 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

Asylum applications by Russian nationals in 2011

0 - 50
51 - 200
201 - 500
501 - 1 500
1 501 - 2 352

250 applications
positive decisions

Source: Eurostat

Figure 14. Asylum applications by Russian nationals in 2011 with the indication of the share of
positive decisions issued by Member States

Abuse of legalisation programmes
Different legalisation programmes in Member
States may act as pull factors for irregular migration. For example, the 2012 legalisation in
Poland produced a phenomenon which Polish authorities called ‘amnesty tourism’. Legalisation conducted during first half of 2012

34 of 42

resulted in 9 500 applications for legalisation,
mostly from Ukrainian nationals.
However, Poland reported that this number
included nationals from Pakistan, Bangladesh, India and Egypt, who had travelled from
other Member States (France, Belgium, Italy
as mentioned in outcomes of one the inves-

tigations against facilitator from India), often lured by facilitators.
Obtaining visa under false pretences
Many migrants obtaining visas under false
pretences come from CIS countries. There
are companies and individuals in Member
States who, in exchange for money, provide
visa applicants (in Ukraine, for example) with
necessary documents or even fictitious invitation letters. Member States’ consular authorities in Ukraine seek to counter this abuse
by strengthening the capacity of their staff
at consular sections and improving the technical equipment needed to detect false supporting documents.
Statements received during second-line interviews with many Ukrainians who were refused entry to Poland suggest that their real
destinations – mainly Germany, Italy or Austria – were almost always different to the one
mentioned in their visa application. Refusals
of entry at the external border of the EU are
therefore a good indication of the extent of
this type of abuse.
Refusals of entry
In 2012, the number of refusals issued by
Member States at common borders increased

(39 749) after two years of decline. This was
mostly due to a sharp 49% increase in refusals of entry issued by Poland. Ukrainian nationals were, like in previous years, the top
nationality refused entry in 2012 (16 668 or
42% of total). The most common reason for
refusal of entry was a lack of appropriate
documentation justifying the purpose and
conditions of stay.
Georgian nationals, ranking second with almost 8 900 refusals of entry, were mainly trying to enter Member States without proper
documents (lack of visa or residence permits; 7 365 refused in 2012), followed by those
who were refused due to alerts in databases
(roughly 1 150). As reported by several Member
States, the actual number of persons refused
entry is lower given that Georgians often engage in multiple unsuccessful attempts to
enter the EU. In response, many Georgians
subsequently opt to attempt illegal bordercrossing or submit asylum applications.
Russian nationals, who were the third most
often refused nationality at the common
borders (7 000), were refused entry mostly
due to a lack of proper documents (almost
5 400 refused). As in previous years, the peak
of refusals started in August and lasted till
the end of the year, indicating a possible link
with seasonal work.

35 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

4. Outlook
Regular traffic
Regular traffic flows are likely to continue to
grow in 2013, facilitated by visa issuance, local
border traffic agreements and general rise of
international travel in the Russian Federation,
Ukraine and Moldova. While the growth of
regular traffic is not a threat as such, it does
pose a challenge to the infrastructure and
personnel of BCPs at common borders. To
maintain efficient border checks and at the
same time keep bona fide traffic smooth will
be increasingly a challenge for border control
authorities in 2013 and 2014.
Cross-border crime
Price differences for certain excise goods like
petrol and cigarettes will continue to drive
smuggling activities. Other important facilitating factors will be (a) increasing level
of organisation of different criminal groups,
(b) corruption, and (c) high unemployment
in many regions adjacent to the common
borders.
The Russian Federation, Ukraine, Moldova
and Belarus will remain important markets
for stolen vehicles. The methods of smuggling vehicles from the EU will vary greatly

36 of 42

and will adapt to mitigation measures taken
at different borders.
Heroin trafficking on route from Afghanistan
towards the Russian Federation and further
westwards is likely to grow, driven by demand in the Russian Federation and the EU.
Irregular migration
Facilitators will be ready to use possible
changes to border enforcement efforts to
their advantage, as the diplomatic dispute
and the following developments at the border
between the EU and Belarus in 2012 showed.
High unemployment in the EU is likely to result in continuing return migration by Ukrainian and Moldovan nationals. The phenomenon
will include use of false entry/exit stamps in
attempts to hide overstay in the EU.
Geopolitical developments in Afghanistan, the
Middle East (Syria), and Africa (Egypt, Mali)
continue to create a general risk of irregular
movements towards the EU. A small proportion of this flow is likely to use Ukraine,
Belarus or the Russian Federation as transit
points for onward movement to the EU. The
actual size of it remains difficult to predict.

5. Statistical annex
Explanatory note:
Detections reported by Member States for illegal border-crossing between BCPs, illegal
border-crossing at BCPs and refusals of entry are detections/refusals at the common
land borders on entry only. For facilitators,
detections at the common land borders on
entry and exit are included. For illegal stay,
only detections at the common land borders
on exit are included. For asylum, all applications (land, sea, air and inland) are included.

For EB-RAN countries, all indicators – save
for refusals of entry – include detections/applications on exit and entry at the land, sea
and air borders.
Each section of the table (reporting country,
border type, place of detection, top five border section and top ten nationalities) refers to
total detections reported by EB-RAN countries and to neighbouring land border detections reported by Member States.

Legend
Symbols and abbreviations:		 n.a. not applicable
											:		 data not available
Source: EB-RAN and FRAN data as of 12 March 2012, unless otherwise indicated
Note:		‘Member States’ in the tables refer to FRAN Member States, including both
27 EU Member States and three Schengen Associated Countries

37 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

Annex Table 1. I llegal border-crossing between BCPs
Detections reported by border type and top ten nationalities
Share of
total

% change on
prev. year

2010

2011

2012

6 149

5 731

5 257

99

-8.3

60

41

42

0.8

2.4

Ukraine

2 077

2 023

1 475

28

-27

Moldova

1 933

1 384

937

18

-32

Georgia

431

544

645

12

19

Russian Federation

677

590

510

9.6

-14

Somalia

127

201

342

6.5

70

Afghanistan

259

268

328

6.2

22

Belarus

237

266

198

3.7

-26

Vietnam

58

42

193

3.6

360

3

15

100

1.9

567

30

36

86

1.6

139

Others

377

403

485

9.2

20

Total

6 209

5 772

5 299

Border Type
Land
Sea

Top Ten Nationalities

Bangladesh
Not specified

-8.2

Annex Table 2. Illegal border-crossing at BCPs
Detections reported by border type and top ten nationalities

2010

2011

2012

Share of
total

% change on
prev. year

Border Type
Land
Air
Sea

2 297

2 555

2 099

94

-18

193

158

107

4.8

-32

0

37

30

1.3

-19

Top Ten Nationalities
Ukraine

38 of 42

1 175

1 495

1 192

53

-20

Moldova

580

624

566

25

-9.3

Russian Federation

187

139

98

4.4

-29

Romania

42

77

73

3.3

-5.2

Tajikistan

-41

118

90

53

2.4

Belarus

62

37

43

1.9

16

Kyrgyzstan

99

81

34

1.5

-58

Not specified

49

29

24

1.1

-17

Poland

12

9

11

0.5

22

Georgia

10

8

10

0.4

25

Others

156

161

132

5.9

-18

Total

2 490

2 750

2 236

- 19

Annex Table 3. Facilitators
Detections reported by place of detection and top ten nationalities

2010

2011

2012

Share of
total

% change on
prev. year

Place of Detection
Land

248

160

124

92

Air

13

6

9

6.7

-23
50

Sea

3

0

2

1.5

n.a.

Reporting
Country

Top Ten Nationalities
Ukraine

92

53

53

39

0

Russian Federation

24

17

14

10

-18

Moldova

29

13

10

7.4

-23

Lithuania

10

20

7

5.2

-65

Poland

16

10

6

4.4

-40

Belarus

4

3

4

3.0

33

Not specified

2

1

4

3.0

300

Germany

0

2

4

3.0

100

Georgia

2

0

4

3.0

n.a.

Estonia

0

0

3

2.2

n.a.

Others

85

47

26

19

-45

Total

264

166

135

-19

39 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

Annex Table 4. I llegal stay
Detections reported by place of detection and top ten nationalities
Share of
total

% change on
prev. year

2010

2011

2012

Land

18 238

20 449

24 176

60

Air

12 387

11 809

14 013

35

19

1 055

867

699

1.7

-19

Inland

102

613

678

1.7

11

Sea

477

565

568

1.4

0.5

Place of Detection

Between BCPs

Reporting
Country

Top Ten Nationalities

40 of 42

18

Russian Federation

5 318

5 842

7 051

18

Ukraine

4 230

6 115

6 883

17

21
13

Georgia

6 110

4 976

4 187

10

-16

Uzbekistan

1 279

1 581

2 889

7.2

83

Azerbaijan

1 371

1 384

2 345

5.8

69

Moldova

3 556

2 538

2 139

5.3

-16

Armenia

1 312

1 480

1 677

4.2

13

Belarus

948

1 232

1 534

3.8

25

Turkey

711

777

1 359

3.4

75

Lithuania

814

894

906

2.3

1.3

23

Others

6 610

7 484

9 164

Total

32 259

34 303

40 134

22
17

Annex Table 5. Refusals of entry
Refusals reported by border type and top ten nationalities
Share of
total

% change on
prev. year

2010

2011

2012

Land

65 417

52 813

62 463

91

18

Sea

3 297

3 073

3 184

4.7

3.6

Air

2 840

2 657

2 690

3.9

1.2

Border Type

Reporting
Country

Top Ten Nationalities
Ukraine

18 823

16 303

19 182

28

18

Georgia

4 668

4 169

9 640

14

131

Russian Federation

7 652

7 506

9 226

14

23

Lithuania

2 472

3 942

5 259

7.7

33

Belarus

5 736

5 947

4 972

7.3

-16

Moldova

9 202

5 387

3 608

5.3

-33

Tajikistan

2 127

825

1 889

2.8

129

Armenia

1 667

1 014

1 217

1.8

20

Uzbekistan

6 272

1 930

1 169

1.7

-39

Not specified

711

793

1 085

1.6

37

Others

12 233

10 727

11 090

16

3.4

Total

71 563

58 543

68 337

17

Annex Table 6. A
 pplications for asylum
Applications for international protection reported by top ten nationalities

2010

2011

2012

Share of
total

% change on
prev. year

Reporting
Country

Top Ten Nationalities
Russian Federation

6 019

5 074

6 801

22

34

Georgia

1 622

2 363

3 900

13

65

Afghanistan

2 478

2 438

2 936

9.6

20

Somalia

2 127

2 767

2 745

8.9

-0.8

Eritrea

1 728

1 266

1 224

4.0

-3.3

229

523

1 212

3.9

132

1 216

1 116

1 170

3.8

4.8

Pakistan

283

484

966

3.1

100

Algeria

248

719

901

2.9

25

Iran

710

578

673

2.2

16

Others

8 218

6 867

8 203

27

Total

24 878

24 195

30 731

Syria
Iraq

19
27

41 of 42

Frontex · Eastern Borders Annual Risk Analysis 2013

Annex Table 7. Document fraud
Document fraud by place of detection, type of document and country of issuance

2010

2011

2012

Share of
total

% change on
prev. year

Place of Detection

Nationality

Land

268

193

139

59

-28

Ukraine (59%)

Air

167

135

96

41

-29

Moldova (18%)

Sea

20

8

1

0.4

-88

Philippines

395

248

189

80

-24

Ukraine (45%)

Not specified

34

60

26

11

-57

Georgia (31%)

Visa

11

13

10

4.2

-23

Iran (40%)

Identity card

8

12

8

3.4

-33

Moldova (63%)

Residence permit

7

3

3

1.3

0

Moldova (67%)

Ukraine

258

139

91

39

-35

Ukraine (92%)

Moldova

81

47

33

14

-30

Moldova (91%)

Georgia

18

36

23

9.7

-36

Ukraine (52%)

Armenia

2

10

13

5.5

30

Ukraine (62%)

Turkey

10

20

12

5.1

-40

Ukraine (100%)

Syria

20

3

7

3.0

133

Ukraine (86%)

Russian Federation

15

11

7

3.0

-36

Moldova (43%)

Cameroon

3

3

5

2.1

67

Ukraine (80%)

Not specified

2

3

4

1.7

33

Ukraine

Iran

4

4

4

1.7

0

Moldova

42

60

37

16

-38

Ukraine (70%)

Type of Document
Passport

Nationality

Top Ten Nationalities

Others

Nationality

Top Ten Countries of Issuance
Ukraine

42 of 42

Highest Share

Nationality

236

122

76

32

-38

Not specified

32

60

27

11

-55

Georgia (30%)

Romania

20

22

17

7.2

-23

Moldova (94%)

Turkey

3

14

13

5.5

-7.1

Turkey (69%)

Georgia

2

4

13

5.5

225

Georgia

Lithuania

16

11

8

3.4

-27

Ukraine (63%)

Moldova

30

10

8

3.4

-20

Moldova (88%)

Bulgaria

20

7

8

3.4

14

Turkey (38%)

Armenia

0

3

7

3.0

133

Armenia

Belgium

3

1

6

2.5

500

Congo (50%)

22

-35

Moldova (15%)

Others

93

82

53

Total

455

336

236

-30

Ukraine (93%)

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union

For Public Release
Risk Analysis Unit
Reference number: 7108/2013

Rondo ONZ 1
00-124 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

Warsaw, July 2013

