FRAN Quarterly
Issue 3 • July–September 2012

Q1 Q2
Q3 Q4

FRAN Quarterly
Issue 3 • July–September 2012

1 of 70

Frontex official publications fall into four main categories: risk analysis, training, operations
and research, each marked with a distinct graphic identifier. Risk analysis publications bear a
triangular symbol formed by an arrow drawing a triangle, with a dot at the centre. Metaphorically, the arrow represents the cyclical nature of risk analysis processes and its orientation
towards an appropriate operational response. The triangle is a symbol of ideal proportions
and knowledge, reflecting the pursuit of factual exactness, truth and exhaustive analysis.
The dot at the centre represents the intelligence factor and the focal point where information from diverse sources converges to be processed, systematised and shared as analytical
products. Thus, Frontex risk analysis is meant to be at the centre and to form a reliable basis for its operational activities.

European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
Rondo ONZ 1
00-124 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu
Warsaw, January 2013
Risk Analysis Unit
Frontex reference number: 374

DISCLAIMERS
This is a Frontex staff working document. This publication or its contents do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of Frontex concerning the legal status of
any country, territory or city or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers
or boundaries.
All maps included in this report are the sole property of Frontex and any unauthorised use is
prohibited. Frontex disclaims any liability with respect to the boundaries, names and designations used on the maps.
The contents of open-source boxes are unverified and presented only to give context and
media representation of irregular-migration phenomena.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The FRAN Quarterly has been prepared by the Frontex Risk Analysis Unit. During the course
of developing this product, many colleagues at Frontex and outside contributed to it and their
assistance is hereby acknowledged with gratitude.

2 of 70

Table of contents
Executive summary #5
1. Introduction #8
2. Methodology #9
3. Summary of FRAN indicators #10
4. Situational picture in Q3 2012 #12
4.1.		Detections of illegal border-crossing #13
4.2.		Routes #20
4.3.		Clandestine entry (1B) #29
4.4.		Detections of facilitators #30
4.5.		Detections of illegal stay #32
4.6.		Refusals of entry #34
4.7.		Asylum claims #34
4.8.		Document fraud #38
4.9.		Returns #39
4.10.Other illegal activities at the border #42
5. Statistical annex #55

3 of 70

Frontex · FRAN Quarterly · q3 2012

List of abbreviations used
BCP 				
border-crossing point
CeCLAD-M 	Centre de Coordination pour la Lutte Anti-Drogue en Méditerranée
Democratic Republic of the Congo (Congo-Kinshasa)
COD			
EDF-RAN		 European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network
EPN				
European Patrol Network
EU 				
European Union
EUR 				
euro
FRAN 			Frontex Risk Analysis Network
fYROM 			former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
GEO				Grupo Especial de Operaciones
ICJ		
			International Court of Justice
ID 				
identity document
IOM 			International Organization for Migration
JO 				
Joint Operation
MS			 	Member State
NM 				
nautical mile
NOK 				
Norwegian krone
OCG 			
organised crime group
RAU 				Frontex Risk Analysis Unit
SV		
			sea vessel
SEESAC			 South Eastern and Eastern Europe Clearinghouse for the Control of Small Arms
and Light Weapons
SIS 				Schengen Information System
UK 				
United Kingdom
UNODC			United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
UNHCR			 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
USD				
United States dollar
VIN				
vehicle identification number
WB-ARA 	Western Balkans Annual Risk Analysis
WB-RAN 	Western Balkans Risk Analysis Network

Note

As some Member States are unable to distinguish between the Democratic Republic of Congo
(Congo-Kinshasa) and Congo (Congo-Brazzaville), ‘Congo’ and ‘Congolese’ are used as collective terms for these two countries throughout this report unless otherwise indicated.

4 of 70

Executive summary
During the third quarter of 2012, several
FRAN indicators varied radically compared
to recent reporting periods. Firstly, there
was a massive reduction in detections of
illegal-border crossing compared to previous third quarters, widely attributed to increased operational activity by the Greek
authorities since the beginning of August
2012 at their land border with Turkey. Secondly, there was the largest number of applications for asylum since data collection
began in early 2008, for the most part due
to increased applications submitted by Syrians. Finally, at BCPs there were the most
refusals of entry and detections of clandestine entries since early 2009.
Overall, in Q3 2012 there were fewer detections of illegal border-crossing than in any
previous third quarter, following the launch
of two Greek Operations: Aspida (Shield),
which involved the deployment of ~1 800
Greek police officers to the Greek land border with Turkey, and Xenios Zeus, which
focused on the inland apprehension of illegally staying persons. The much-increased
surveillance and patrolling activities at the
Greek-Turkish land border, combined with
the lengthening of the detention period to
up to 6 months, resulted in a drastic drop
in the number of detections of irregular migrants from ~2 000 during the first week of
August to below ten per week in each of the
last few weeks of October. Perhaps somewhat predictably, there were increased detections of illegal border-crossing at both
the Turkish sea border with Greece and land
border with Bulgaria, indicative of weak displacement effects from the operational area.
Also relevant in this area were several detections of significant amounts of heroin con-

cealed in vehicles attempting to cross the
Bulgarian-Turkish border.
Despite the clear impact of the Greek operational activities on the number of detections
of illegal border-crossing, there is little evidence to suggest that the absolute flow of
irregular migrants arriving in the region has
decreased in any way. In fact, document fraud
on flights from Istanbul increased once the
Greek operations commenced. Hence, there
remains a very significant risk of a sudden influx of migrants immediately subsequent to
the end of the operations.
As far as nationalities are concerned, at the
EU level migrants from Afghanistan continued to be the most widely detected across
a range of indicators. For instance, Afghans
ranked first in terms of detections of illegal
border-crossing, clandestine entries at BCPs
and illegal stay, and second for being subject
to decisions to leave. Hence, this nationality is by far the most significant for irregular migration at the EU level. In contrast to
most other nationalities, many detected Afghans had previously resided in Iran or Pakistan, rather than their home country. In
Pakistan, energy shortages in many refugee camps may accelerate departures of Afghans; according to the UNHCR, 400 000
to 800 000 Afghans are expected to leave
Pakistan during 2012 and 2013.
In Q3 2012 Syrian nationals were increasingly
detected across a wide range of indicators
and Member States, reflecting the desperate situation in their home country. For example, compared to the previous quarter,
detections of illegal border-crossing doubled in Q3 2012 to nearly 4 000. As a result
they ranked second at the EU level for ille-

5 of 70

Frontex · FRAN Quarterly · q3 2012

gal border-crossing. However, subsequent to
increased operational activity at the Greek
land border with Turkey, detections of Syrians fell significantly, although slower and to
a lesser extent than it was the case for other
nationalities, which reflects Syrians’ desperate plight. Each migrant detected illegally
crossing the border into Greece is handed a
decision to leave the country within 7 days
and, so correspondingly, in Q3 2012 Syrians
were also subject to twice as many decisions
to leave compared with the previous quarter.
Most Syrians continued their journey on to
other Member States, and so they were also
increasingly detected as clandestine entries
across the Western Balkans and using fraudulent documents travelling from Greek to
(mostly) German airports. According to EDFRAN data, on intra-Schengen flights the most
commonly detected documents used by Syrians were counterfeit Greek and Romanian ID
cards, image-substituted Bulgarian ID cards
and stolen blank Greek residence permits.
Finally, Syrian nationals submitted twice as
many asylum applications as in the previous quarter.
As Greece is a Schengen exclave and also
(mostly) a transit country, secondary movements from Greece to other EU Member
States were still detected in very high numbers. For example, at the EU level there were
more clandestine detections than in any
other period since data collection began for
this indicator in 2009, with most increases
reported from the Western Balkans and of
nationalities tightly coupled with those detected at the Greek border with Turkey. For
instance, Slovenia reported more detections
than any other Member State, mostly of Afghan migrants detected at the border with
Croatia who were making secondary movements after initially entering the Schengen
area in Greece.

6 of 70

Similarly, Afghan migrants, together with increasing numbers of nationals from Pakistan,
Bangladesh and Syria, were also detected arriving on pleasure boats in the southern Italian blue borders of Calabria and Apulia after
having initially entered the Schengen area
in Greece. In fact, according to the FRAN
data there were more detections in these
regions than ever before. Finally, a wide variety of nationalities were also increasingly
detected using fraudulent documents on
flights from Greece to airports in other EU
Member States, particularly in Germany.
Although Greece reported more than half of
all detections of illegal border-crossing, there
remained significant numbers reported from
elsewhere, particularly the Central Mediterranean. According to FRAN data, in Q3 2012
there were more than 3 500 reported detections of illegal border-crossing on the main
Central Mediterranean route (Italian Pelagic Islands, Sicily and Malta), a significant
decrease compared to the same reporting
period in 2011 during the peak associated
with the Arab Spring, but still the highest
reported so far in 2012, and higher than the
pre-Arab Spring peak of 2010. Additionally,
there were some significant increases of various nationalities such as Tunisians and Egyptians departing from their own countries,
and Somalis and Eritreans departing from
Libya. Several reports included details of how
sub-Saharan migrants were often deceived,
over-charged or even left to drown by their
facilitators during the embarkation process.
Ranking third at the EU level for detections
of illegal border-crossing, Algerians were also
detected along a range of border sections,
which is in contrast to most other nationalities which show strong preferences for
single entry points. Algerians were equally
detected at the Greek land border with Turkey, the Spanish land border with Morocco
and several areas of the Spanish sea border. In total, this amounts to a very signifi-

cant pressure from Algerian migrants, which
may be overlooked by a regional approach.
Moreover, they were very rarely refused entry or detected with fraudulent documents,
suggesting that they tended to avoid BCPs.
However, with considerable detections they
ranked fifth at the EU level as illegal stayers and seventh for decisions to leave, both
mostly in Belgium, which indicates their final destination.
Albanians continued to be detected illegally
crossing their land border with Greece at rates
that remain significant at the EU level (5% of
all detections) but with a slightly declining trend. They were, however, increasingly
detected using counterfeit border-crossing
stamps to fabricate travel histories and extend periods of stay. They were detected
mostly at their land border with Greece but
also at the land border of Slovenia.

the mos