2015

Africa-Frontex
Intelligence Community
Joint Report

2015

Africa-Frontex
Intelligence Community
Joint Report

1 of 52

Frontex official publications fall into four main categories: risk analysis, training, operations
and research, each marked with a distinct graphic identifier. Risk analysis publications bear a
triangular symbol formed by an arrow drawing a triangle, with a dot at the centre. Metaphorically, the arrow represents the cyclical nature of risk analysis processes and its orientation
towards an appropriate operational response. The triangle is a symbol of ideal proportions
and knowledge, reflecting the pursuit of factual exactness, truth and exhaustive analysis.
The dot at the centre represents the intelligence factor and the focal point where information from diverse sources converges to be processed, systematised and shared as analytical
products. Thus, Frontex risk analysis is meant to be at the centre and to form a reliable basis for its operational activities.

European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu
Warsaw, January 2016
Risk Analysis Unit
Frontex reference number: 20937/2015
OPOCE Catalogue number TT-01-16-058-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-21-5
doi:10.2819/436478
© Frontex, 2016
All rights reserved. Reproduction is authorised provided the source is acknowledged.
Cover photo (taken by a migrant): A group of sub-Saharans stranded in a desert mud on
their way to Sabha, southern Libya. © Frontex, 2015. All rights reserved.

DISCLAIMERS
This is a Frontex staff working document. This publication or its contents do not imply the
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of Frontex concerning the legal status of
any country, territory or city or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers
or boundaries. All maps and charts included in this report are the sole property of Frontex
and any unauthorised use is prohibited. Frontex disclaims any liability with respect to the
boundaries, names and designations used on the maps. The contents of open-source boxes
are unverified and presented only to give context and media representation of irregular-migration phenomena.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The AFIC Joint Report 2015 has been prepared by the Frontex Risk Analysis Unit. During the
course of developing this product, many colleagues at Frontex and outside contributed to it
and their assistance is hereby acknowledged with gratitude.

2 of 52

Table of contents
Executive summary #6
1.	Introduction and methodology #8
1.1.	Introduction #8
1.2.	Methodology #8
2.	Irregular migratory movements affecting AFIC countries and EU Member States #12
2.1.	Introduction #12
2.2.	Availability of legal travel channels #14
2.3.	Access to smuggling services, advice from relatives or friends and peer pressure #21
2.4. L
 ibya remains in a power vacuum #26
2.5.	Rising number of casualties among migrants #32
3.	Cross-border criminality #36
3.1.	Introduction #36
3.2.	Trafficking in human beings #36
3.3.	Document fraud involving AFIC nationals and travel documents issued by AFIC countries #37
3.4.	Drug smuggling #39
3.5.	Firearms trafficking #41
4.	Regional security threats #42
4.1.	Regional initiatives gain ground against Boko Haram #42
4.2.	Northern Mali remains unstable #48
5.	Conclusions and recommendations #50

3 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

List of abbreviations used
ACLED
Armed Conflict Location and Event Data Project
AFIC
Africa-Frontex Intelligence Community
AQIM
Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
African Union
AU
AVRR
Assisted Voluntary Return and Reintegration
BCP
border crossing point
CCRC	
Canary Islands Regional Coordination Centre of Guardia Civil (Centro de
Coordinación Regional de Canarias)
Frontex Consultative Forum
CF
CFA franc
Communauté financière africaine franc
CMFPR-I	Coordination of movements and patriotic resistance fronts I (Coordination des
mouvements et forces patriotiques de résistance I)
Coalition of the People of Azawad
CPA
CSDP
Common Security and Defence Policy
DRC
Democratic Republic of the Congo
DSS
Nigeria’s Department of State Services
EB-RAN
Eastern European Borders Risk Analysis Network
EC, COM
European Commission
ECOWAS
Economic Community of West African States
European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network
EDF-RAN
EPN
European Patrols Network
EU
European Union
EUCAP Sahel Mali European Union CSDP Mission in Mali
EUNAVFOR Med	European Union Naval Force – Mediterranean
EUR
euro
Statistical Office of European Communities
Eurostat
FOC
Full Operational Capability
Frontex	European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the
External Borders of the Member States of the European Union
Frontex Risk Analysis Network
FRAN
G5 Sahel
Mauritania, Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger and Chad
GADM
Database of Global Administrative Areas
Pro-unity Self-Defence Group of Imrad Tuareg and Allies
GATIA
GSPC	Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat (Groupe salafiste pour la prédication et
le combat)
HALCIA	
Niger’s High Authority for the Fight against Corruption and Similar Crimes
(Haute Autorité de lutte contre la Corruption et les Infractions Assimilées)
HCUA
High Council for the Unity of Azawad (Haut conseil pour l’unité de l’Azawad)
ID
identity document
Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre
IDMC
IDP
internally displaced person
IOM
International Organization for Migration
Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant
ISIL/Da’ish
ISWAP
Islamic State’s West Africa Province
JO
Joint Operation

4 of 52

MAA
Arab Movement of Azawad
MINUSMA	United Nations Multidimensional Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali
MNJTF
Multinational Joint Task Force
MNLA	National Movement for the Liberation of Azawad (Mouvement national pour la
libération de l’Azawad)
memorandum of understanding
MoU
MSF
Médecins Sans Frontières
MUJAO	Movement for Unity and Jihad in West Africa (Mouvement pour l’unicité et le Jihad
en Afrique de l’Ouest)
NEMA
Nigeria’s National Emergency Management Agency
NGO
non-governmental organisation
Offshore Patrol Vessel
OPV
OSCE
Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe
RFI
Request for Information
Rimbo Transport Voyageurs
RTV
SALB
Second Administrative Level Boundaries
SAR
search and rescue
trafficking in human beings
THB
TU-RAN
Turkey-Frontex Risk Analysis Network
UK
United Kingdom
UNHCR
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
USA
United States of America
USD
United States dollar
Visa Information System
VIS
WAI
Web Accessibility Initiative
WB-RAN
Western Balkans Risk Analysis Network
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime
UNODC
UN
United Nations

5 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Executive summary
Legal travel channels to the EU available for
most West Africans are quite narrow. Some
AFIC countries have visa rejection rates close
to 50%. This high rate indicates that irregular
migratory movements from the AFIC region
to the EU are largely perceived as economic
migration by consular authorities in the EU.
When measured in terms of the number of
refusals of entry issued per 1 000 passengers, flights from Lagos to Paris, with rates
of around 3–4 refusals for every 1 000 passengers, are considered the most risky. However, the overall ratio of refusals of entry to
the number of passengers has been steadily
declining on a number of air routes between
West Africa and Europe.
The prevailing profile of rejected visa applicants (young males) corresponds to the profile
of migrants arriving in the EU through irregular channels. Also, apart from North African
nationals all other AFIC country nationalities
face a very low risk of return after their irregular entry to Italy, which is the main entry point
for African migrants.
For many West Africans, the decision to migrate is motivated by the feeling of inequality as well as social, peer and family pressure
rather than by desperate need (poverty).
This is why many of the migrants are not the
worst-off in their home countries.
Routing through Niger is currently the preferred option despite the turmoil in Libya and
a high risk of loss of life when crossing the
Mediterranean. This is largely due to the fact
that would-be migrants face a much higher
risk of return if detected on other routes. Most
notably, very good operational cooperation
between Spain, Senegal, Mauritania and Mo-

6 of 52

rocco has significantly reduced the pressure
on the route towards the Canary Islands and
south of Spain.
The city of Agadez in Niger is catering for a
growing number of transiting migrants en
route to Libya and further on to the EU. Arriving in Niger and travelling to Agadez is a relatively cheap, fast and simple option. People
smugglers in Agadez consider themselves to
be service providers. Attempts to tackle this
growing industry could spark local protests.
Part of the challenge for the Nigerien authorities is the fact that the smuggling service industry is not controlled by one person
or group. Authorities in Niger also face transiting migrants who are determined to reach
Libya and Italy, have entered the territory of
Niger legally (under the ECOWAS free-movement protocol) and for the most part are able
to finance their onward journey.
AFIC members pointed to a lack of harmonisation, especially with regards to different
ECOWAS free-movement protocols. While
some countries allow entry with ID cards both
on land and air routes on the basis of bilateral
or multilateral agreements (e.g. between Senegal and Guinea or Senegal and Cape Verde),
others require travel documents (passports
and IDs) in line with the ECOWAS protocols
(Ghana and Nigeria). In practice, ECOWAS
countries’ citizens very often travel without
any kind of identity documents due to a lack
of basic knowledge of the free movement of
people within ECOWAS countries.
Additionally, with regards to the maximum
period of stay (90 days), travelling on the basis of ID card makes it difficult to confirm the
period of stay, as there is no notification of

entry/exit (a stamp or registration system).
Thus, in majority of cases this requirement
is not respected.
Some people arriving in Agadez (mostly Sudanese) are also lured by the promise of finding
gold in Djado, a hamlet located seven hundred kilometres north-east of Agadez, where
soil gold was discovered in 2013. Such artisanal mining carries life hazards and also breeds
the phenomenon of explosive smuggling on
board regular buses. Regular bus lines in the
ECOWAS region were also associated with
drug smuggling as reported by Niger.
Migrants making a maritime crossing continue
to run a high risk of dying in the process. The
increasing death toll in the Central Mediterranean during 2015, however, shows that more
vessels engaged in rescue operations do not
necessarily guarantee fewer deaths at sea.
For several West African nationalities, the
ratio between illegal border-crossings at external borders of the EU and the number of
EU visas issued approaches 1:1 (e.g. the case
of Malians in 2014).

Reducing irregular migration through an efficient asylum and visa system is likely to be
difficult to implement in the case of West Africa. This is suggested by the current visa rejection rates and the profiles of rejected visa
applicants and irregular migrants detected in
the Mediterranean.
Based on discussions during thematic workshops held in Africa, AFIC delegates agreed
that irregular migration, terrorism and organised crime must countered using a holistic approach.
Consensus was reached that the securitisation and prosecution of smugglers and terrorists is exacerbated by the porosity of borders
and vast areas of terrain in the Sahelian corridor (adjacent to ECOWAS free-movement
space), corruption, opaque criminal structures
and plethora of terrorist networks.
AFIC delegates proposed that fight against
cross-border criminality and terrorism should
be based on three pillars: international cooperation, exchange of intelligence, and the provision of training and technical equipment to
agencies and organisations involved in neutralising these security threats.

7 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

1.	Introduction and methodology
1.1.	Introduction
The Africa-Frontex Intelligence Community
(AFIC) was set up in 2010 to provide a framework for regular knowledge and intelligence
sharing in the field of border security between
Frontex and African countries. The concept of
this collaboration was broadly based on the
model of the Frontex Risk Analysis Network
(FRAN) and the two already established regional risk analysis networks (the Western
Balkans Risk Analysis Network – WB-RAN
and the Eastern European Borders Risk Analysis Network – EB-RAN).
In April 2010, a conference initiating this new
network was held in Madrid with the participation of representatives of selected African
states from West and North Africa, as well as
Immigration Liaison Officers based in some
African countries. The participants agreed
to name the network ‘the Africa-Frontex
Intelligence Community’, in short ‘the AFIC’.
Following the positive experiences of 2011 and
2012, further joint activities of the AFIC were
organised in 2013 and 2014. Several workshops, annual conferences, field visits and
three joint reports (prepared in English and
French) testify to the achievements of the
community.
The AFIC has also gained more visibility outside its immediate members by sharing its
knowledge with external stakeholders, such
as ECOWAS, the European Commission, the
European External Action Service, and regional initiatives such the Rabat and Khartoum Processes and the G5 Sahel (Mauritania,
Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger and Chad).

8 of 52

This growing recognition was also echoed in
the ‘EU Action Plan against migrant smuggling’ (COM(2015) 285 final), which recommended the AFIC to be further developed
as a platform for information-sharing and
joint analysis with third countries in Africa.
In 2015, several new countries participated
in the work of the AFIC. These are predominately countries of the Khartoum Process
and Chad.

1.2.	Methodology
Over recent years, the AFIC has grown and
matured as a community of experts. Discussions throughout 2014 revealed a clear need
for further development of the community
beyond the established model. In particular,
work was initiated to create a dedicated and
secure information-sharing platform that will
be accessible via the internet. This was designed to extend the type and number of reports which could be shared within the AFIC
and thus used in the drafting of this report.
Furthermore, AFIC participants decided to
create sub-regional analytical groups, based
on linguistic, thematic or geographic criteria
allowing for workshops to take place in Africa and not only in Europe, as has been the
case until now.
In March 2015, the AFIC held its first workshop in Warsaw, where information-sharing platform was presented and a training
session was offered to AFIC participants on
the use of the platform and the new reporting templates. Two types of reporting templates were agreed upon: Incident Reports
(to be prepared on an ad-hoc basis) and In-

Figure 1. Geographical scope of the Africa-Frontex Intelligence Community

Tunisia

Morocco

Egypt

Mauritania
Cape
Verde

Niger

Mali

Sudan
Chad

The
Senegal
Gambia

Eritrea

Burkina
Faso
Guinea

Djibouti
Benin

Cote
d'Ivoire

Sierra
Leone

Ghana

Nigeria

Somalia
South
Sudan

Togo

Liberia

Cameroon

Kenya

EU Member States/Schengen Associated Countries

Congo,
DRC

AFIC
Invited as observers in 2015
AFIC observer in 2014

Angola

Source: Frontex, 2015

telligence Analysis Reports (to be submitted
on a quarterly basis).

ports (on a quarterly basis) as well as
photographs and other graphic elements.

The workshop participants agreed that the
newly-created information-sharing platform
is a major step forward in the development
of the AFIC, as it:
nn Allows for structured, secure and regular
information sharing;
nn Enhances the goal of shared ownership
of the AFIC;
nn Offers near to real-time information sharing among all AFIC participants;
nn Limits access to the AFIC platform to registered users (no access to information uploaded by AFIC users to externals, such as
other EU institutions, commercial companies, banks, etc.);
nn Standardises the format of the provided
information: Incident Reports (on an adhoc basis) and Intelligence Analysis Re-

AFIC participants also noted that Frontex
should explore options on how to bring the
countries of the so-called Khartoum Process
gradually into the community.
The community also used the March 2015
workshop to agree on the composition of,
and the topics and venues for sub-regional
groups. Frontex initially proposed three
groups; however, the number was later reduced to two taking into account logistical
issues and available resources. The first workshop took place in Casablanca between 26
and 27 May 2015.
The purpose of this workshop was to discuss, share and jointly analyse very important issues linking Africa and Europe: terrorist

9 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Source: Frontex

lese hosts for their excellent support, hospitality and professional attitude during the
two events.

Figure 2. Participants from AFIC countries during a training session
on the use of a new platform and AFIC reporting templates

movements affecting the Sahel and North
Africa and irregular migration linking West
Africa with North Africa and the EU. In addition, by organising the first event on the African continent, the community also wanted
to test the feasibility of such events in the
future.

* In order to promote the highest
levels of transparency and respect
for Fundamental Rights in all
Frontex activities, the Frontex
Fundamental Rights Strategy
(March 2011) and Article 26a (2) of
the amended Frontex regulation
(December 2011) mandated
Frontex to create a Consultative
Forum (CF) comprised of relevant
European and international
fundamental rights organisations.
The organisations currently
represented in the CF are:
Amnesty International European
Institutions Office, Caritas
Europa, Churches’ Commission
for Migrants in Europe, Council
of Europe, European Asylum
Support Office, European Council
for Refugees and Exiles, European
Union Agency for Fundamental
Rights, International Catholic
Migration Commission,
International Commission of
Jurists, International Organisation
for Migration, Jesuit Refugee
Service, OSCE Office for
Democratic Institutions and
Human Rights, Platform for
International Cooperation on
Undocumented Migrants, Red
Cross EU Office, and the UNHCR.

10 of 52

The second workshop took place in Dakar
between 10 and 11 June 2015. The objective
was to review the functioning of the information sharing platform and, more importantly, discuss the topics of common interest:
cross-border crime and the threat posed by
Boko Haram.
The two workshops were conducted in ‘open
discussion’ format that allowed for direct and
very productive exchanges. As such, they
provided additional ideas for topics to be explored in the joint report. These include an
update on legal travel channels between the
EU and the AFIC region.
In order to present a more comprehensive
picture regarding this additional topic, Frontex addressed consular authorities from Germany, France, Belgium, Spain and Italy with
a specific Request for Information (RFI). Furthermore, the European Commission and the
European External Action Service were also
addressed with specific RFIs.
All replies to the RFIs and the issues discussed
during the two workshops were fully integrated into the present report. Frontex would
also like to take this opportunity to express
its gratitude to our Moroccan and Senega-

Joint analytical work continued throughout
August and early September when the first
draft of the annual report for 2015 was finalised. The draft was also shared with the
Frontex Consultative Forum on Fundamental Rights*, which provided its comments. In
addition, a meeting with International Organization for Migration (IOM) representatives was held in Dakar (June 2015) as were
numerous audio or video conferences with
the relevant representatives of the UNHCR,
supported by UNHCR-Frontex liaison office
in Warsaw.
A drafting workshop was held in Warsaw
between 8 and 9 September 2015 with the
purpose of improving the draft’s quality by
providing additional and more specific information from AFIC countries and other invited participants. Namely, apart from AFIC
participants, nine observer countries (Khartoum Process + Chad) and experts from different EU missions in the Sahel region were
also invited.
The drafting workshop in Warsaw was also
used to further enhance the visibility of the
community by adopting an AFIC logo (see
Fig. 5). It will be used in conjunction with
the Frontex logo in accordance with the established rules.
In addition, AFIC email server was created by
Frontex and all participants were provided
with initial training on the use of new communication channel. The new emails will be
used to reregister all countries in the AFIC on
the information-sharing platform.
Objectives of this joint report
Since the publishing of AFIC third annual report in November 2014, AFIC started to be
seen by policy makers in Brussels as a model
for a successful analytical and informationsharing platform. This fourth annual AFIC report is a further attempt to consolidate this
cooperation model further.

Source: Frontex
Source: Frontex

Figure 3. The first two sub-regional analytical group workshops were also attended by
representatives of several EU Member States and the European Commission

Source: Frontex

Figure 4. Drafting workshop in Warsaw was very productive with all participants engaging
in lively discussions

Figure 5. Africa-Frontex Intelligence Community adopted a logo that represents core values
of the community and symbolically brings the two continents closer together

Furthermore, AFIC joint report drafting process is designed in a way to provide many opportunities for African partners to engage
in practical implementation of risk analysis
methodology used by Frontex.
This annual report is also a culmination of
joint efforts in terms of information exchange
and the use of information-sharing platform.
As such, the report testifies also to the positive developments in bringing African part-

ners together and sharing information among
themselves as they see fit.
Lastly, the report should be read in the context of all major policy developments regarding the management of migration flows
between West Africa and Europe and initiatives aimed at improving border control and
return capacities of the countries involved
in the AFIC.

11 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

2.	Irregular migratory
movements affecting AFIC
countries and EU Member
States
2.1.	Introduction
The EU is facing a dramatic and unprecedented irregular migration crisis. More
precisely, with roughly 340 000 illegal border-crossings reported until July 2015, the
sheer magnitude of the development becomes clear. By comparison, during the same
period in 2014 (a record year in its own right)
‘only’ 123 400 illegal border-crossings were
reported.
In July 2015 alone, there were 107 500 detections of illegal border-crossing, which is more
than the sum of yearly totals for 2012 and 2013.
Figure 6. Comparison of different routes used by irregular migrants
from West Africa in 2015 compared with 2014
Jan-Jul 2015

Western
Mediterranean
route

Jan-Jul 2014

The dramatic nature of the situation is apparent, especially given the scale of irregular
migration flows faced by border-control authorities in Greece, Hungary and Italy. These
three Member States reported 97% of all
cases of illegal border-crossing in the EU during 2015.
A significant share of this flow is composed
of persons coming from countries producing
very high numbers of refugees (e.g. Afghanistan, Syria and Iraq). This particular flow has,
during 2015, mostly affected Greece on the
Eastern Mediterranean route, and by extension Hungary and Croatia on the Western Balkan route. The pressure stemming
from large numbers of arriving refugees is
also being largely felt by the main destination EU Member States (Germany, Sweden,
the UK and France).
In the Central Mediterranean, however, subSaharan Africans are the single largest group
of persons being detected/rescued. More
specifically, Nigerians, Gambians, Senegalese, Malians and Ghanaians are the top five
nationalities detected amongst AFIC country nationals.

Eastern
Mediterranean
route
Western
Balkan
route
Central
Mediterranean
route
Grand Total

0

5 000 10 000 15 000 20 000 25 000 30 000 35 000 40 000

Source: FRAN data as of 10 August 2015

12 of 52

Their numbers have been steadily increasing, mostly in the Central Mediterranean
as shown in Figure 6, which compares the
numbers of arrivals from West Africa in the
first seven months of 2014 and the same period of 2015.

Figure 7. Detections of illegal border-crossing at European external borders during July 2015 compared with July 2014

Detections of illegal border-crossing
at European external borders
July 2014

July 2015

Jan–Jul 2014 Jan–Jul 2015

Eastern Med. route
Western Balkans route
Central Med. route
Other routes (outside the map)
Total EU – Detections

5 433
1 738
24 107
1 286
32 564

49 911
34 833
20 871
1 885*
107 500*

18 395
8 089
88 217
8 768
123 469

132 240
102 342
91 302
14 156*
340 040*

Total EU – Persons (estimate)

31 000

72 000

117 000

261 000

*estimates

Western
Balkan

1 738

34 833
100 000
90 000

Central
Mediterranean

24 107

5 433

80 000

49 911

70 000
60 000

Eastern
Mediterranean

20 871

50 000
40 000

Overall EU long term trend

30 000

Monthly
detections
of illegal
bordercrossing

20 000
10 000
Total
2 0 0 9

2 0 1 0

2 0 1 1

2 0 1 2

2 0 1 3

2 0 1 4

2 0 1 5

Source: FRAN and JORA data as of 10 August 2015

Using knowledge of AFIC experts, contributions from the European Commission, EU
Member States’ consular authorities, regular
reporting from EU Member States and available information from debriefing activities of
Frontex, the current chapter explores underlying reasons behind these developments. The
focus is put on analysing how several key factors have evolved. These include:

(i)	availability of legal travel channels for
AFIC country nationals;
(ii)	likelihood of entering the EU without
being returned and the risk of dying en
route;
(iii)	advice from relatives or friends already
present in the EU and peer pressure;
(iv)	access to smuggling services.

13 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

2.2.	Availability of legal travel
channels
2.2.1. In Africa

* The Economic Community of
West African States (ECOWAS)
was established on May
28 1975 via the treaty of Lagos
with a mandate of promoting
economic integration in
all fields of activity of the
constituting countries. Member
countries making up ECOWAS
are Benin, Burkina Faso,
Cape Verde, Côte d’Ivoire,
the Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,
Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali,
Niger, Nigeria, Sierra Leone,
Senegal and Togo.

Travelling in Africa is greatly facilitated by the
existence of ECOWAS* free-movement protocols and great porosity of the borders. Citizens have therefore access to a large area of
West Africa and the Sahel with roughly 340
million inhabitants. The volume of these regular movements is difficult to estimate as reliable passenger flow data are not available;
however, it is likely quite significant.
Despite the legal framework that was put in
place over thirty years ago, ECOWAS nationals are still facing limitations regarding free
movement. More precisely, there are significant differences among ECOWAS member
states’ implementing entry controls. Namely,
ECOWAS member states reserve the full right
to refuse entry to anyone from the ECOWAS
region on the basis of their national legislation, which can substantially differ between
one another. In some cases, border-control
officials enjoy absolute discretion to refuse
entry to would-be migrants without the need
to explain their reasons or process the case.
These challenges were also mentioned during the AFIC workshop in Dakar when a lively
debate arose over the question of whether
one ECOWAS member state has the right to
refuse entry to a national of another ECOWAS member state on the basis that the person has no sufficient means of subsistence.
The debate also demonstrated the possible
differing interpretations of the same text
amongst border-control authorities in the
ECOWAS region.
While some countries allow entry with ID
cards both on land and air routes on the basis of bilateral or multilateral agreements
(e.g. between Senegal and Guinea and Sen-

14 of 52

Box 1. Increasing number of bus
companies offering extensive
route network in the ECOWAS
region
A novel feature during 2014 and 2015,
according to AFIC experts, is the increasing market presence of many
bus companies. They compete for
their customers by providing relatively cheap and thus affordable transport for potentially millions of persons
across ECOWAS region.
Rimbo Transport Voyageurs in particular stands out as the company
with the most developed network of
routes and prices that are quite affordable. This company is also frequently
mentioned by irregular migrants upon
arrival in Italy. Its role in facilitating
transit through Agadez in Niger is explained in greater detail in Section 2.3.

egal and Cape Verde) other require travel
documents following the ECOWAS protocols
(Ghana and Nigeria). In practice, ECOWAS
countries’ citizens very often travel without
any kind of identity documents due to lack
of basic knowledge of the free movement of
people within the ECOWAS countries.
Additionally, with regards to the maximum
period of stay (90 days) travelling on the basis of identity card makes it difficult to confirm
the period of stay as there is no notification
of entry/exit (stamp or registration system).
Thus, in majority of cases this requirement is
not respected.
The European Commission and its ECOWAS
counterpart are aware of these many challenges. In fact, in its European Agenda on Migration, the European Commission proposed

a 24-million-euro project aimed at ‘maximising the development potential of free movement of persons and migration in West Africa
by supporting the effective implementation
of the ECOWAS Free Movement of Persons’
Protocols and the ECOWAS Common Approach on Migration.’ The project covers all
ECOWAS member states and Mauritania.
In its proclaimed objective, the action wants
to strengthen the capacities of the ECOWAS
commission to lead an intra-regional dialogue
on free-movement and migration issues and
act as a platform for policy development and
harmonisation.
Furthermore, the capacities of national institutions of ECOWAS member states and
Mauritania in the areas of migration data
collection and management, migration policy development, border management, labour migration and anti-trafficking will be
improved.
2.2.2. Between Africa and Europe
As the recently published European Agenda
on Migration (COM(2015) 240 final) states,
‘a clear and well implemented framework for
legal pathways to entrance in the EU (both
through an efficient asylum and visa system)
will reduce push factors towards irregular
stay and entry, contributing to enhance security of European borders as well as safety
of migratory flows.’
The fact, however, remains that most of the
countries in the Sahel and West Africa have
the highest visa and asylum rejections rates
compared to other regions of the world. For
example, when it comes to visas, West Africa is the region with a visa rejection rate
almost six times higher than the EU average.
In 2014, almost one in three visa applications was rejected by EU Member States’

consular authorities in West Africa resulting in 213 000 visas issued, predominately,
by five EU Member States (France, Germany,
Italy, Belgium and Spain; data do not include the UK and Ireland) for a region with
an estimated 340 million inhabitants. This
represented only 1.3% of the total number
of short-term visas issued by EU Member
States (excluding the UK and Ireland) to third
country nationals.
In the case of the Democratic Republic of the
Congo, visa rejection rate stood at 50% during 2014, which was the highest rate among
AFIC countries and the second highest for
any third country in 2014. Other AFIC countries with consistently high rejection rates
(30–40%) since 2011 are Guinea, Mali, Senegal, Nigeria, Cameroon and Ghana. In fact,
there were five AFIC countries among the
top ten third countries with the highest visa
rejection rates in 2014.
The fact that visas are hard to obtain even
for AFIC representatives was mentioned several times during the past meetings of the
AFIC and reiterated during the AFIC workshop in Dakar. While in some cases these
are logistical problems (no Polish consulate in their country or the need to travel
great distances for the fingerprinting in accordance with VIS regulation), the biggest
concern is the fact that a stamp with ‘visa
rejected’ is put in the passport of an unsuccessful visa applicant. This fact alone has a
potentially detrimental effect if the same
persons wants to travel to Canada, the USA
or the Persian Gulf.
The AFIC representative from Cameroon also
mentioned that in some cases people will
change their passport up to four or five times
in order to have one without such a stamp.
In his words: ‘This practice is breeding also
identity and document fraud as many try to
fraudulently obtain a clean passport’.

15 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Figure 8. Rejection rates of visas and the number of visas issued to AFIC country nationals in 2014
Visa rejection rate (percentage)
60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Tunisia
Visas issued
Rejection rate of visas

Egypt
Niger
Morocco
Togo
Burkina Faso
Guinea-Bissau

AFIC countries

Mauritania
Benin
Cape Verde
Libya
Algeria
Côte d'Ivoire
Cameroon
Mali
Ghana
Nigeria
Senegal
Guinea
Congo (DRC)
0

50 000

100 000

150 000

200 000

250 000

300 000

Number of visas issued
Source: Complete statistics on short-stay visas issued by the Schengen States

16 of 52

350 000

400 000

450 000

500 000

Source: Cameroonian presentation at AFIC workshop in 2015

2.2.3. Regular passenger flow between
West Africa and Europe
According to available Eurostat data, the
number of passengers arriving in the EU on
flights originating from Benin, Burkina Faso,
Côte d’Ivoire, Cape Verde, the Gambia, Ghana,
Guinea, Mali, Nigeria, Niger, Senegal and Togo
has been steadily rising since 2009. During
2014 this trend reversed as the numbers decreased compared to 2013.
This was likely due to flights from Senegal and
Nigeria carrying fewer passengers to Paris,
Frankfurt, Amsterdam, Madrid and Brussels
airports. The largest drop in passengers were
on flights to Paris, both Charles de Gaulle and
Orly airports especially from June 2014 onwards, while Madrid also registered fewer
passengers from Dakar, albeit with a more
moderate decrease.
These decreases on direct routes to Europe
are likely down to the ‘Ebola’ restrictions
and passengers increasingly flying via Turkey
given that Turkish Airlines increased capacity
from Lagos and Dakar in the summer of 2014.
In the case of Lagos, Turkish Airlines has increased its capacity annually for a number

Figure 9. As visa rejection rates are the highest in West and Central
Africa consular authorities of several EU Member States clearly mark
a rejection by stamp affixing a stamp in the passport pages normally
reserved for visas and entry/exit stamps

Box 2. Impact of introduction of Visa Information
System (VIS)
Facilitation in visa procedure, less visa shopping: with the
implementation of the VIS consular authorities can verify also
possible other visa applications of the applicant. This gives a
full image of the profile of the applicant (purpose of stay and
country of destination). The status of earlier visa applications
can be decisive in some cases.
Reduction of fraud: The fingerprints of the applicant and the
verification in the VIS by linking with other applications, give a
useful control mechanism of the identity of the applicant. This
limits the cases of look-alikes and identity theft.
Source: Belgian consular authorities in Dakar, Abuja, Abidjan and Yaounde (reply to
the RFI)

Figure 10. Gradual increase of air passenger flow both from West African countries and
Morocco to the EU
Air passenger flow from West African and Moroccan airports to EU destinations between 2009 and 2014

5 000 000
4 000 000
3 000 000
2 000 000
1 000 000
0

2009

2010

2011
Morocco

2012

2013

2014

West Africa

Source: Eurostat as of 26 June 2015

17 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Box 3.

Turkish Airlines have the largest network in Africa

Turkish Airlines further expanded during 2015 adding at least
six new destinations in Africa. The airline already has the largest network in the continent among foreign carriers, followed
by Air France and Emirates. By the end of 2015, Turkish Airlines has approximately 45 destinations in its African network
across 30 countries.
Air France has the second largest African network among European carriers with 34 destinations. Brussels Airlines operates
19 destinations, while British Airways has 18 and Lufthansa 13.
Unsurprisingly, several members of AFIC members mentioned
the fact that Turkish Airlines are transporting a growing number of their nationals either towards Istanbul or in transit towards the Gulf region.
Flying to Turkey seems to be fairly easy for many would-be migrants who gain an easy access to the external borders of the EU.
Importantly, during 2015 significantly more Congolese and Cameroonians, Moroccans, Algerians, Nigerians and Ghanaians were
detected en route from Greece through the Western Balkans
towards Hungary.

Source: Frontex

Turkish Airlines has nearly doubled its seat capacity to Africa
from about 38 000 in 2011 to about 70 000 weekly seats at
the end of 2014.

Figure 11. Turkish Airlines advertisement
in Dakar, where passenger numbers on
Turkish Airlines flights are increasing

of years, however, in the case of Dakar, the
capacity was increased by over 50% in 2014,
which was not the case in 2013. These diversions in passenger flow during the summer months could account for around 3 000
passengers per month not taking the usual
direct connections to Europe (calculation
based on the capacity of aircraft and frequency of flights). Also of importance is the
fact that Turkish Airlines have been adding
capacity on all their flights to Africa, including in other AFIC countries (like Cameroon)
that are not included in the Eurostat data
set (see Box 3).
Flights from Sierra Leone and Liberia, which
are not included in the Eurostat database,

Source: centreforaviation.com

Figure 12. Lagos and Dakar accounted for most passengers travelling via air route towards
the EU in 2013 and 2014

Others
17%
Abidjan
6%

Lagos
27%

2014

Abuja
11%
Accra
12%

Source: Eurostat as of 26 June 2015

18 of 52

Abidjan
6%

2013

Abuja
12%

Others
20%

Lagos
28%

Dakar
25%

Accra
12%

Dakar
24%

Figure 13. The main destination airports from West Africa to the EU were Paris Charles de
Gaulle, Porto Santo, London Heathrow and Amsterdam Schiphol
Passenger flow between the main West African airports and European destinations during 2014

250 000

200 000

Amsterdam/Schiphol

Madrid/Barajas

London/Heathrow

Paris/Orly

Paris/Charles De Gaulle

Frankfurt/Main

Brussels/Brussels-national

Porto Santo

150 000

100 000

50 000

0

Lagos

Dakar

Accra

Abuja

Abidjan

Bamako

Praia

Dakar

Source: Eurostat as of 26 June 2015

Figure 14. 2009 and 2012 saw a high rates of refusals of entry issued to West Africans
(principally at London Heathrow and Paris Charles de Gaulle) despite relatively low
passenger flows, but since 2012 refusals of entry have been declining sharply thanks to all EU
destinations issuing less refusals
Refusals of entry issues to West African countries’ citizens at reporting EU airports between 2009 and 2014

arrivals

1 500 000

2 800

refusals

2 700
2 600

1 450 000

2 500

1 400 000

2 400

1 350 000

2 300

1 300 000

2 200

1 250 000
1 200 000

2 100
2009

2010

2011

2012

2013

2014

total refusals of entry upon
arrival to the EU

Total passenger flow
from West African air routes

1 550 000

2 000

Source: Eurostat and FRAN data

Figure 15. Refusals of entry are gradually decreasing, although each year a surge occurs in
the final four months of the year
Monthly breakdown of passenger flow (left scale) compared to refusals of entry (right scale) in 2012–2014

160 000

passenger flow

refusals
300

140 000

250

120 000
100 000

200

80 000

150

60 000

100

40 000

50

0

Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec

20 000

2012

2013

0

2014

Source: Eurostat and FRAN data

19 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

could have further dented this longer term
rising trend of passenger flow in the second
half of 2014, since flights between London
Heathrow and Freetown/Monrovia (British Airways) were suspended between August 2014 and January 2015, due to the Ebola
crisis.
In 2014, most passengers from West Africa
used Nigeria’s Lagos Murtala Muhammed
International Airport to make their way towards Europe, with around 56% of these
440 000 passengers flying to London Heathrow airport, the rest were split between the
international airports of Paris, Amsterdam
and Frankfurt.
The second main air hub to the EU from West
Africa during 2014 proved to be Senegal’s
Léopold Sédar Senghor International Airport in Dakar, despite noting the largest decrease in its passenger flow compared with
any other West African airport under investigation (23 782 or 6.7% since 2013).
In addition to these two main airports, Ghana’s Accra Kotoka International airport with
connections to London Heathrow, Frankfurt
International and Paris Charles de Gaulle, as
well as Nigeria’s Abuja Nnamdi Azikiwe International Airport connecting Paris Charles
de Gaulle, proved to be airports with significant passenger flows above 180 000 in 2014.
The drop in the share of total passengers
travelling through Lagos, Dakar and Abuja
seem to have been diverted towards other
airports in the West African region. The main
airport witnessing a large surge in passenger
travel in 2014 was Bamako in Mali. Between
2011 and 2013, the passenger flow to Paris
dropped from 67 986 (2011) to 38 578 (2012)
to 29 949 (2013). In 2014 however, the passenger flow through Bamako bounced back
to 68 327. This can be linked to the end of operation Serval, the French military intervention in Mali which began in January 2013 and

20 of 52

lasted until mid-2014. Indeed, during 2013 no
passengers departed Bamako towards Europe in the first five months of the year, coinciding with the beginning of the military
intervention.
2.2.4. Ratios of refusals of entry
compared to passenger flow
The peak in EU-wide refusals of entry noted
in 2012, was mainly due to London Heathrow
and Paris Charles de Gaulle airports issuing
high numbers of refusals. Since 2012, the refusals of entry issued by these two major air
hubs to West Africans has been declining,
contributing greatly to the overall decrease
in refusals of entry issued by Member State
authorities at air borders.
The highest number of refusals of entry per
1 000 passengers in 2014 were on flights between Lagos and Paris Charles de Gaulle. Refusals in Paris were slightly above 3 per 1 000
passengers, which represents a marginally
higher rate compared to 2013.
Most of these refusals were issued because
no appropriate documentation justifying the
purpose and length of stay could be provided
by the traveller. A disproportionately high
(55%) share of refusals of entry were issued
during the last 4 months of the year, which
seems to be in line with the general trend
across reporting EU airports.
Passengers travelling from Lagos to other European destinations were also refused entry
in higher ratios than from other departure
airports in West Africa. Indeed, authorities
at London Heathrow airport refused entry
to around 2.7 out of 1 000 passengers while
in Amsterdam this ratio was a lower 1.7 out
of 1 000. Reasons for refusals were similar,
in that most passengers were refused for a
lack of visa or residence permit, or because
they could not present suitable documents
to justify their stay.

In contrast, the lowest rates of refusal measured against passenger flow were between
Abuja (Nigeria) and Paris, while Accra (Ghana)
to Amsterdam followed close behind. On
these connections the refusal of entry ratio
per 1 000 passengers was below 0.5 in 2013
and dropped to below 0.25 in 2014, in other
words approximately 1 in 4 000 passengers
were refused entry.

2.3.	Access to smuggling
services, advice from
relatives or friends and
peer pressure
Most irregular migrants from West Africa
who cannot obtain a visa or travel to the EU
using other legal avenues opt to travel by land
through Agadez in Niger, where many smuggling services are easily available.
Evidence from debriefing of migrants in the
Central Mediterranean during 2015 suggest
that many have started their journey after receiving information or encouragement from
friends or relatives already in the EU. The
suggestion was that it is now fairly easy to
reach the EU regardless of the heightened
risk of dying in the desert or at sea in the
Mediterranean.
This perceived easiness is obviously prompting many new departures as open source reporting suggests that the number of weekly
arrivals of West Africans to Agadez can reach
around 6 000.
What is interesting is the fact that poverty
is not necessarily the sole factor that influences a decision to migrate. As suggested by
an IOM study*, ‘poverty usually needs to be
accompanied by a perception of inequality or
an appreciation for the fact that something
greater exists’. IOM termed this as ‘aspirational migration’.

Box 4.

Migrants’ testimony

‘Some of my friends went to Europe and when they came back,
they had money and bought cars for their family. One day I
thought, “I am the same as these people, I should do the same”.’
(Male, Côte d’Ivoire, 25)
Source: Migration Trends Across the Mediterranean: Connecting the Dots, IOM, June 2015

An example given by the AFIC representatives of Niger highlights the aspirational nature of some migratory movements: even
though the agricultural region of Kantche
in Niger (on the border with Nigeria) is relatively rich, people who are relatively well
off still choose to depart. Furthermore, micro credits given by the government to local
women were used to finance trips to Europe
instead of for its intended purpose.
Many in Niger and West Africa view migration to Europe also as a ‘cultural’ phenomenon. Some would-be migrants are driven by
the fame and status migrants gain after they
are able to buy a house or a car upon return
from Europe. These perceptions of how easy
it is to get rich in Europe are strong.
The paradox mentioned by the representative
of Niger is that many migrants would never
accept menial and low-paying jobs in their
own countries but are willing to do so when
either in transit or already at destination.
In any case, arriving in Niger and travelling
to Agadez is relatively cheap, fast and quite
simple. As discussed in further detail below,
migrants need only buy a bus ticket and hop
on buses that connect Niamey and Agadez
with numerous cities in the ECOWAS region.

* Migration Trends
across the Mediterranean:
Connecting the Dots, IOM,
June 2015

Many regular bus lines are operating en route
from countries like the Gambia, Senegal, Benin, Mali and Ghana to Niger. In the case of
migrants from the Gambia, there are at least

21 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

four companies operating buses en route between the Gambia and the city of Agadez:
Rimbo Transport Voyageurs (RTV), Sonef,
Africa Star and 3STV.

Source: Frontex

For example, it costs around EUR 60 or
41 000 CFA francs to travel 1 600 km from
Cotonou in Benin to Agadez in Niger. From
Dakar in Senegal, RTV is offering tickets for
EUR 120 for the journey that covers almost
3 800 km (see Fig. 16).
Migrants usually pay for each leg of the bus
ride separately so that they do not carry large
sums of money with them. The money is

Figure 17. Hundreds of young Africans wait to board a RTV bus from
Niamey to Agadez in late July 2015. The ticket costs EUR 19

Figure 16. Main routes and prices of the bus company Rimbo Transport Voyageurs linking many cities in West Africa
with Agadez

Algeria

Mauritania

Mali

Niger

Agadez

Dakar

Senegal

Segou
Bamako

Niamey

Zinder

Ouagadougou
Burkina
Faso

Guinea

Benin
Nigeria

Sierra
Leone

Côte
d’lvoire

Ghana

Liberia

Abidjan

Source: Frontex, RTV

22 of 52

Cotonou
Lomé
Accara

Cameroon

Diffa

Chad

Nigerien authorities are maintaining several
checkpoints between Niamey and Agadez.
Police and soldiers manning these checkpoints are often accused of taking bribes
from smugglers and migrants. In fact, according to Niger’s agency HALCIA (Haute Autorité
de lutte contre la Corruption et les Infractions Assimilées) corruption remains a major issue. In
its report from 2013 the HALCIA concluded
that payments to security forces and local
authorities totalled USD 450 per vehicle and
USD 30 per foreign migrant on the route between Agadez and the Libyan border. The
HALCIA mission also found that bribes paid
by migrants were essential to keep the security forces functioning as money earmarked
in the military budget to buy diesel for vehicles, spare parts and food simply disappeared in Niamey.

Source: Niger, AFIC email system

transferred using money transfer companies
along the route.

Figure 18. Regular bus lines are not used only for transport of people
but also drugs

Box 5.

AFIC Incident Report.

Operation against a migrant smuggling network
This sentiment was echoed during the April
2015 HALCIA workshop on corruption in the
road transport sector. According to the chief
of staff of the Minister for Transport of Niger, corruption and false travel expenses have
become common practices in relations between some road users and those responsible
for management and traffic control. Furthermore, corruption in the transport sector is
also manifest in unhealthy practices regarding issuing of administrative documents, and
especially the control of the roads through
what is commonly called ‘road harassment’.

27.05.2015 – As part of the fight against Illegal immigration,
Nigerien National Police intercepted, at the entrance of the
city of Agadez, 124 sub-Saharans. They are as follows: 12 Gambian, 15 Senegalese, 45 Nigerians, 2 Bissau Guineans, 10 Malians,
1 Guinean, 11 Ivorians, 6 Burkinabe, 21 Ghanaians and 1 Beninese.
Result: The Nigerien authorities have put several buses available to ensure return of the migrants to their home countries.
Source: Nigerien AFIC delegation

The issue of corruption is also exacerbated
by the fact that in practically all AFIC countries border guards who are sent to remote
regions consider this as a form of professional
punishment and are therefore unmotivated.
As reported by Cameroon, the approach often
taken by the authorities to counter corruption
is to rotate available staff on a regular basis.

23 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Box 6. Smuggling of explosives on regular bus
connections in Niger
Authorities in Niger are confronted with a growing problem of
explosives being smuggled on regular passenger buses. There
were at least two seizures of large quantities of explosives and
detonators during July-August 2015. Both cases were discovered during routine checks of passengers’ baggage on bus lines
linking Niamey and Agadez. The first seizure was of 96 sticks
of explosives, 50 detonators, 10 detonating cords and 6 rolls of
detonating cords. The second one was very similar regarding
the material however with smaller quantities.
Some AFIC partners expressed their worry (during AFIC workshop in Warsaw, September 2015) that these explosives might
also be used for terrorist attacks in the wider region.
Source: Niger, AFIC workshop in Warsaw, September 2015

When buses arrive in Agadez, passengers are
immediately surrounded by people, called
‘Chasseurs’ offering accommodation in socalled ‘ghettos’ and onward transport to
Libya. They get a few thousand CFA francs
(up to EUR 5) for each migrant they bring to
the ghetto. Accommodation is reportedly

not very expensive as most of the profits are
made on transport towards Libya.
Interviewed migrants, authorities in Niger,
different NGOs and open sources cite fairly
similar prices for the trip to Sabha – between
EUR 180 and 300. Usually, the money is split
between the owner of the ghetto and the
driver of who reportedly gets around 100 000
CFA francs or EUR 150 per each migrant.
Those that cannot afford to travel to Libya
opt to go to Morocco (Algeria/Morocco/
Spain) and in some cases are provided with
Malian passports (visa-free status in Algeria
and Morocco) and/or a false UNHCR document registering them as refugees is Algeria. ‘Rental’ of this kind of documents costs
between EUR 50 (for a Malian passport) and
EUR 10 (for UNHCR documents). Malian or
UNHCR refugee documents are used for
identification during many road check Algerian authorities hold on major roads in the
region. Once in Maghnia, close to the Moroccan border, the networks will take care
of retrieving the documents so that they
can be reused.

Source: Georg Hofer

The vast majority, however, chooses to go
to Libya. Some arrivals in Agadez (mostly
Sudanese) are also lured by the promise of
finding gold in Djado, a hamlet seven hundred
kilometres north-east of Agadez, where soil
gold was discovered in 2013. Such artisanal
mining not only carries life hazards but also
breeds smuggling of explosives on regular
buses (see Box 6).

Figure 19. A group of young migrants from Burkina Faso is waiting for
onward transport in a ghetto in Agadez

24 of 52

Box 7.

EU to help Niger by creating a pilot multi-purpose centre

According to the European Agenda on Migration ‘a
pilot multi-purpose centre is to be set up in Niger.
Working with the IOM, the UNHCR and the Niger
authorities, the centre will combine the provision of
information, local protection and resettlement opportunities for those in need. Such centres in countries of origin or transit will help to provide a realistic
picture of the likely success of migrants’ journeys,
and offer assisted voluntary return options for irregular migrants.’
Whereas the existing four centres in Niger (operated by IOM) provide basic assistance to migrants
and limited Assisted Voluntary Return and Reintegration (AVRR) opportunities, the new multi-purpose
centre project will offer a more comprehensive range
of services aimed at supporting migrants (including
returnees) and local host communities, and promoting alternatives to irregular migration.

Such a centre should offer the possibility of medical and
psychological assistance to migrants transiting through
Niger as well as the host communities. The migrants
would be advised on the dangers of irregular migration, and provide a realistic view of future perspectives
of life in Europe (existence as an irregular migrant) and
inform about credible alternatives to risky journeys.
According to AFIC representative from Niger persuading
the transiting migrants not to continue their onward
journey is and will remain an uphill battle. Namely, the
authorities in Agadez are dealing with migrants who
are determined to reach Libya and Italy, have invested
money and reputational capital, are legally present on
the territory of Niger (ECOWAS free-movement protocol) and in most part are able to finance their onward
journeys. Only small minority request return assistance
from IOM and their transit centre is currently (August
2015) almost empty (capacity up to 1 000 persons).

Box 8. Niger adopts a tough law against the
smuggling of migrants. This is the first law of
that kind in West African countries
The Nigerien Parliament approved a law that increases
sentences from 1 to 30 years of prison, penalties from
3 million up to 30 million CFA francs (EUR 4 500–
45 000) for human traffickers and allows for the seizure of their vehicles.
According to the Nigerien Ministry of Justice, the
main goal of this law is ‘to protect the country borders. At these disturbed times, when the organised
crime sows the terror in our country, it is essential
that all those who travel have their identity accreditation. This law imposes it’.

Smaller vans are also transporting would-be migrants from Niamey
to Agadez
Source: Spanish National Police

25 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

2.3.1. Growing service industry catering
for transiting migrants in Agadez

prior to 2011 when a lot of Africans were travelling to Libya for work.

Thousands of would-be migrants transit
Agadez every month. In fact, given the increasing weekly arrivals in Agadez and almost 45 000 that have already irregularly
entered Italy from Libya (until August 2015),
roughly 100 000 West Africans are expected
to transit through Agadez in 2015. In a city of
140 000 people, the numbers are staggering and difficult to ignore. According to open
source estimates, these numbers are as much
as four times higher compared to the period

Unsurprisingly, local officials and inhabitants
(according to open sources) view this transit
as beneficial to the local economy. Transiting
migrants spend money on food, water, accommodation, and generally contribute critically to the local economy. Furthermore, the
steady demise of regular tourism prompted
many former tour guides to switch and cater for the transiting migrants.
Attempts to tackle this growing industry
could spark riots in Agadez. Part of the challenge for authorities in Niger is also the fact
that no one person controls the smuggling/
services industry. Already in 2013 Niger’s national police reported there were more than
70 smugglers ‘ghettos’ active in Agadez.

Source: Georg Hofer

2.4. Libya remains in a power
vacuum

Source: Jochen Stanchke

Figure 20. Water stand in Agadez where locals are selling water
canisters to the migrants preparing to travel through Sahara to Libya

Figure 21. A migrant is waiting in front of a banking establishment in
Agadez for money transfer

26 of 52

The current Libyan situation is characterised by the collapse of government security
structures, even in the west of the country,
where most of the migrants start their journey towards Europe. The security vacuum is
filled by militias, often performing duties in
their area of influence. They are not bound
by state law, but rather guided by their own
interests. These militias range from city and
district militias to tribal militias, ideologically motivated militias and criminal gangs.
The command and control structures often
function only to a limited extent.
The southern tribes of Libya, the Toubou
and Tuareg are both engaged in providing
some border security, in the absence of a
central and effective border force. However,
elements from both tribes are almost certainly also involved in the smuggling business themselves, and it is judged that their
primary interests will remain financial.

Box 9.

Irregular routes as reported by Niger

According to the National Police of Niger, moving towards Libya or Algeria maintains these main routes
than precedent years:
n	
Agadez/Arlit/Assamaka/Inguezzam/Tamanrassett,
the main road, which is less risky;
n	
Agadez/Arlit/Inguezzam/Tamanrassett (route bypasses the police station);
n	
Agadez/Arlit/Tchingalen/Bouss Adrar/Tchibarakaten, where Libyan and Algerian facilitators
offer packages to Janett (Algeria) or Gath (Libya).
Migrants are housed in places called ‘garage’ that
belong to the facilitators. Crossing to Algeria or
Libya is done in small groups and preferably overnight in order to avoid possible checkpoints;
Agadez/Ténéré/Dirkou/Seguidine/DaoTimi/
n	
Madama/Toumo/Gatrone/Oubari/Sabahaon.

Starting from Seguidine, the route is very dangerous and migrants face a high risk of dying in
the desert given the many cases of drivers simply abandoning migrants;
n	
Agadez/Dirkou/Seguidine/Chirfa/Djado/Janet in Algeria. This route is also very dangerous since most
of the journey is done at night with only stars showing the way;
n	
Tchintabaraden/Azanag/Albada/Nabamgaré/
Assamaka/Tamanrasset/Dabab;
n	
Tchintabaraden/Gharo/Tassara/Assamaka/Tamanrasset/Dabab. The routes departing from Tchintabaraden are becoming more and more important.
Often, the transport is provided by vehicles from
Libya.

Geographical representation of these routes as presented by Niger during the AFIC workshop in Casablanca (May 2015)

Libya

State borders
Direction of migration
The Niger River
Main towns

Janett

Algeria

Capital cities

Oubari
Gath
Gatrone

Tchibarakaten Well

Tamnarasset

Siguidine
Tchingalen

Inguezam
Assamaka

Mali

Arlit

Dirkou
Ténéré Tree

Bilma

Agadez

Niger

Chad

Niamey

Burkina Faso
Benin

Nigeria

27 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

2.4.1. Anatomy of smuggling networks
in Libya

Boat left adrift

Smugglers recovering
the rubber boat

It is challenging for the smugglers to transfer
migrants to the coastal departure points, as
they have to move through the various militia
control points. Due to hostilities and rivalry
among militias, their controlled areas change
constantly. Therefore, it is indispensable for
human smugglers to know which group controls the transit areas at any given moment.
Most probably, the fighting in coastal areas
(e.g. over the route between western Tripoli
and Ras Ajdir) is actually for control over the
smuggling routes and the share of the profits.
The common structure of these smuggling
networks has three levels:
nn High level: composed of the leading persons, described as Libyan nationals and
members of active/former military/police officers.
nn Medium level: middlemen named ‘people
smugglers’ (usually Libyans) who organise
the journey of the would-be migrants and
their shelter while in Libya. They confirm
the arrangements of the journey (such as
price, type of vessel, etc.).
nn Low level: members in charge of collecting new ‘clients’ willing to reach the EU,
as well as giving support to the people
smugglers during the embarkation process at the beach. Usually, these members are of the same nationality as the
would-be migrants (Syrian, Sudanese, Eritrean, and Somali), in order to be trusted
easily by them.
2.4.2. Purchasing boats in Libya
Thus far in 2015, inflatable dinghies (75% of
the total) and wooden boats have been the

28 of 52

Source: Frontex, 2015

The migrant smuggling networks in Libya
are composed of active and former military/
law-enforcement officers structured in a hierarchical and strict criminal organisation.

MSF boat ‘Dignity 1’

Figure 22. Smugglers towing a rubber boat
back to Libya

two types of boats used to cross the Mediterranean Sea from Libya to Italy. The choice
of boat is based on the availability and price
of the vessel.
The type of boat used by the irregular migrants arriving in Italy from Libya has varied
since the beginning of 2015. Starting from
April an increase in the use of wooden boats
has taken place. The migrant smuggling networks typically buy wooden boats in Tunisia
and to a lesser extent in Egypt. Smugglers are
also increasingly adamant to recover boats
used for crossings as clearly shown by Figure 22.
Cooperation between authorities is of
key importance on other routes
In the case of western Mediterranean and
Ceuta and Melilla, cooperation between Spain
and Morocco is also helping to reduce the
number of irregular migrants. The Moroccan Gendarmerie Royale informs that 90 attempts to climb over the fences of Melilla and
Ceuta involving more than 18 000 irregular
sub-Saharan migrants were recorded in 2014.

Box 10. EU Naval Force – Mediterranean
MISSION

MANDATE

On 23 April 2015, the European Council stressed that
the Union will mobilise all efforts to prevent further
loss of life at sea, tackle the root causes of the human
emergency in the Mediterranean – in cooperation with
the countries of origin and transit – and fight human
smugglers and traffickers. On 18 May 2015, the Council
approved the Crisis Management Concept for a military CSDP operation to disrupt the business model
of human smuggling and trafficking networks in the
Southern Central Mediterranean (Council Decision
2015/778 dated 18 May 2015).

EUNAVFOR Med (now renamed Operation Sophia)
operates in accordance with the political, strategic
and politico-military objectives set out in order to:
n	
disrupt the business model of human smuggling
and trafficking networks in the Mediterranean;
contribute to reducing the further loss of lives at
n	
sea In accordance with the Council Decision dated
18 May 2015 the operation shall end no later than
12 months after having reached Full Operational
Capability (FOC).

As a result, and as part of the EU’s comprehensive
approach to the challenge, on 22 June 2015 the EU
launched an EU military operation in the Southern
Central Mediterranean (EUNAVFOR Med). The aim
of this military operation is to undertake systematic
efforts to identify, capture and dispose of vessels as
well as enabling assets used or suspected of being
used by migrant smugglers or traffickers. Countering the smuggling and trafficking of migrants is one
dimension of addressing the human tragedy that we
see in the Mediterranean Sea. It is also an important
contribution to saving lives and improving security
in the region.

The Operation Sophia is conducted in sequential
phases and in full compliance with international law,
including humanitarian, refugee and human rights law.
n	
The first phase focuses on surveillance and assessment of human smuggling and trafficking networks
in the Southern Central Mediterranean.
n	
The second stage of the operation provides for the
search and, if necessary, diversion of suspicious
vessels.
The third phase would allow the disposal of vesn	
sels and related assets, preferably before use, and
to apprehend traffickers and smugglers.
The Council shall assess whether the conditions for
transition beyond the first phase have been met, taking
into account any applicable UN Security Council Resolution and consent by the Coastal States concerned.
Source: European Union External Action Service

Moroccan authorities have also dug a moat
and have built a high fence on its own territory in the most vulnerable areas of the perimeter near the border with the Spanish
cities. These fences and moat, combined with
implementation of readmission agreement
between Morocco and Spain, reinforcement
of Moroccan Border Guard Units protecting
the fence and dismantlement of makeshift

camps of irregular migrants, have reduced
the numbers attempts.
In response, many sub-Saharan migrants
have changed their modus operandi and are
increasingly trying to take the sea route towards Spain.

29 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Agadir

!
!

!

5

!
!

!
!

12

!
!
!

!
!

!
!
!

!
!

El Ouatia
Tarfaya
!
!

Al Ayoun

Boujdour

Ad Dakhla

Between 2013 and 2014 three cargo vessels, towed to
EU ports for scrapping, were used by sub-Saharan to
illegally enter European soil. This is a very similar modus
operandi well-known in other parts of the Mediterranean
Sea, such as the ports of Turkey and Eastern Mediterranean, where criminal networks used old cargo vessels to transport irregular migrants towards the EU.

This route is therefore characterised by a high return/
readmission risk for migrants which contributes to the
low numbers of departures and low numbers of migrants dying. Still, at least 12 people died during March
2015 (exposure and dehydration) in two separate incidents involving boats that have departed from Morocco.

Last Senegalese intervention was carried out on 15
February 2015 when Senegalese Marine Commandos
boarded the vessel Dola, sailing under Togolese flag,
which was escorted and docked at Dakar port.
After the operation, 17 members of the crew were arrested, accused of piracy in the Gulf of Guinea and human trafficking. This vessel was also involved in a piracy
attack against the fishing vessel Lu Rong Yu-Tuan off the
coast of Ghana (January 2015).

As the route is effectively closed, migrant smuggling
networks are constantly testing other modi operandi.
Hence, in recent years Senegalese authorities have reported the use of cargo vessels, which have previously
been moored in the port of Dakar, by migrants trying
to enter illegally into the EU.

Source: Senegalese AFIC delegation

Source: Frontex

After an in-depth search in the interior of the vessel,
11 Nigerian would-be irregular migrants were found.
They were attempting to reach Europe. They started the
trip hidden as stowaways in the Nigerian port of Lagos.

Vessel Dola assaulted on 15 February 2015 by
Senegalese Special Forces

* In areas between Tarfaya-Al‘Ayun-Boujdour, AoI in beaches such as Negritas, Blaibilat, Mraijnat and Roka Ariel
** Ad Dakhla port: attempts in 2014 but no arrivals due to Spanish-Moroccan cooperation (including JO EPN Hera)

30 of 52

Morocco

Source: CCRC, Guardia Civil

Due to the effectiveness of the MoUs between Spain,
Senegal and Mauritania, the last boat (cayuco) which arrived on the Canary Islands from Senegal was in 2008
and the last one coming from Mauritanian shores was in
June 2014, as Mauritanian and Senegalese AFIC delegates
reported during workshops in Casablanca and Dakar.

Senegalese patrol boat donated by Spain

!
!

1

At the Western African route that connects Senegal,
Mauritania and Morocco with the Canary Island in
Spain the numbers remain almost negligible despite
a gradual increasing trends for departures from Morocco during 2014.
These recent departures are mainly located in Moroccan shores specifically nearby the ports of Agadir,
Sidi-Ifni, El Ouaitia/Tan-Tan, Tarfaya, Boujdour* and Ad
Dakhla** (see map).

Sidi Ifni

!
!

2

!

Box 11. Western African route remains effectively
closed due to joint efforts of Spain, Senegal,
Morocco and Mauritania

Canary Islands

This again shows how important effective
cooperation between transit, source and
destination countries is in preventing unauthorised departures and thus preventing
death at sea and ensuring integrity of legal
migration channels.
The European Commission (EC) is aware of
this link between effective return policy of
persons who are illegally present on the territory of the EU or no longer have the right
to stay (e.g. failed asylum seekers). In its European Agenda on migration, the EC states
that ‘one of the incentives for irregular migrants is the knowledge that the EU’s return
system – meant to return irregular migrants
or those whose asylum applications are re-

Source: Frontex, JO Indalo 2015

Algerian nationals also continue to arrive on
Spanish shores of Andalucía and Levante. The
phenomenon called harga (‘burning’ in Arabic) has decreased since 2013, largely due to
good collaboration between Spanish and Algerian authorities regarding rapid repatriation processes.

Figure 23. Very typical toy boat used by
many would-be migrants for crossing
from Morocco to Spain. In 2014, Morocco
reported a total of 12 267 irregular migrants
that were prevented from reaching Spain
by sea (1 746 until April 2015). The main
nationalities were Senegalese (41%),
Malians (33%), Guineans (12%), Ivorians (9%),
Algerians, Ghanaians and Nigerians (all 3%)

fused – works imperfectly.’ The EC proposes
several key actions in this regard, including to
reinforce and amend the Frontex legal basis
to strengthen its role on return.

Figure 24. Illegal border-crossings of Algerian nationals in Spain and effective returns of
Algerian nationals by Spain, comparison between years. Return likelihood is calculated
using ratio between illegal border-crossings and effective returns performed by Spain. The
number close to one indicates higher likelihood and therefore higher return risk (year 2015)
1 600

1.10

1 400

0.90

1 200
0.70

1 000
800

0.50

600

0.30

400
0.10

200
0

Year 2013
Illegal border-crossings

Year 2014
Effective return

Year 2015 (up to June)

-0.10

Return likelihood – right axis

Source: FRAN data as of 7 August 2015

31 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Box 12. Increasing number of Syrian asylum seekers
in Ceuta and Melilla
In March 2015, the International Protection and Asylum Offices
were inaugurated at BCPs in Ceuta and Melilla (Spain). The decision came as response to a surge in the number of Syrian families seeking asylum there. The trend started in November 2014.
Exponential growth of asylum applications by Syrian nationals in
Ceuta and Melilla
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0

Sep

Oct

Nov
2014

Dec

Jan

Feb

Mar
Apr
2015

May

Jun

Source: FRAN data as of 7 August 2015

The route followed by these Syrian asylum seekers is Syria/Lebanon/Algeria/Morocco (Nador)/Spain (Melilla or Ceuta).
Different modi operandi used by Syrians to enter Ceuta and Melilla have been detected: They range from document fraud,
mostly by using genuine Moroccan passports of residents of
Tetuan and Nador (no visa needed, impostor method, reported
by Frontex) to posing as Moroccan goods carriers. The impostor method started to be used by Syrians already in May 2014
when Spanish authorities reported the first 72 cases.
No Syrian national was detected for trying to storm the fences at
the two Spanish cities. Furthermore, Spain reported 478 cases of
Moroccan passport being used by Syrian impostors in the period
between 2014 and the first half of 2015 while more than 2 800
Syrian asylum applications were submitted in Melilla alone only
during eight months between November 2014 and June 2015.
This difference would indicate that many are able to enter Melilla undetected (successfully posing as Moroccans for example).
There are still hundreds of Syrians in Moroccan city of Nador
waiting to enter Spain through Melilla BCP. According to Moroccan intervention during AFIC workshop in Casablanca, altogether there are more than 5 000 Syrian refugees in Morocco.
Moreover, the decision to open Asylum offices in Ceuta and Melilla has acted as an additional pull factor.

32 of 52

2.5.	Rising number of
casualties among migrants
According to IOM estimates, more than 2 000
migrants have died during the first seven
month of 2015 trying to cross the Mediterranean to reach Europe. This represents an increase of 27% compared to the same period
in 2014. Frontex reporting from the Joint Operation Triton for the same period suggests
190 confirmed fatalities (recovered bodies).
As in 2014, the overwhelming majority died
in Central Mediterranean route connecting
Libya and Italy. When it comes to this tragic
loss of life one must note the fact that 86%
of all interceptions in the Central Mediterranean until the end of July 2015 were outside operational area of JO Triton and 90%
of these cases were done as search and rescue (SAR – after receiving a call).
What is also interesting is the fact that on
the route from Libya to Italy there were almost exactly the same number of persons
that were rescued/intercepted during 2015
and the reference period in 2014. However,
there were roughly 100 more incidents (551
in 2014 and 657 in 2015) to which authorities
had to respond in 2015, unfortunately resulting in the previously mentioned 27% increase
of the estimated number of casualties. In addition, geographical location of these interventions moved further south as indicated
by Figure 25.
In May, the operational area of Frontex JO
Triton 2015 was extended closer to Libya. In
addition, the number of assets in this area
were increased. Through the whole period
Italian authorities continued with their naval operation ‘Mare Securo’.
Importantly, the EU naval operation EUNAVFOR Med was approved in July 2015, and several additional naval vessels were deployed

Figure 25. In some areas, in particular those of Zuwara and Misrata, detections have moved
closer to the Libyan coast
Detections of migrants’ boats up to 31 May 2015 (blue spots), and detections reported between 1 June to 26 July 2015
(green spots)

!
P

!
P

!
P
!
P

!
P

P
!
P!
P!

!
P

!
P
!
P

Tunisia

!
P
!
P
!
P !
P
!
P
!
P
P!
P !
P!
P
!
!
P
P !
!
P
!
P
!
P
P !
!
P!
P!
!
P!
P !
!
!
P
P!
P!
P
!
!
P!
PP !
P!
P!
P !
!
P!
P!
!
!
P !!
P
P!
P
P!
P
!
P
P
P!
!
!
!
P!
P
PP!
P !
!
!
!
P
P
P
!
!
P
P!
P!
!
P
P
P
!
!
P!
P
P
P
P
!
P!
!
!
P!
P
P
!
!
P
PP
!
!
P
P
P!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P!
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P!
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
!
P!
P!
!
P
P!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P P!
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P!
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P!
P
P
P
P
P
P!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P!
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P!
P
P
P
P!
P!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P!
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
!
!
!
P
!
!
!
P!
P
P
P
P
P!
P
P
P
!
!
P
P
P
P!
P !
!
!
!
!
!!
P
P!
P
P!
P!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P!
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P!
PP P!
!
!
!
!
P
P!
P
P
P
!
P
P
P!
!
!
!
P!
P
P
P !
P
!
!
!
P
P
P
!
!
!
!
P
P
P
P
P
!
!
P!
P!
P P!
PP
!
!
P
P
P!
!
!
P!
P !
P
P
!
P!
P!
P
P!
P!
!
P!
!
P

EPN Triton 2014/2015
01 Jan - 26 Jul 2015
Detections

!
P
!
P

Libya

01 Jun - 26 Jul
01 Jan - 31 May
Triton operational area
Extended operational area

Source: Frontex

in the operational area of JO Triton and the
Libyan SAR area.
In addition, four vessels belonging to various
NGOs (Sea-Watch, Norwegian Society for
Search and Rescue, Medecins Sans Frontieres,
and Migrant Offshore Aid Station) continued
their patrolling close to the main departure
areas in Libya.
Despite these efforts and many more additional vessels engaged in rescue operations,
new tragedies occurred in August 2015 when
at least 340 people died. One incident that
took place only 15 nautical miles from Libyan
shores where 25 people died was soon fol-

Figure 26. Deaths in the Central
Mediterranean, by region of origin of
migrants perished while making the sea
crossing between 1 January and 14 July 2015
MENA
14%
Horn
of Africa
18%

Sub-Saharan
Africa
46%

Breakdown
unavailable/
Unknown
22%
Source: IOM

33 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Some 50 Sierra Leoneans had travelled by land to Libya through
irregular means, in a bid to cross over to Europe. They were
taken to the Southern City of Sabha where they were subjected
to inhuman conditions by the facilitators. At the request of the
Government of Sierra Leone and in coordination with the Libyan
authorities and the Sierra Leonean embassy, IOM helped 35 of
these Sierra Leonean migrants stranded in Libya to voluntarily return home from the south of the country through Tripoli.
Source: Sierra Leonian AFIC delegation

Box 14. IOM: Migrants in Libya suffer many types of abuse
The International Organization for Migration (IOM) has collected the testimonies of more than 2 000 migrants from West
Africa and Central Africa recorded between January and September 2014 two transit centres and assistance for migrants in
Niger (Dirkou and Arlit).
The migrants from Senegal, the Gambia and Mali, are mostly
young men, married, who left their own country for Libya to
find job opportunities. Only some migrants from Benin, Liberia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo chose Algeria as
their final destination.
As the interviewed migrants were returning back to Niger,
their statements reflected precarious living conditions in Libya.
Namely, the majority of migrants reported having suffered
abuse and threats, including from their employer: the threat of
intervention of law enforcement, confiscation of identity documents, forced use of drugs and other substances, restriction
of movement and physical abuse.
Source: Profilage de l’OIM: migrants en transit, IOM, January–September 2014

lowed by another in which up to 250 people
were declared missing.
These incidents in August 2015 exposed the
enormity of the challenge. Namely, as the
number of SAR incidents is increasing, even

34 of 52

Source: Italian Navy

Box 13. Inhumane treatment prompts return of 50 Sierra
Leoneans from Libya

Figure 27. Dramatic rescue of a migrant by
the Italian Navy on 12 August 2015. At least
50 people could not be saved and were
declared missing

with many more vessels now engaged in
rescue operations it is simply impossible to
effectively rescue all as there are often multiple simultaneous rescue operations requiring high level of coordination.
The increasing death toll during 2015 is therefore highlighting possible paradox. That is to
say, more and more vessels engaged in rescue operations is not necessarily a guarantee for reduction of number of people dying.
In addition, operational intelligence from JO
Triton 2015 suggests that Libyan smugglers
are taking advantage of rescue vessels’ proximity to the shores of Libya and are overcrowding the vessels, with limited amount of
fuel and water as they know that migrants
will be rescued very soon. For example, in one
incident a Spanish vessel participating in JO
Triton 2015 was called to intervene roughly
22 nautical miles from the coast of Libya. It
managed to bring to safety 112 persons that
were cramped on a rubber boat. The boat
was at sea for less than 12 hours with only
nine 20 litre fuel containers on board. Given
the engine used in this particular case this is
only enough for around 12 hours of sub-maximum speed sailing, therefore nowhere sufficient to reach Italian Pelagic islands. This
overcrowding and low fuel supplies on unseaworthy vessels increases the risk of death
at sea by a great deal.

Source: Reuters

Source: OPV Rio Segura. Guardia Civil

Figure 28. A typical incident where a rubber

Figure 29. There are between 3 000 and

boat is overloaded and equipped with
minimal fuel supplies

4 000 residents in ‘The Jungle’, as the
makeshift camp outside Calais is called.
Around 90% of those living there are men,
most of whom are in their late teens or
early twenties

Given that sub-Saharan African are the largest group of arrivals in Italy, most of the death
during 2015 were linked to this group. According the IOM’s Missing Migrants Project,
888 individuals from sub-Sahara Africa died
at sea, which represents 46% of all deaths in
the Mediterranean during 2015.
Migrants also face constant danger during
the crossing of the desert or when in Libya.
The discovery of the remains of 30 migrants
in Dirkou during May 2015 and Boxes 13 and
14 clarify this point further.
While crossing Sahara desert and the Mediterranean is extremely dangerous, reaching
Italy does not necessarily means the end to

all hazards. Migrants or refugees that move
towards northern Europe often live in appalling conditions, usually in makeshift and
improvised camps (e.g. Italy-France border,
Austria-Germany border). Those travelling
to the UK also risk injury or even their lives
when trying to cross from Calais to Dover.
Since June 2015 alone at least nine people died
while attempting to cross the Euro tunnel.
The rising death toll is following significant
increases in the number of daily attempts to
enter the tunnel (from 500 in May to 2 000
in June 2015).

35 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

3.	Cross-border criminality
3.1.	Introduction
Similar to other regions of the world, crossborder criminality in West Africa can be
largely divided into two main categories:
smuggling of people and illicit trade. Illicit
trade can be further classified into six main
non-exhaustive categories:
nn Trafficking in human beings;
nn Smuggling of natural resources and wildlife: crude oil (bunkering), cocoa, gold, minerals, vital commodities or crops, ivory,
horns of rhinoceros and/or other protected species;
nn Smuggling of excise goods: cigarettes
(genuine or counterfeit) or fuel;
nn Drug trafficking;
nn Smuggling of stolen cattle, stolen vehicles, toxic waste, weapons, firearms and
ammunition;
nn Maritime piracy in the Gulf of Guinea.
Illicit trade is often driven by factors such as
considerable cross-border price differentials
and differences in the legal status of particular products, taxation of excise goods, as
well as local, regional and global demand for
smuggled goods. In many cases, locals participating in illicit trade consider their activity as
legitimate given the lack of other economic
opportunities. Additionally, most borders in

West Africa are highly porous and difficult to
patrol with border-control authorities often
suspected of corrupt practices. This in turn
further facilitates illegal cross-border flow
of goods and people both in the region and
transiting towards Europe.
It is also worth highlighting that West African criminal networks are non-hierarchical
informal structures, in many cases linked by
tribal, social or family ties showing a high degree of flexibility. Such loose structure allows
for members to have exchangeable roles.
Most informal groups are composed by networks of three to six individuals, mainly relatives or friends. There is hardly a permanent
membership in the criminal group. These
characteristics, make these groups highly
fluid, which in turn makes detection, investigation and eventual criminal prosecution
very difficult.

3.2.	Trafficking in human
beings
Trafficking in human beings is a demand and
profit driven crime. Vulnerability of people
alone does not result in trafficking. Factors
that render people more vulnerable to trafficking include limited economic opportuni-

Figure 30. Evolution of cross-border criminality
GLOBAL TRENDS
Changing illicit markets

Conflict

Limited state reach and protection economies

HISTORICAL CRIME
Illicit goods
smuggling

Drug trafficking
Migrant smuggling

NEW & EVOLVING CRIME
Enviromental
crime

Kidnapping for ransom
Piracy

Human trafficking
Small arms trafficking

Corruption

Illicit financial flows
and money laundering

Cybercrime

CRIMINAL ENABLERS
Source: Comprehensive Assessment of Drug Trafficking and Organised Crime in West and Central Africa, African Union, 2014

36 of 52

Box 15. Labour recruitment morphing into a trafficking case

ties, desperate socio-economic conditions,
regional imbalances and violence. The line
between people smuggling and human trafficking in the case of West Africa is therefore often blurred as prospective migrants or
guest workers may often end up as victims of
trafficking once in their destination country.
For example, when irregular migration is
financed by smugglers themselves (debtfinanced migration), migrants often find
themselves exploited en route or in the destination country.
As these debt/labour obligations incurred by
migrants are easily enforceable by criminal
groups, it can be profitable for smugglers to
finance irregular migration.
Debriefing interviews conducted in the context of Frontex Joint Operations revealed
several suspected cases of ‘debt bondage’
victimisation. They all are linked to Nigerian
women who were forced to provide sexual
services in transit countries such as Libya
or Algeria before being transported further
across the sea to Europe.
One interviewee, who had escaped from the
trafficking network in Libya before travelling onwards to Europe alone, described her
journey in detail starting from her recruitment in Nigeria to the forced travel through
Niger and Libya. She also described the system of debt bondage used to coerce the victims. First, victims are required to pay a fee
for their travel from Nigeria. Once they leave
the country and begin the journey through
Niger and Libya they are told that they must
pay again to ‘regain their freedom’. In this
way they are forced into prostitution to repay these debts. Once they are transported
to Europe they are forced to pay the traffickers an even higher fee to be released.

In another typical case of labour recruitment morphing into a
trafficking case, a women from Sierra Leone paid approximately
USD 1 480 to recruiters who promised her a nursing job or hotel work in Kuwait. Upon her arrival in Kuwait, however, she
was instead forced to work as a domestic worker for a private
Kuwaiti family. She worked all day, every day without compensation. Her employers forbade her from leaving the house or
from using a cell phone. The family eventually returned her to
recruiter, taking advantage of a guarantee allowing them to
obtain a refund for domestic workers they are not happy with.
She ran away from the recruiter to the Sierra Leonean Embassy
and was placed in a Kuwaiti government-run shelter with approximately 300 other former domestic workers.
Source: Trafficking In Persons Report, US Department of State, July 2015

AFIC representatives from Sierra Leone share
their growing concern regarding trafficking in
persons. In particular, establishment of many
so-called phantom employment recruitment
agencies. There were at least 20 such agencies with 301 cases of officially confirmed
victims of trafficking in human beings (2013–
2014). As the case described in Box 15 suggests, most victims ended up in Kuwait but
also in Lebanon, Qatar and Europe.

3.3.	Document fraud involving
AFIC nationals and travel
documents issued by AFIC
countries
3.3.1. M
 ost detected AFIC nationals
using fraudulent documents
Moroccan nationals represented the largest group among AFIC nationals detected
for document fraud in the EU. In 2014, there
were over 800 Moroccans with fraudulent
documents and just over 300 in the first five
months of 2015. The trend has been more
or less stable over the past couple of years.
Most of the Moroccans were detected on
entry to the EU/Schengen area, mostly from
Morocco to the Spanish cities of Ceuta and
Melilla, followed by arrivals on flights from
Casablanca (CMN) to Fiumicino (FCO) or
Brussels (BRU).

37 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Moroccan nationals often use Spanish documents (ID cards, residence permits, passports)
or Moroccan passports. Most of abovementioned documents were abused by Moroccan impostors, using genuine documents of
someone else.
Nigerian nationals form the second biggest group reported for document fraud in
the EU/Schengen area. The overall number
of detections and trends remained stable in
2013, 2014 and 2015. Just under 800 document
fraud cases were linked to Nigerian nationals
in 2013 and a very similar figure was also recorded in 2014. Almost two-thirds have been
reported on arrival from third countries, in
particular from Lagos (LOS), followed by arrivals via Istanbul (IST).
Senegalese nationals rank third among the
AFIC nationals abusing travel documents.
The overall number of detections oscillates
around 280 cases per year. They are mostly
detected on entry to the EU/Schengen area
from third countries, in particular from Dakar (DKR).
Most of the Senegalese attempted to reach
either Spanish airports, such as Madrid (MAD)
or Barcelona (BCN), or Lisbon airport (LIS) in
Portugal. They were often detected travelling
with their national passports (impostors), as

well as mostly counterfeit French and Italian
visas and residence permits.
Congolese nationals have been mostly detected with fraudulent documents on the
routes from Lagos (LOS) to Fiumicino (FCO)
or on routes to French airports. Congolese
nationals have been also departing from Kenia or attempting to reach the EU/Schengen
area via Turkey, in particular via Istanbul (IST).
The route via Istanbul (IST) includes embarkation in N’Djili (FIH) and intended final destination of Fiumicino (FCO), Charles de Gaulle
(CDG) or Brussels (BRU).
Ghanaian nationals were mostly detected
on intra-Schengen air routes between Italy
and Germany. Those detected on entry to the
EU/Schengen area are in 50% of cases depart
from Accra (ACC). There are also attempts to
target the EU/Schengen area via Istanbul on
the following air routes: ACC → IST → MAD,
MXP, DUS, VIE. Ghanaian nationals were often detected presenting counterfeit Italian
residence permits, passports, ID cards and
fraudulent Ghanaian passports.
3.3.2. Most abused travel documents
issued by AFIC countries
In total, there were approximately 1 400
fraudulent travel documents issued by AFIC

Figure 31. Moroccan and Nigerian nationals were the AFIC nationals most detected for
document fraud. Overall figures, however, remain stable in the past 2.5 years except for a
decrease in Angolan and Guinean nationals
Detections of AFIC nationals presenting fraudulent documents, by nationality of the holder between 1 January 2014 and
31 May 2015

1 200
1 000
800
600

Entry from third country
Intra-EU/Schengen
Exit to third country
Transit

400
200
0

MAR NGA SEN COD GHA CIV CMR MLI GIN GMB AGO TGO LBR SLE BEN BFA CPV MRT NER

Source: European Union Document-Fraud Risk Analysis Network (EDF-RAN) data as of 6 July 2015

38 of 52

countries reported as fraudulent by EU Member States during 2013. This figure increased
by 14% in 2014. The beginning of 2015 seems
to follow the trend of previous years. These
figures, however, include all persons showing fraudulent AFIC documents and not just
AFIC nationals.
Around 85% of fraudulent documents issued
by AFIC countries were detected on entry
from third countries and the most detected
documents were passports issued by Morocco, Nigeria, Senegal, Mali, Guinea and the
Democratic Republic of the Congo. Due to
the significant increase in the use of genuine Moroccan passports by Syrian impostors,
this type of document fraud became prevalent also in case of AFIC travel documents.

3.4.	Drug smuggling
In July 2015, regional representative for West
Africa of the United Nations Office on Drugs
and Crime (UNODC) estimated that between
30 and 40 metric tonnes of cocaine transit
West Africa every year en route to Europe.
This represents a decrease from the peak of
47 tonnes in 2007.

Box 16. AFIC Incident Report.
Exchange of Information. Ghana.
Drug trafficking
A 26-year-old Kenyan female, claiming to be a businesswoman,
was arrested at Kotoka International Airport for carrying cocaine into the country. She arrived on a Kenya Airways flight
from Nairobi, Kenya with approximately 3 kg of cocaine wrapped
and hidden in her luggage. She claimed she was only to deliver the cocaine to someone she did not know but who was
to meet her on arrival.
Source: Ghanaian AFIC delegation

ing Benin, Togo and Ghana (as entry points)
and Nigeria (as the main centre for distribution and control of the drug by the criminal networks).
Cocaine originating from South America is
transported across the Atlantic by sea or
air along the so-called Highway 10, i.e. the
shortest distance between the two continents along the 10th parallel.

Drug trafficking continues to be the most lucrative form of business for criminals. Despite
the international cooperation and transnational efforts to curb the trafficking of cocaine, large and small shipments by sea or
by air, continuously flow from South America (Venezuela, Peru, Argentina, Brazil or Colombia) to Europe, through the Sahel region.
According to information from AFIC partners
and other sources, three main cocaine hubs
can be identified. The first consists of the
Gambia, Guinea-Bissau, Senegal and Cape
Verde islands. The second is the Central Sahelian corridor, which covers vast areas of
Mali and Mauritania (air transport). The third
hub is the Coastal Southern corridor includ-

Figure 32. Helicopter intercepted by Spanish authorities after
crossing the Strait of Gibraltar carrying 200 kg of hashish from
Morocco to Spanish mainland

According to the UN Secretary General, this
flow of cocaine in West Africa could have the
market value of USD 1.25 billion in Europe, and
would bring West African traffickers profits in the order of USD 150 million per year.

Source: Guardia Civil

3.4.1. Routes

Once it arrives in Africa, it is transported
northwards towards Europe through the Sahara along routes which have been used for
legal and illegal trade for centuries. Also for
centuries, these transportation routes have
been controlled by tribal groups such as Tuaregs and Tebus. Nowadays they use off-road
vehicles to transport everything, starting
from human beings, firearms, narcotics to

39 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Box 18. AFIC Incident Report. Exchange of Information,
Cape Verde
Citizen of Guinea-Bissau
On 15 June 2015 Nigerien Police apprehended, at the International Airport of Niamey, a citizen of Guinea-Bissau (male aged
45, residing in Liberia) for drug trafficking inside of his body. He
had swallowed 70 capsules of cocaine weighing 1 241 grammes
to transport them from Nigeria to Niger on the itinerary Lagos/Nairobi/Addis Ababa/Niamey.
Source: Nigerien AFIC delegation

Box 17. AFIC Incident Report. Exchange of Information,
Cape Verde
The Airport Anti-Trafficking Cell seizes cocaine at Praia
International Airport Nelson Mandela
28.05.2015 – Due to Cape Verde’s geographic and strategic position, the country continues being used as a drug transit point
from South America to Europe. Several ‘couriers’ transporting
drugs inside their bodies and under clothes were arrested and
the drug was apprehended by police at airports. Praia International Airport has an Airport Anti-Trafficking Cell composed of
Judiciary Police, Borders Police, Fiscal Guard and Customs. In
this specific case, the suspect was arrested, sent to the Main
Court of Praia and put in prison to await the final trial.
Source: Cape Verdean AFIC delegation

40 of 52

cigarettes. As the provision of such services
is a very lucrative business, new players are
violently seeking their slice of the pie: the terrorist groups of the Sahel region.
Cocaine is transported across the Sahel by
different routes: through northwestern African countries (Morocco and Mauritania) to
Spain or through Libya to EU Member States
in the Central Mediterranean.
Morocco, considered as the largest producer
of cannabis in the world alongside with Algeria, is also the first supplier of this drug for
the EU market, using Egyptian and Balkan
criminal networks. To avoid the troubled Moroccan-Algerian border, smugglers use two
different routes: across the Sahel or following the Northern coastal path.
International cooperation and exchange
of intelligence are essential for curbing the
black market of cocaine, methamphetamine
and other narcotics. Also, such cooperation
helps neutralise the criminal networks, forcing them to constantly adapt their modi operandi to maintain the flow of drugs towards
the EU.
During the workshop in Dakar in June 2015,
Ghanaian AFIC delegates reported that
drug smugglers are also using Kenya Airways flights to deliver small shipments of
cocaine.
Likewise, during the AFIC workshop in
Senegal, delegates from Liberia, according
with their intelligence analysis, concluded
the following concerns on national security matters:
nn The trafficking of illicit drugs and fake
pharmaceuticals by Chinese transnational
criminal organisations in West Africa;
nn The resumption and reorganisation of major drug shipments in Liberia after the Ebola outbreak;
nn South American criminal groups resurfacing in Guinea and Guinea-Bissau;
nn Increased possibility of cross-border criminality across the Liberian-Ivorian border
as the Ivorian elections draw near.

Whilst trafficking in illicit goods, narcotics or
human beings thrives in the areas of intense
conflict and institutional chaos (e.g. Libya),
firearms trafficking flourishes throughout the
Sahelian area. This criminal activity responds
to the demand for armaments in unstable
areas, such as Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Burkina
Faso or Côte d’Ivoire, among others. Firearms trafficking is of course not limited to
supplying the needs of criminal networks but
also those of terrorist groups such as MUJAO, MNLA, AQIM, Boko Haram or small secessionist factions.
Thus, particularly after the collapse of
Gaddafi’s regime in 2011, the main routes of
arms trade run from Libya: to Niger and the
south of Algeria (area of influence of terrorist groups such as al-Mourabitoun or AQIM),
to northern Mali to supply terrorist and separatist groups (MUJAO, Ansar al-Dine, MLNA)
and also from Chad to Nigeria to feed Boko
Haram’s needs.

Source: Liberian AFIC delegation

3.5.	Firearms trafficking

Figure 33. Typical handgun smuggled from
Guinea and used in armed robberies in Liberia

Other routes of illegal arms trade have been
detected between other ECOWAS countries:
from Guinea-Bissau, the Gambia or Guinea
to Mali, and from Côte d’Ivoire and Sierra Leone to Liberia through the coastal corridor
of the Gulf of Guinea to supply local criminal networks.
Liberian AFIC delegates expressed their concerns about new non-Liberian gunsmiths
emerging in Central Liberia and in the northwestern suburb of the capital, Monrovia.

41 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

4.	Regional security threats
Both AFIC workshops in Africa highlighted
that political violence and terrorism in AFIC
countries are mainly linked to: Boko Haram
activities, attempts of ISIL/Da’ish to establish
itself in the Maghreb/North Africa, a more latent threat of Al-Qaida in the Islamic Maghreb
(AQIM), and activities of groups such as alMourabitoun, MUJAO or Ansar al-Dine.
The absence of state authority and institutional weakness in vast regions of the Sahel
and West Africa, porous borders and an ongoing chaos in Libya continue to be cited by AFIC
members as the main obstacles when addressing the physical threat that these groups pose.
According to AFIC members and other relevant sources, the groups mentioned above
are mostly operating in the following areas:
nn Boko Haram: mainly in the north-east
of Nigeria and at its borders with Niger,
Cameroon and Chad;
nn ISIL/Da’ish: trying to operate in North Africa, mainly Libya with the Wilayat (province) in Barqa/Cyrenaica, Sinai in Egypt and
Jamaat Jund al-Khalifah in Algeria;
nn AQIM: after this Al-Qaida franchise evolved
from the Algerian terrorist group known as
the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat (GSPC) in January 2007, it mainly operates in the north of the Sahelian corridor;

Box 19. Number of terrorist attacks on the rise in North
Africa and the Sahel
According to open sources, the documented numbers of terrorist attacks in North Africa and the Sahel during 2014 show
an increase of the political violence in the area. Thus, the countries most affected were Libya with 201 attacks, Mali with 35,
Mauritania with 27, Tunisia with 27 and Algeria with 22.

42 of 52

nn Al-Mourabitoun, MUJAO or Ansar al-Dine:
mainly in northern Mali.
In addition to the above, AFIC workshops also
provided an opportunity to openly discuss
the issue of young men mostly from North
Africa travelling to Syria and Iraq to engage
in combat. Concerns were voiced that many
might be travelling to and from these war
zones without being identified and thus posing a serious security risk.

4.1.	Regional initiatives gain
ground against Boko
Haram
After shifting away from insurgent tactics in
order to seize and hold territory in 2014, Boko
Haram terrorist group succeeded in gaining control over a vast swath of territory in
northeastern Nigeria. In fact, during the AFIC
workshop in Dakar, Nigeria reported that 2014
was the year of the most violent and intensive activities of Boko Haram. Data on clashes
and casualties reported by diverse specialised open sources confirm this conclusion.
In February 2015, the Nigerian government
initiated military operations north of Maiduguri and Mubi. They first liberated towns
along the main road to Baga, up to Monguno, as reported by the Nigerian AFIC member. They later captured Baga (where Boko
Haram had taken control of a Nigerian military outpost and massacred the local population), Monguno, Marte, Gamboru-Ngala and
Dikwa. This offensive push was the first major success since minor operations in northern Adamawa during 2014.
In other words, at the beginning of 2015,
Boko Haram controlled 20 districts of Nige-

Figure 39. Military operations against Boko Haram at the beginning of 2015 (upper map)
and changing intensity of the crisis in 2012–2015 (bottom map)

Localities under Boko Haram control

Niger

Localities under government control
Chadian military presence

Abadam
Kukawa

Recent Nigerian military offensive

Gashua

Baga

Marte

Maiduguri
Damaturu
Potiskum
Buni
Gujba
Yade Konduga
Bularafa
Ashaka

Dutse

Nigeria

Bajoga
Bauchi

Gulani
Biu
Gombe Bumsa

Dikwa
Mafa

Chad

Chibok

ns

Jos

Lake Chad

Monguno

Mubi
Hong
Bama
Sambisa
forest

Yola

Gwoza
Limankara

M

an

da

ra
M

Jalingo

ou

nt
iai

Song

Gulak

Banki

Pulka
Madagali

100 mi

Cameroon

200 km

Source: Stratfor 2015

50

100

200

400

Numbers killed
in individual attacks

More intense colour
represents multiple attacks

2012 1 663 civilians killed

State of emergency since May 2013
(Adamawa, Borno Yobe)

2013 2 978 civilians killed

Kano

Nigeria

Nigeria

Abuja

2014 9 033 civilians killed

Maiduguri

Abuja

2015* 2 146 civilians killed
Baga

Nigeria

Chibok
Abuja

Nigeria

Abuja

* data as of 24 January 2015

Source: ACLED data, by Prof. Clionadh Raleigh, University of Sussex

43 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

territory around the size of Belgium and the
Netherlands.
According to the Nigerian AFIC delegate, this
decision was taken in cooperation with Chad,
Cameroon and Niger (Multinational Joint Task
Force – MNJTF, 9 000 troops) and a clear
demonstration of commitment to fight Boko
Haram on the regional level.
Source: Nigerian AFIC delegation

The joint offensive by the MNJTF forces also
rescued 200 girls and 118 women from the
Sambisa Forest (April and May 2015) and additional 260 women and children in the outskirts of Chalawa village in Adamawa State.

Figure 40. Women and children kidnapped by Boko Haram a moment
after the liberation by Nigerian Special Forces in Sambisa forest

ria (a territory the size of Belgium). By midMarch, they only controlled three.
The AFIC member from Nigeria also reported
that the Nigerian military had received more
sophisticated arms to confront Boko Haram
and senior officers had also changed their
strategy, which resulted in these successes. In
March 2015, Nigerian Defence Headquarters
also declared Adamawa and Yobe States free
from the control of Boko Haram insurgents.
While these operations have pushed Boko
Haram forces out of many population centres in a substantial portion of northern
Borno State, insurgents dispersed closer to
the mountainous Cameroonian border.
The new Nigerian president Muhammadu Buhari announced in his first speech on 29 May
2015 that the Command Centre of Nigerian
Military Operations against Boko Haram
would be moved from Abuja (capital of Nigeria) to Maiduguri. This move to the largest city in the north-east of Nigeria, where
the insurgency is the strongest, was aimed
at establishing governmental control over a

44 of 52

With the new and increasing pressure exerted by the MNJTF, Boko Haram lost control of additional villages and its combatants
dispersed in the surrounding forests. In doing so, the group made sure to slow down
the advance of the MNJTF with minefields
and other measures.
4.1.1. Financing of activities and
recruitment
Boko Haram gains finances through diverse
illegal activities such as fake military checkpoints, kidnapping people for ransom, extortion, looting, bank robberies and illicit
trafficking of arms or other goods. It is estimated that more than 2 000 women and
girls have also been kidnapped to be used as
sexual slaves, forced into marriages and recently even used as suicide bombers.
During the discussions in both AFIC workshops, Nigerien and Nigerian delegates came
to the same conclusion that economic incentives are a very powerful tool to recruit
young people, above all in economically deprived communities. In the geographical area
formed by the borders of Nigeria, Chad, Cameroon and Niger, poverty and unemployment is widespread. Boko Haram uses money
and ideology to approach young individuals

who are more receptive to indoctrination
and recruitment.
AFIC members also reported that in some
cases Boko Haram also kidnaps people and
forces them to fight for them.
4.1.2. Change in tactics – going back to
roots
Boko Haram is an ideologically driven
group so setbacks such as loss of territory
will not lead to its complete disintegration.
However, these setbacks require a change
in tactics. Rather than acting like a state,
which provides services to its people and
protects its borders, terrorist organisations
without territory use more typical terrorist
tactics – bombing, shooting, assassination
and kidnapping.
These changes in modus operandi are evidenced
by a number of terrorist attacks attributed
to Boko Haram in Nigeria and nearby countries. Two explosions in Chad, where the MNJTF has its headquarters, killed 11 people. A
few days later, approximately 150 people died
in Nigeria: nearly 50 killed in a shooting in
Monguno and almost 100 in Kukuwa. The
group has been trying to smuggle weapons through Chad but Chadian police forces
raided two arsenals, seizing a large number
of arms and gathering intelligence.
4.1.3. Regional threat
Although Boko Haram’s acts of violence are
mainly concentrated in Borno State in the
north-east of Nigeria, the terrorist group
has demonstrated the ability to launch attacks in the territories of Niger and Cameroon and even in Abuja, the Nigerian capital.

Box 20. The ‘deadliest massacre’ of Baga
Between 3 and 9 January 2015, the group AlJama’atu Ahlus Sunnah Lid Da’wati Wal Jihad, commonly called Boko Haram, carried out massive
attacks in the city of Baga and its outskirts, located in the state of Borno, north-east of Nigeria
near the border with Chad.
The storms of attacks began when Boko Haram
assaulted the Headquarters of the Multinational
Joint Task Force (MNJTF) containing troops from
Chad, Niger, and Nigeria. In the days that followed,
Boko Haram terrorists were killing people in the
area. According to an Amnesty International statement, and other sources of information, the town
was razed and 2 000 people were killed in the
‘deadliest massacre’ in the history of Boko Haram.
Source: Amnesty International

Box 21. Pledging alliance to ISIL/Da’ish?
In March 2015, a ISIL/Da’ish’s spokesman said
that the leader Abu Bakr Al-Baghdadi accepted
the pledge of allegiance (bayat) by Boko Haram’s
leader Abubakar Shekau, adopting the name ‘Islamic State’s West Africa Province’ (ISWAP). Nigerian member of AFIC informed however that there
is no intelligence so far to establish any relation
between Boko Haram and Da’ish. Boko Haram is
a local group, very focused and located in a specific region which does not have international links,
not even with AQIM, Al-Shabbab or other terrorist groups operating in the Sahel.
There were also no confirmed foreign fighters
among Boko Haram’s troops. Most of the fighters
are locals from Nigeria or immediate border regions.

In the case of Niger, Lamina and Ungumawo
villages in the Diffa region suffered at least
40 casualties after Boko Haram staged their
attacks there. Similar attacks outside Nige-

45 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Source: Nigerian AFIC delegation

ria have provoked mobilisation of troops in
the Diffa region, which meant fewer troops
in the area of Agadez. This vulnerability could
have been exploited by migrant smuggling
networks and other criminal organisations.

Source: Nigerian AFIC delegation

Figure 42. Nigerian refugees in a Nigerien camp

Figure 43. Nigerian refugees in a Cameroonian camp

Boko Haram mainly uses car bomb attacks,
young girls as suicide bombers and very often also ‘moto raids’. This method was described by the Nigerien AFIC member during
the workshop in Casablanca. Groups of motorcycles reach the target, attack using RPG-7
rocket-propelled grenades and quickly disappear. In fact, Boko Haram might be giving away motorcycles among the Nigerien
youths to increase the number of recruits.
Likewise, AFIC members from Cameroon expressed their concern about the persistence
of Boko Haram and pointed to a need to disrupt radicalisation and recruitment of local
population. In addition, Cameroon is very
concerned about Boko Haram members hiding among refugees. Namely, Cameroonian
authorities were able to detect such cases
in August when two female bombers were
arrested with explosive devices in a refugee
camp of Minawao (northern Cameroon). As
female suicide bombers were behind several
blasts in northern Cameroon in July 2015, the
regional governor banned the Islamic veil as
part of counter-terrorist measures.
4.1.4. Humanitarian impact

Source: Nigerian AFIC delegation

In April 2015, the Internal Displacement Monitoring Centre (IDMC) estimated that 1.5
million people had been forced to flee their
homes in Nigeria. They are either internally
displaced or are living as refugees in neighbouring countries.

Figure 44. Nigerian refugees in a Chadian camp

46 of 52

The Nigerian AFIC member reported that Niger has evacuated thousands of Nigerian refugees sheltering from Boko Haram fighters
on Lake Chad’s Karanga Island in May 2015.
Karanga Island has been used by Boko Haram

Figure 41. Displacement statistics for Cameroon

Cameroon: Far North
–Displaced Population
(as of 1 June 2015)

Chad

Nigeria

Resident Population:
3 945 168

LOGONE-ET-CHARI
Central
African
Republic

Affected Population

Yaounde

Affected Population

Fotokol

Border Crossing
Gabon

Border Crossing

Sites

Ndjamena

Refugee Camp
Refugee Site
Transit Site

Republic
of the Congo

Kousséri
NIGERIA

Settlements

Chad

Transit Site

Borders
National
Regions
Departments

Roads

Waza

Amchide

Primary
Kolofata

Magdame

Ashigashiya
0

Mora

25

MAYO-SAVA

km

DIAMARE

Mokolo

EXTREME-NORD
Maroua

Minawao
Population: 37 171
MAYO-TSANAGA

NORD

Guider

Source: Natural Earth, SALB, GADM, UNHCR, MapAction, 2015

47 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

Source: Nigerian AFIC delegation

are no Boko Haram terrorists among the
refugees. Of those, 650 have been relocated
to Borno State and the rest to Malkohi IDP
camp in Yola. Nigerian authorities are calling for international assistance to mitigate
the appalling conditions in these IDP camps.

4.2.	Northern Mali remains
unstable

Figure 45. 33 Nigerian women and children rescued from Sambisa
forest and located at IDP camp of Maiduguri, Borno State

to mount surprise attacks in Chad, Cameroon, Niger and Nigeria itself.
By the middle of 2015, UNHCR reported the
presence of 74 000 Nigerian refugees in the
Far North of Cameroon (Logone-et-Chari;
Mayo Sava, Dimare, Mayo-Sanaga). This represents an increase of around 26 000 refugees from 30 December 2014, when there
were 48 000 Nigerian refugees. In addition to
the Nigerian refugees, there are 81 700 IDPs,
36 000 returnees and 74 000 Nigerian refugees in the Far North region. These massive
numbers, added to the 200 000 people settled in this region and the refugees form Central Africa Republic, are considered a factor
of destabilisation and this situation is overwhelming the Cameroonian capabilities of
security and assistance.
Minawao Camp in Cameroon saw an increase in arrivals as its population rose from
about 30 000 in late 2014 to approximately
44 000 at the end of July 2015. On 5 August
2015, Nigeria’s National Emergency Management Agency (NEMA) reported that 12 000
Nigerian refugees had been returned to Nigeria from Cameroon.
All the returnees are currently being screened
by the Nigerian Immigration Service and security agencies (DSS) to confirm that there

48 of 52

Despite the efforts by Malian authorities and
the international community, instability persists in the Northern regions of Mali. On 15
May 2015 a peace agreement was signed in
Bamako between Malian government and
the ‘Platform movement’ composed by Coordination of movements and patriotic resistance fronts I (CMFPR-I), a faction of the
Coalition of the People of Azawad (CPA), a
faction of Arab Movement of Azawad (MAA)
and the pro-government Tuareg militia of
the Pro-unity Self-Defence Group of Imrad
Tuareg and Allies (GATIA), and representatives of two groups of the ‘Coordination
movement’.
However, the core members of ‘Coordination movement’ did not sign the agreement,
which led to a serious deterioration of security situation and violent clashes between
the opponents.
The Malian AFIC member reported, during the
workshop held in Casablanca (Morocco), the
proliferation of terrorist activities from AQMI,
MUJAO and Ansar al-Dine. These groups are
responsible for destruction of places of religious worship and attempts to violently impose sharia (Islamic law) in the Kidal district.
The Malian member of the AFIC also highlighted the persistence of terrorist activities after the French intervention, referring
to the operation Serval and the appearance
of new jihadist or radical groups, such as the
Haut Conseil pour l’unité de l’Azawad (HCUA),
formed by members of the Al-Qaida-allied
Islamist Ansar al-Dine.

International community is supporting the
government of Mali in its fight against terrorism and political violence. These efforts
include the United Nations Multidimensional
Integrated Stabilization Mission in Mali (MINUSMA), EUCAP Sahel Mali mission, the
French operation Barkhane and cooperation with the USA.
The Malian armed forces have also intensified their activities at the border with Côte
d‘Ivoire. For example, near the Sama forest,
Malian forces neutralised a group of jihadists belonging to Ansar al-Dine, seizing diverse weaponry and vehicles.

Box 22. Regional displacement of people
As of 31 July 2015 Malian refugees were residing in the following neighbouring countries: Niger (52 445), Mauritania (49 911),
Burkina Faso (33 907), Algeria (1 330), Togo (169) and Guinea (27).
Additional 90 000 live as IDPs in Mali’s southern cities, including Bamako (46 143), Koulikoro (19 101) and Ségou (12 139), and
just over 16 000 have returned to their homes. The camp in
M’berra (Mali), at the border with Mauritania, is the most populous with almost 60 000 people.

These groups often operate as criminal networks engaged in narcotic trafficking, migrant smuggling activities, kidnapping for
ransom, looting and all kind of cross-border crimes in order to finance their activities.

49 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

5.	Conclusions and
recommendations
This AFIC Joint Report covers several subjects broadly linked to border management
which call for measures to be taken in coordination and at different operational levels.
Possible measures also fit into the recent EU
actions addressing the challenges of migration (European Agenda on Migration, Agenda
on Security, Action Plan on smuggling, and
Action Plan on return) and the current discussions concerning the scope and deliverables of the upcoming Valletta Summit on
Migration. The multitude of issues mentioned
in the preceding analysis can be summarised
into the following core blocks:
Reducing risks that migrants or asylum
seekers face during irregular migration
through new framework for legal
pathways
The analysis of legal travel channels clearly
points to the fact that travelling to the EU
legally is simply not an option for large sections of African societies. As mentioned by
several AFIC members, the fact that visa rejection rates are by far the highest for AFIC
nationals is also perpetuating false and often exaggerated impression of Europe as a
sort of ‘the promised land’.
To obtain a chance of getting to Europe, many
young Africans are willing to resort to illegal
means. As reported by Cameroon and consular authorities of EU Member States, these include falsification of breeder documents (salary
slips, passports, birth and marriage certificates,
etc.), misleading consular authorities about
their intended duration of stay, identity theft
and – as a last resort – also irregular migration using the routes described in the analysis.

50 of 52

While decision on issuing visas is an exclusive
competence of every EU Member State, AFIC
members agree that currently the threshold for obtaining a visa is set extremely high
compared to other regions.
Stamping the rejected visa applicant’s passport with a ‘visa rejected’ stamp should be
avoided given the existence of the Visa Information System and its impact on reducing visa shopping and identity fraud.
Several nationalities in West Africa have the
ratio of illegal border-crossings at external
borders of the EU to the number of visas issued for a legal travel to the EU was very
close to 1:1 (e.g. the case of Malians in 2014).
Furthermore, the prevailing profile of rejected visa applicants almost perfectly corresponds to the profile of migrants arriving
through irregular channels.
This would indicate that their propensity
to use irregular routes is to be reduced, the
possible new framework within the Mobility Partnerships should be geared towards
this group of migrants. In addition, circular
migration patterns should be encouraged
taking into account EU rules facilitating circular migration (Seasonal Workers Directive).
Improving effectiveness of rapid
return of those who are not eligible for
international protection
It is clear that the lack of effective return of
persons not eligible for protection is encouraging others to try their chances. This can
lead to unnecessary human suffering as migrants face harassment, exploitation, violence

and even death while trying to cross the desert or the Mediterranean Sea.
The EU Action Plan against migrant smuggling (COM(2015) 285 final) clearly acknowledges this by making a link between a lack
of effective return and increasing migrant
smuggling.
In addition, EU Action Plan on return
(COM(2015) 453 final) identifies many AFIC
countries as possible priority countries regarding readmission building on the ‘morefor-more’ principle (e.g. Morocco, Nigeria,
Senegal, Guinea, Mali, the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, the Gambia).
If the ratio between illegal border-crossings
and subsequent returns by the affected EU
Member States in line with the EU Return
Directive (2008/115/EC) was improved, fewer
migrants would be willing to risk the journey
as clearly demonstrated by the case of Tunisians in Italy or Algerians in Spain.
However, in order to improve this ratio, additional support from the affected AFIC countries needs to be secured, taking into account
financial, technical and logistical limitations
that many of these countries will have to be
helped with.

established bilateral arrangements that several AFIC countries (e.g. Cameroon or Nigeria) have with EU Member States.
Helping transport companies in Africa to
operate responsibly and thus minimise
migrant smuggling
It is clear that the growing travel industry
can help maximise the development potential of the ECOWAS protocols on free movement of persons.
Many bus companies now operate in all 15
ECOWAS countries and offer a vast network
of routes (for example Africaada Trans-Continent or Rimbo Transport Voyageurs) at
relatively affordable prices. In doing so, the
companies play a key role in regional mobility and should thus be an important partner
to consider when AFIC countries are addressing irregular migratory movements.
Authorities from AFIC countries should
therefore engage in dialogue and establish
partnership with these companies to raise
awareness and work with them on proper
implementation of ECOWAS free-movement
protocols.
Improving detection of THB victims as
they cross borders

This could result in possible presence of their
consular authorities at the main entry points
where Frontex-coordinated Joint Operations
are ongoing (mostly Italy and Spain) in order to assist with the procurement of return
documentation. Given the complexity of the
return procedure, a pilot project with one
or two African countries could be initiated.

Potential THB victims typically travel either
alone or in groups of two or three persons.
If the victim is accompanied by a trafficker
during the journey, they often cross the border control separately. They may claim that
they are travelling with an apparent family member.

Such initiatives should be implemented in
conjunction with the Commission’s plan to
provide ‘technical support to countries of origin or transit for migrants, to help improve
their capabilities to integrate the returnees.’
Furthermore, they should build on already

If the victim travels alone, they are usually
picked up directly at the airport by the trafficker (sometimes the ‘madam’). During the
interview victims make false statements
about the travel and their personal and family situation as they present a story learnt by

51 of 52

Frontex · AFIC Joint Report 2015

heart from the traffickers. Victims can initially
appear arrogant or aggressive and refuse to
cooperate with border guards.
All these insights should be taken into consideration by border authorities in AFIC countries when they perform border checks.
Frontex should further assist by providing a
handbook and/or risk profiles when available.
Further development of the AfricaFrontex Intelligence Community
The AFIC is growing both in terms of its participants and ability to share information.
New AFIC mailboxes dedicated to each AFIC
country have now been added to the already
introduced information sharing platform. This
allows for more frequent and permanent information sharing and more frequent production of joint reports (quarterly and annual).

52 of 52

To further develop information sharing capacity, Frontex would be ready to engage in
developing technical and institutional capacity using available EU financial instruments.
Frontex will also support AFIC partners to effectively disseminate joint reports and present the work of the AFIC in regional fora
(ECOWAS, AU, other). AFIC partners will provide proposals for regional meetings where
this support will be needed.
The AFIC should also continue to meet in Africa at least once per year. Frontex will support study visits that could be organised on
the margins of such AFIC meetings in Africa.
Finally, while this report is mostly focused on
ECOWAS and Central African region, steps
will be taken to cover also East Africa the
Horn of Africa in future activities of the AFIC.

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union

For Public Release
Risk Analysis Unit
Reference number: 20937/2015

Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01

TT-01-16-058-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-21-5
doi:10.2819/436478

Warsaw, January 2016
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

