Best Practice Technical
Guidelines for Automated
Border Control (ABC) Systems

Best Practice Technical
Guidelines for Automated
Border Control (ABC)
Systems

Research and Development Unit

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders
of the Member States of the European Union
Research and Development Unit
Capacity Building Division
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

2 of 60

Print version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-51-2
DOI 10.2819/86138
Online version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-50-5
DOI 10.2819/39041
Date: September 2015

Contents
Legal notice #6
All rights reserved #6
Acknowledgements #7
About Frontex #8
Acronyms and abbreviations #9
Glossary #10
Executive summary #16
Terminology #20
1. Introduction #21
1.1. Purpose and audience #21
1.2. Scope and methodology #21
1.3. About best practices and guidelines #23
1.4. How to read this document #24
2.	General overview of ABC systems #25
3.	Architecture of an ABC system #26
3.1. Requirements of the physical installation #26
3.2. Security and safety #27
3.3. Long-term reliability #27
4.	The document authentication process #28
4.1. Document reader requirements #28
4.1.1. Technical requirements	  #28
4.1.2. Capability requirements #29
4.2. Performing optical checks on the e-Passport #29
4.2.1. Mandatory optical checks #29
4.2.2. Optional optical checks #29
4.3. Accessing and reading e-Passport data #29
4.4. Verification of e-Passport data #30
4.4.1. EF.SOD verification #32
4.4.2. DS certificate signature verification #32
4.4.3. Certificate validity period check #33
4.4.4. DS certificate revocation status #33
4.4.5. Comparison between EF.SOD and EF.COM #34
4.4.6. Data group integrity check #34
4.4.7.	Comparison of optical and electronic biographical data
(DG1 vs MRZ) #34
4.4.8. Issuing country comparison (DG1 vs DS certificate) #35
4.4.9. Defect handling #35
4.5. Design of the document authentication process #35
4.6. Alternative e-MRTDs #37
4.6.1. MSs national identity cards #37

3 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

5.	The biometric verification process #40
5.1. Face verification #40
5.1.1. Face capture unit #40
5.1.2. Face verification unit #42
5.1.3. Design of the face capture and verification process #43
5.2. Fingerprint verification #44
5.2.1. Fingerprint capture unit #44
5.2.2. Fingerprint verification unit #46
5.2.3. Design of the fingerprint capture and verification process #47
5.3. Multi-biometrics #47
6.	Quality control and quality assurance #50
6.1. General recommendations #50
6.2. Access data #51
6.3. ABC installation data #51
6.4. Document authentication data #52
6.5. Biometric verification data #52
6.6. Other Data Sets #53

4 of 60

Annex 1:

References #54

Annex 2:

Additional reading #56

Annex 3:

Overview of ABC systems in the EU/Schengen Area #58

Release Note
and Table of Changes
This report supersedes the previous version of the Best Practice Technical Guidelines for Automated Border Control (ABC) systems. The main changes are summarised in the table below.

Table of changes
Section altered

Change

Acknowledgements

Names of experts, stakeholders and Frontex staff who contributed to the revision updated
accordingly

About Frontex

Changes made in the title of this section as well as in the sentence about the core objective
of the Capacity Building Division

Preamble

Removed

Glossary

Introduction of terms and definitions

Executive Summary

Updated according to the text

Section 1.1.

Introduction of clarification regarding the purpose of the guidelines

Section 1.2.

Introduction of a reference to the Smart Border Package, introduction updates regarding
the biometrics used and types of border crossing points, as well as introduction of updates
regarding the methodology

Section 1.3.

Introduction of clarifications and updates regarding the definition of best practices

Section 4.3.

Changes to Figure 1; introduction of PACE and of the sequence for reading data groups

Section 4.4.4.

Introduction of clarification regarding the DS certificate revocation status

Section 4.4.5.

Introduction of clarifications regarding EF.SOD and EF.COM

Section 4.4.7.

Introduction of a remark regarding non-ICAO-compliant use of optional MRZ data

Sections 4.6.1.1.
and 4.6.1.2.

Introduction of updates and clarifications regarding national ID cards; additional section
4.6.1.3 added highlighting the main differences between e-Passport, German ID and Spanish
ID card

Chapter 6

Changes made in the title of the section and introduction of clarifications regarding quality
control and quality assurance

Section 6.5.

Some text removed as regards collection of biometric verification data

Annexes 1 and 2

Update of the references

Annex 3

Introduction of updates regarding the operational and planned ABC systems in the EU

5 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Legal notice
The contents of this publication do not necessarily reflect the official opinions of any institution or body of the European Union. Neither Frontex nor any person or company acting on
behalf of Frontex is responsible for the use that may be made of the information contained
in this report.

All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced
in any form or by any means electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording
or by any information storage retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
copyright holder.
Before citing the Frontex Best Practice Technical Guidelines for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems, the following procedure
should be observed.
1.	Please contact the Frontex Research and
Development Unit in order to get the latest version of the guidelines and support
for using them in your document.
In the introductory part of the document.
2.	Include a brief text declaring that Frontex ABC guidelines have been used in the
document. Mention explicitly which sections in the document are (totally or partially) based on these.
3.	Explain briefly why Frontex ABC guidelines
have been used in the document, and in
case of total or partial use of particular
sections, explicitly state why these sections are copied in full and what the added
value is. Provide some background about
how using Frontex guidelines best serves
the purposes of the document.

6 of 60

4.	Briefly mention that Frontex guidelines are
the result of a collaborative effort among
EU Member States (coordinated by Frontex) who at the time of writing have an operational or piloting ABC system in place.
In the body of the document.
5.	In those parts of the document based on
Frontex guidelines, make a reference to
the Frontex document (see references
below).
In the references section.
6.	Include a proper reference to the Frontex ABC guidelines document (title, version and issuing date, ISBN reference, plus
a download link to the Frontex web page
hosting the latest version).
7	Include Frontex Research and Development Unit contact data at the end of the
document.

Frontex RDU contact data:

Research and Development Unit
Capacity Building Division
Frontex
Plac Europejski 6, 00-844 Warsaw, Poland
E-mail: rd@frontex.europa.eu
Tel. +48 22 205 96 25
Fax +48 22 205 95 01

Acknowledgements1
This report was prepared by the Research
and Development Unit (RDU) of Frontex in
close collaboration with experts from a number of EU Member States which, at the time
of writing, were operating or testing an ABC
system at selected border crossing points of
the European Union. Frontex would like to
particularly acknowledge the work of Markus
Nuppeney, Head of Section and Florian Rienhardt, Technical Officer at the Federal Office of Information Security (BSI) who took
the lead in revising these guidelines. Frontex
would also like to thank the following persons who participated in the Working Group
on Automated Border Controls and contributed to this report.
nnBulgaria: Lyubomir Dilov and Aleksandr
Kamburov (Border Police).
nnCzech Republic: Mylan Frydrych and Petr
Malovec (Border Police).
nnFrance: Dominique Gatinet (French Secure
Documents Agency), Eric Clement Pierre
Alexander Gelas and Laurent Mucchielli
(Border Police).
nnFinland: Max Janzon, Janne Kurvinen, Pasi
Nokelainen, Alapelto Pentti and MIkko
Väisänen (Finnish Border Guard).
nnGermany: Markus Nuppeney, Florian Rienhardt (Federal Office for Information Security) and Maik Rudolf (Federal Police).
nnIreland: Kevin Ryan (Irish Naturalisation
and Immigration Service).

1

nnNetherlands: Yvonne Bakker, Kier-co Gerritsen, Joost van Aalst (Ministry of Justice),
Rijck van de Kuil and Hans De Moel (Royal
Netherlands Marechaussee).
nnPortugal: Paula Maria Azevedo Cristina
and Maria Conceição Bértolo (Immigration and Border Service).
nnSpain: Javier Núñez Alonso, Ángel L. Puebla
and Alberto Raez Liria (Spanish National
Police).
nnUnited Kingdom: Andrew Clayton, Daniel
Soutar and Glen Wimbury (UK Border
Agency).
In addition Frontex is grateful to Ciaran Carolan (eu-LISA, the EU Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems),
Ted Dunstone (Biometrics Institute and Biometix), and Kerry Kwan (Immigration Department of the Hong Kong Administrative
Region) who have extensively contributed to
the revision of this document.
Moreover, the following staff from the Frontex RDU participated in the drafting and
editing process: Aurelie Gaudron, Karolina
Lopacka, Rasa Karbauskaite, María Duro
Mansilla, Gustav Soederlind and Ignacio Zozaya. Frontex is also grateful to all those other
stakeholders (not mentioned here) who contributed to the review process.

Member States’ experts and Frontex staff
have been acknowledged in alphabetical order
according to the first letter of their surnames.

7 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

About Frontex
The mission of Frontex is to facilitate and render more effective the application of existing
and future European Union measures relating to the management of external borders,
in particular the Schengen Borders Code. As
such, the Agency is to play a key role in analysing and defining the capability needs in
border control and in supporting the Member States in development of these capabilities. Frontex also provides qualified expertise
to support the EU policy development process in the area of border control.
One of the core objectives of the Capacity Building Division is to drive the process
of harmonisation and standardisation for

8 of 60

border control and promote greater interoperability. As part of the Capacity Building
Division at Frontex, RDU is tasked to develop
best practices and procedures, both technical and operational, for border control. RDU
proactively monitors and participates in the
development of research relevant to the control and surveillance of external borders and
keeps Member States and the European Commission informed concerning technological
innovations in the field of border control. In
particular, one of RDU’s main areas of work
is the exploration of the potential offered by
new border management technologies to
meet the dual objective of enhancing security while facilitating travel.

Acronyms and abbreviations
AA
ABC
B900
BAC
BCP
BioAPI

Active Authentication
Automated Border Control
IR sensitive ink
Basic Access Control
Border Crossing Point
Biometric Application Programming
Interface
BMP
Image format Windows Bitmap v3
BPGs
Best Practice Guidelines
BPOGs
Best Practice Operational Guidelines
BPTGs
Best Practice Technical Guidelines
CA
Chip Authentication
CAN
Card Access Number
CCTV
Closed Circuit Television
CRL
Certificate Revocation List
CSCA
Country Signing Certification Authority
CV
Card Verifiable
CVCA
Country Verifying Certification Authority
DG	Data Group, elementary file on e-Passport
chip
DG1
Data Group 1 of the e-Passport chip
(machine readable zone data)
DG2
Data Group 2 of the e-Passport chip
(encoded face data)
DG3
Data Group 3 of the e-Passport chip
(encoded finger(s) data)
DG14
Data Group 14 of the e-Passport chip
(chip authentication public key data)
DG15
Data Group 15 of the e-Passport chip
(active authentication public key data)
DS
Document Signer
DV
Document Verifier
EAC
Extended Access Control
EBF
External Borders Fund
EF.COM
Common Data Object of the e-Passport
chip (version information and tag list)
EF.SOD
Document Security Object of the e-Passport chip (data integrity and authenticity
information)
e-ID
Electronic ID
EMC
Electromagnetic compatibility
e-MRTD
Electronic MRTD
EMV
Europay, Mastercard and Visa

EU
European Union
EU/EEA/CH European Union, European Economic Area,
Switzerland
FAR
False accept rate
FRR
False reject rate
FTA
Failure to acquire
ICAO
International Civil Aviation Organisation
ID
Identity Document
IR
Infrared light
IS
Inspection System
ISO
International Organisation for
Standardisation
JPEG
Joint Photographic Experts Group
JPG
JPEG compression format for images
JPG2000
JPEG 2000 compression format for images
LDAP
Lightweight Directory Access Protocol
LED
Light-Emitting Diode
MRTD
Machine Readable Travel Document
MRZ
Machine Readable Zone
MS
EU Member State
OCR
Optical Character Recognition
PA
Passive Authentication
PACE
Password Authenticated Connection
Establishment
PC
Personal Computer
PC/SC
Personal Computer/Smart Card (specification for smart-card integration into computing environments)
PCD
Proximity Coupling Device
PKI
Public Key Infrastructure
PPI
Pixels per Inch
QES
Qualified Electronic Signatures
RF
Radio Frequency
SDK
Software Development Kit
SW
Software
TA
Terminal Authentication
TCC
Terminal Control Centre
USB
Universal Serial Bus
UV-A
Ultraviolet light A (400 nm–315 nm
wavelength)
VIZ
Visual Inspection Zone
WSQ
Wavelet Scalar Quantisation
XML
Extensible Markup Language

9 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Glossary2
Active Authentication (AA): Explicit authentication of the chip. Active authentication requires processing capabilities of the
e-MRTD’s chip. The active authentication
mechanism ensures that the chip has not
been substituted, by means of a challengeresponse protocol between the inspection
system and the e-MRTD’s chip. See also ‘Passive Authentication’.
Assisting Personnel: Border guard officer(s)
who are responsible for handling the exceptions that occur at an ABC system, redirecting
travellers as required (for example, to second
line checks), and assisting them in specific situations. Assisting personnel work in close cooperation with the operator of the e-Gates.
Automated Border Control (ABC) system:
An automated system which authenticates
the electronic machine readable travel document or token, establishes that the passenger is the rightful holder of the document or

2

10 of 60

The definitions included in this section are
based on a number of relevant glossaries and
dictionaries, namely the European Migration
Network Glossary, the Eurostat Glossary; the
ICAO MRTD Glossary, the OECD Glossary of
statistical terms, and the Oxford Language
Dictionary. Other sources of definitions are
the European Commission ‘Communication
on Smart Borders’; the European Union
‘Schengen Borders Code’; the Federal Office for
Information Security of Germany ‘Defect List:
Technical Guideline TR-03129’; and ICAO ‘Doc
9303 Machine Readable Travel Documents’,
‘Guidelines on electronic – Machine Readable
Travel Documents & Passenger Facilitation’
and its ‘Primer on the ICAO PKD Directory’ (for
further details see the reference list in Annex
I). Finally, a number of definitions have been
devised and agreed by the Frontex Working
Group on Automated Border Controls.

token, queries border control records, then
determines eligibility of border crossing according to the pre-defined rules.
Basic Access Control (BAC): Challenge-response protocol where a machine (RF) reader
must create a symmetric key in order to read
the contactless chip by hashing the data
scanned from the MRZ. See also ‘Extended
Access Control (EAC)’.
Biometric Capture: The process of taking a
biometric sample from the user.
Biometric Spoofing: A deception technique
taking advantage of a biometric vulnerability
of an ABC system caused by the manufacture
of a disguise, prosthetic or other obscuration, aimed to either avoid detection or to
be incorrectly identified as another person.
Biometric Verification: The process of
confirming the identity of the holder of an
e‑MRTD by the measurement and validation of one or more distinctive properties of
the holder’s person.
Border Checks: The checks carried out at
border crossing points, to ensure that persons, including their means of transport and
the objects in their possession, may be authorised to enter the territory of the Member States or authorised to leave it. See also
‘Border Crossing Point (BCP)’.
Border Crossing Point (BCP): Any crossingpoint authorised by the competent authorities for the crossing of external borders.
Border Guard: Any public official assigned,
in accordance with national law, to a border
crossing point or along the border or in the

immediate vicinity of that border who carries
out border control tasks in accordance with
the Schengen Borders Code and national law.
Border Management Authority: Any public law enforcement institution which, in accordance with national law, is responsible for
border control.
Certificate: An electronic document establishing a digital identity by combining the
identity name or identifier with the public
key of the identity, a validity period and an
electronic signature by a third party.
Certificate Revocation List (CRL): A list
enumerating certificates whose validity is
compromised along with the reasons for
revocation.
Change Management: Within the context
of these Best Practice Guidelines, the term
refers to the strategies adopted by the border management authority to deal in a constructive way with the uncertainty associated
with the introduction of new border control
technologies. The aim is to promote the development among the staff of new attitudes
and behaviour that are instrumental to the
introduction of the new processes required
for the operation of those technologies (i.e.
the ABC system).
Chip Authentication (CA): Implicit authentication of the chip. Chip authentication requires a key pair specific to a particular chip,
where the private key is stored in a non-accessible area of the chip. The chip authentication mechanism serves for initiation of a
secure channel between the chip and the inspection system terminal. It ensures implicitly that the chip has not been substituted.
See also ‘Active Authentication’
Cost Benefit Analysis: Technique for deciding whether to make a change. As its name
suggests, it compares the values of all bene-

fits from the action under consideration and
the costs associated with it.
Customer Service Personnel: Within the
context of these Best Practice Guidelines, the
term refers to the staff of the port operator
who are tasked with providing guidance, advice and assistance to travellers in using the
ABC system. Some Member States use the
term ‘hosts’ to refer to such personnel.
Database: An application storing a structured
set of data and allowing for the management
and retrieval of such data. For example, the
Schengen Information System (SIS) is a joint
information system that enables the competent authorities in each Member State of the
Schengen area, by means of an automated
search procedure, to have access to alerts
on persons and property for the purposes of
border checks and other police and customs
checks carried out within the country in accordance with national law and, for some
specific categories of alerts (those defined in
Article 96 of the Schengen Convention), for
the purposes of issuing visas, residence permits and the administration of legislation on
aliens in the context of the application of the
provisions of the Schengen Convention relating to the movement of persons. See also
‘Schengen area’ and ‘Watch List’.
Database Hit: An instance of identifying
an item of data that matches the requirements of a search. See also ‘Database’ and
‘Watch List’.
Defect: A production error affecting a large
number of documents. The withdrawal of
already issued documents is impractical or
even impossible if the detected defect is contained in foreign documents.
Defect List: A signed list to handle defects.
Defects are identified by the Document Signer
Certificate(s) used to produce defect documents. Defect Lists are thus errata that not

11 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

only inform about defects but also provide
corrigenda to fix the error where possible.
See also ‘Defect’.
e-Gate: One of the components of an ABC
system, consisting of a physical barrier operated by electronic means. This covers different types of e-Gates: A single-door e-Gate
is a system with one barrier to pass. A double-door e-Gate is a system with an entry
and an exit barrier (mantrap).
e-ID: An electronically enabled card used as
an identity document.
e-MRTD: A machine readable travel document (MRTD) equipped with an electronic
contactless chip according to Doc 9303. See
also ‘MRTD’.
e-Passport: A machine readable passport
(MRP) containing a Contactless Integrated
Circuit (IC) chip containing data from the MRP
data page, a biometric measure of the passport holder, and a security object to protect
the data with PKI cryptographic technology,
and which conforms to the specifications of
the ICAO Doc 9303, Part 1.
EU citizen: Any person having the nationality
of an EU Member State, within the meaning
of Article 20(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. See also ‘Persons
enjoying the Community right to free movement’ and ‘Freedom of Movement (Right to)’.
Extended Access Control (EAC): Protection
mechanism for additional biometrics included
in the e-MRTD. The mechanism will include
State’s internal specifications or the bilateral
agreed specifications between States sharing this information. See also ‘Basic Access
Control (BAC)’.
Failure to Acquire (FTA): The failure of a biometric system to obtain the necessary biometric feature to verify a person.

12 of 60

False Accept Rate (FAR): The probability that
a biometric system will incorrectly identify an
individual or will fail to reject an impostor. The
rate given normally assumes passive impostor attempts. The false acceptance rate may
be estimated as FAR = NFA/NIIA or FAR =
NFA/NIVA where FAR is the false acceptance
rate, NFA is the number of false acceptances,
NIIA is the number of impostor identification
attempts, and NIVA is the number of impostor verification attempts.
False Reject Rate (FRR): The probability that
a biometric system will fail to identify an enrolee or verify the legitimate claimed identity
of an enrolee. The false rejection rate may
be estimated as follows: FRR = NFR/NEIA
or FRR = NFR/NEVA where FRR is the false
rejection rate, NFR is the number of false rejections, NEIA is the number of enrolee identification attempts, and NEVA is the number
of enrolee verification attempts. This estimate assumes that the enrolee identification/verification attempts are representative
of those for the whole population of enrolees. The false rejection rate normally excludes
‘failure to acquire’ error.
First-Line Check: Default check carried out
at border crossing points to ensure that travellers are authorised to enter the territory of
the EU/EEA/CH. See ‘Second-Line Check’.
Freedom of Movement (Right to): A fundamental right of every citizen of an EU Member State or another European Economic
Area (EEA) state or Switzerland to freely
move, reside and work within the territory
of these states. See also ‘EU citizen’ and ‘Persons enjoying the Community right to free
movement’.
Impostor: A person who applies for and obtains a document by assuming a false name
and identity, or a person who alters his physical appearance to represent himself as an-

other person for the purpose of using that
person’s document.
Integrated Two-Step Process: One of the
possible topologies of ABC systems. In an ABC
system designed as an integrated two-step
process, the traveller initiates the verification
of the document and of the traveller’s eligibility to use the system at the first stage, and
then if successful moves to a second stage
where biometric verification and other applicable checks are carried out. This topology is
invariably implemented by using a mantrap
e-Gate. See also ‘One-Step Process’ and ‘Segregated Two-Step Process’.
Interoperability: The ability of several independent systems or subsystem components
to work together.
Machine Readable Travel Document
(MRTD): An official document conforming
with the specifications contained in ICAO
Doc 9303, issued by a state or organisation,
which is used by the holder for international
travel (e.g. passport, visa) and which contains
mandatory visual (eye readable) data and a
separate mandatory data summary in a format that is capable of being read by machine.
Machine Readable Zone (MRZ): The area
on a passport containing two lines of data
(three lines on a visa) printed using a standard format and font. See also ‘Visual Inspection Zone (VIZ)’.
Member State: A country that is a member
of the European Union. Within the context
of these Best Practice Guidelines, the term
also applies to those countries that, not being EU members, take part in the Schengen
area. See also ‘Schengen area’.
Monte Carlo Method: The Monte Carlo
method for auto-correction is an automatic
correction method in which the corrected
data value is randomly chosen on the basis

of a previously supplied probability distribution for this data item. The method employs
computer algorithms for generating pseudorandom variables with the given probability
distribution.
Multi-biometrics: Refers to the combination
of information from two or more biometric
measurements. It is also known as ‘Fusion’
and ‘Multimodal biometrics’.
One-Step Process: One of the possible topologies of ABC systems. An ABC system designed as a one-step process combines the
verification of the traveller and the traveller’s secure passage through the border. This
design allows the traveller to complete the
whole transaction in a single process without the need to move to another stage. It
usually takes the form of a mantrap e-Gate.
See also ‘Integrated Two-Step Process’ and ‘Segregated Two-Step Process’.
Operator: The border guard officer responsible for the remote monitoring and control
of the ABC system. The tasks performed by
the operator typically include: (a) monitoring the user interface of the application; (b)
reacting to any notification given by the application; (c) managing exceptions and making decisions about them; (d) communicating
with the assisting personnel for the handling
of exceptions at the e-Gates; (e) monitoring
and profiling travellers queuing in the ABC line
and using the e-Gates, looking for suspicious
behaviour in travellers; and (f) communicating with the border guards responsible for
second-line checks whenever their services
are needed. See also ‘Assisting Personnel’.
Passive Authentication (PA): Verification
mechanism used to check if the data on
the RF chip of an e-MRTD is authentic and
not forged by tracing it back to the Country
Signing Certificate Authority (CSCA) certificate of the issuing country. See also ‘Active
Authentication’.

13 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Password Authenticated Connection Establishment (PACE): Password authenticated
Diffie-Hellman key agreement protocol that
provides secure communication and explicit
password-based authentication between an
e-MRTD chip and an inspection system. See
also ‘Extended Access Control (EAC)’.
Persons enjoying the Community right of
free movement: According to Article 2(5)
of the Schengen Borders Code these are: a)
Union citizens within the meaning of Article
20(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union and third country nationals who are members of the family of a Union citizen exercising his or her right to free
movement to whom Directive 2004/38/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the right of citizens of
the Union and their family members to move
and reside freely within the territory of the
Member States; and b) third country nationals and their family members, whatever their
nationality, who, under agreements between
the Community and its Member States, on
the one hand and those third countries, on
the other hand, enjoy rights of free movement
equivalent to those of Union citizens. See also
‘Freedom of movement (Right to)’ and ‘Persons
enjoying the Community right to free movement’.
Port Operator: Also known as ‘Port Authority’. The public institution and/or private company that operates the port facility, at either
air or sea borders.
Public Key Directory (PKD): A broker service that publishes certificates and revocation lists for download.
Registered Traveller Programme (RTP): A
scheme aiming to facilitate border crossing
for frequent, pre-vetted and pre-screened
travellers, often making use of ABC systems.
Registered Traveller: See also ‘Registered
Traveller Programme’.

14 of 60

Schengen Area: An area without internal
border control encompassing 26 European
countries, including all EU Member States except Bulgaria, Ireland, Cyprus, Romania and
the United Kingdom, as well as four non EU
countries, namely Iceland, Lichtenstein, Norway and Switzerland. It takes its name from
the Schengen Agreement signed in Schengen, Luxembourg, in 1985; this agreement was
later incorporated into the EU legal framework by the 1997 Treaty of Amsterdam.
Second-Line Check: A further check that
may be carried out in a special location away
from the location at which all travellers are
checked (first line).
Segregated Two-Step Process: One of the
possible topologies of ABC systems. In an ABC
system designed as a Segregated Two-Step
Process the process of traveller verification
and of passage through the border control
are completely separated. The traveller is verified at the first stage, a tactical biometric is
captured or a token is issued, and then the
traveller proceeds to the second stage where
the tactical biometric or token is checked to
allow exit. It typically takes the form of a kiosk for verification of the document and the
holder, while border passage occurs at an eGate. See also ‘One-Step Process’ and ‘Integrated Two-Step Process’.
Service Level Agreement (SLA): Part of a
service contract where the level of service
is formally defined. SLAs record a common
understanding about services, priorities, responsibilities, guarantees and warranties of
the services provided.
Terminal Authentication (TA): Mechanism
ensuring that only authorised inspection system terminals get access to sensitive chip
data. Part of the EAC protocol. See ‘Extended
Access Control’.

Third Country National: Any person who is
not an EU citizen within the meaning of Article 20(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union and who is not a person enjoying the Union right to freedom of
movement, as defined in Article 2(5) of the
Schengen Borders Code. See also ‘EU citizen’
and ‘Persons enjoying the Community right
of free movement’.
Topology: The way in which the constituent
parts of a system are interrelated or arranged.

Vulnerability: A weakness in an ABC system
that might be exploited to bypass some aspect of the system integrity.
Visual Inspection Zone (VIZ): Those portions of the MRTD (data page in the case of
an e-Passport) designed for visual inspection, i.e. front and back (where applicable),
not defined as the MRZ. See also ‘Machine
readable zone (MRZ)’.
Watch List: A list of individuals, groups, or
items that require close surveillance. See also
‘Database’ and ‘Database Hit’.

15 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Executive summary
This document constitutes a compendium of
best practice guidelines on the design, deployment and operation of automated border control systems with a focus on their
technical dimension.
These BPGs have been drafted by the Frontex Working Group (WG) on ABC in an effort
to promote harmonisation of practice, similar traveller experience and consistent security levels at the different BCPs where ABC
systems have been deployed. The intended
audience is technical experts involved in the
design and implementation of ABC systems
in the EU Member States, including project
managers and system architects from border management authorities. While these
ABC Best Practice Technical Guidelines have
been conceived as a stand-alone resource,
ideally they should be read in combination
with the Frontex ‘Best Practice Operational
Guidelines for ABC Systems’. Additional documents such as Guidelines for Processing
Third Country Nationals through ABC and
ABC Challenge Catalogue (forthcoming in
2015) should serve as the complementary
documents to these BPGs.
The document focuses on ABC systems based
on the use of an electronic travel document
(generally an ICAO compliant e-Passport)
which can be used by EU citizens without the
need for pre-enrolment. Registered Traveller Programmes (RTPs) are outside its scope.
The biometric markers covered include both
facial recognition and fingerprints.
The BPGs are structured in four main sections,
which focus respectively on: (1) the physical
architecture of an ABC system; (2) the document authentication process; (3) the biometric verification process; and (4) quality control.

16 of 60

Architecture of an ABC system
The key components of an ABC system include: one or two physical barriers (e-Gates);
a document reader; one or several biometric capture devices (camera and/or fingerprint reader); user interfaces (monitors, LED
signals, audio devices); processing units and
network devices; and monitoring and control stations for the operators.
There are three main topologies of ABC in
use. ‘One-step process’ topologies enable
the traveller to complete the whole transaction, including the document and the biometric verification, in one single process
without the need to move to another stage.
A variation from this is the ‘integrated twostep process’ topology, in which the traveller
will initiate the verification of the document
and the traveller’s eligibility to use the system at the first stage, and then if successful
move to a second stage where a biometric
comparison and other applicable checks are
carried out. Finally, in the ‘segregated twostep process topology’ the verification processes and the crossing of the actual border
take place at separate locations.
Irrespective of the particular configuration
chosen, an ABC system must meet basic requirements regarding the physical installation and security and safety considerations.
This includes protecting the modules which
are installed in public areas against tampering
and vandalism, for instance by using materials that are scratch proof and impact-resistant. The system must also be constructed in
such a way as to ensure that only the traveller who has been cleared is allowed to cross
the border, while those who have been refused are appropriately redirected to a bor-

der guard officer. This is typically achieved
by the use of single-door or double-door eGates and tailgating detection/prevention
mechanisms, or by operating the system in
a secure area. Long-term reliability and future-proofness are other important features
of a qualitative ABC system.
The document authentication process
Document authentication is the process by
which the e-MRTD presented by the traveller is checked in order to determine whether
it is a genuine one and enabling the traveller to cross the border. A document reader
is required as a hardware subcomponent of
the ABC system in order to check the authenticity of an e-Passport. The associated document authentication process is considered
to be composed of three separate steps: (1)
carrying out optical document checks; (2) accessing and reading e-Passport data; (3) verifying e-Passport data.
The document reader subcomponent of an
ABC system should have a number of capabilities, including an integrated Radio Frequency
(RF) module which meets ISO standards, a
dedicated wired connection as physical interface to a host system (e.g. a PC), a state-ofthe-art operating speed and a user-friendly
design. It should also be future-proof in order to accommodate future enhancements
provided by the market.
Mandatory optical checks on the e-Passport
relate to the MRZ consistency, the visibility of
the MRZ in the infrared light (IR) image of the
biographical data page and UV-A brightness.
In addition, the e-Passport may be checked
in order to compare the information taken
from the MRZ (e.g. name, nationality or gender) with the data that was extracted from
the visual inspection zone (VIZ) and to verify security patterns (UV, IR, visible) using
a database for pattern checks. Such databases should be kept up to date in order to

avoid significant increases in the False Reject Rate (FRR).
In accessing and reading the e-Passport
data, ABC systems must at least support
the reading and decoding of the following
files/data groups from e-Passports: EF.SOD,
EF.COM, DG1, DG2, DG14 and DG15. When
fingerprints are used in the biometric verification process, the ABC system must also
support the reading and decoding of DG3.
Supported security protocols must include
Passive Authentication (PA), Basic Access
Control (BAC), Password Authenticated Connection Establishment (PACE), Active Authentication (AA), Chip Authentication (CA)
and, when fingerprints are part of the biometric verification process, Terminal Authentication (TA) as well.
In addition to reading it, ABC systems have to
verify the data stored in the e-Passport. Document verification is mainly covered by the
Passive Authentication (PA) security method,
the reliability of which is guaranteed by the
use of trustworthy Document Signer (DS)
and Country Signing Certification Authority
(CSCA) certificates only. Thus, a trusted certificate store must be available. The PA procedure consists of the following sub-steps:
(1) EF.SOD verification; (2) DS certificate signature verification; (3) Certificate validity
period check; (4) DS certificate revocation
status; (5) comparison between EF.SOD and
EF.COM if EF.COM is present; and (6) Datagroup integrity check. Additional checks to
complete the e-Passport data verification
process are the comparison of optical and
electronic biographical data (DG1 vs MRZ)
and the issuing country comparison (country as referenced in DG1 vs country named in
the DS certificate). The overall result of the
e-Passport data verification process is not
to be considered as ‘Passed’ or ‘Successful’
if one or more of the particular sub-steps
listed above end up with the result ‘Failed’.
It is also recommended to use information

17 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

on defects during the process of e-Passport
data verification.
It is up to MSs to decide whether and what
kind of alternative e-MRTDs are supported
by their ABC systems. Currently, both Germany and Spain have ABC implementations
that support their national e-ID cards.
Biometric verification
Biometric verification is the process
whereby, using biometric technology, it is
ascertained that the person holding the eMRTD is actually the owner of the e-MRTD.
ICAO recommends face recognition as the
main global interoperable biometric for identity verification of travellers, although ABC
systems may also support fingerprints or
other biometric markers (e.g. iris).
The biometric verification process is composed of two separate steps: (1) the biometric capture sub-process, carried out by the
face or fingerprint capture unit; (2) the biometric verification sub-process, carried out
by the face or fingerprint verification unit.
As regards face capture and verification, a
number of key recommendations on the biometric capture process refer, among others,
to the positioning of the face capture unit (in
the traveller flow, in order to avoid delays), the
resolution of the cameras and their lighting
modules, the feedback provided to the traveller during the face capture process, and the
pre-processing and quality assessment on
the images provided by the capture to the
verification unit. As for the verification process, the configuration of the face verification algorithm has to ensure a security level
in terms of the False Accept Rate (FAR) of
0.001 (0.1 per cent) or less. At this configuration the False Reject Rate (FRR) should
not be higher than 0.05 (5 per cent). Such

18 of 60

performance levels should be ascertained by
an independent test laboratory or an official
agency, and not only by the supplier.
Concerning fingerprints, recommendations
are provided in relation to the architecture
and setup of the fingerprint reader, including the minimum capture area (16 mm width
and 20 mm height for single fingerprint sensors), the possibility of recalibration by qualified service staff, the optimal temperature
of the room for good quality capture, and
the feedback provided to the traveller during the transaction. As in the case of facial
recognition, the images provided by the capture to the verification unit should be subject to pre-processing and pre-qualification
to ensure that the requisite quality standards
are met. The configuration of the fingerprint
verification algorithm shall ensure a security
level in terms of FAR of 0.001 (0.1 per cent).
At this configuration the FRR should not exceed 0.03 (3 per cent).
The monitoring and control station should receive the results of the biometric verification
process, both regarding face and/or fingerprints. At least the overall verification result
must be displayed in the summary view on
the monitoring screen, although it is advisable that further details regarding the verification process are shown on request by
the operator.
On the other hand, the use of two or more
biometric modalities may be incorporated in
national ABC implementations. Multi-biometrics allow for better results than a process
based on a single biometric, reducing the risk
of false positives and negatives. Several types
of multi-biometrics can be applied directly
to ABC systems in order to improve performance and accuracy: (1) sample level fusion;
(2) score level fusion; and (3) decision level fusion. A detailed description of these modalities is available in ISO 24722.

Quality control and quality assurance
Quality control (QC) is the process whereby
the quality of all factors involved in the operation and exploitation of the ABC system
are measured. While not part of the core
functions of an ABC system, quality control
is nevertheless essential to assess the performance of the system, identify potential
problems and, in sum, serve as the basis for
quality assurance (QA) to ensure that the
system meets the expectations of travellers
and border management authorities.
The BPGs focus on the minimum recommended anonymous operational data to
be collected for QC/QA and the extraction of
business statistics in ABC systems. The data
stored should include information on at least
the following types of transactions: access attempts with documents not accepted by the
system (e.g. non-electronic passports); access
attempts with non-eligible documents (e.g.
third country nationals (TCNs) holding an ePassport); and access attempts by an eligible
traveller with a valid e-Passport but whose
verification was not successful (e.g. due to a
biometric verification error). Importantly, the
collection and storage of data should comply with the limitations imposed by EU and
national data protection regulations in the
Member States. Thus, personal data should
not be stored unless properly anonymised.

In order to allow for detailed performance
and trend analysis, all data entries must be
time-stamped. They must also provide a summary of the final outcome of the verification process, that is, whether the traveller
was granted permission to cross the border
without the requirement for further, manual,
action by the officers monitoring the BCP.
Data entries should include information on
the nationality of the document issuer, and
the traveller’s age and gender. The total verification time and the access time (the total
time spent by an eligible traveller in the process since the first interaction with the system) should also be recorded.
Specific subsystems should be available for
the logging of statistical and technical data
regarding the document authentication process and the biometric verification process,
for the purpose of maintaining continuous
quality control, the extraction of business
statistics and the introduction of improvements to the ABC system. When an ABC system runs other background checks in parallel
to the document authentication and biometric verification processes, some data should
also be stored on those background checks.
Finally, for the purposes of QC/QA, each ABC
installation, as well as each of its components,
should be uniquely identified.

19 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Terminology
Although the recommendations and guidelines presented in this document are nonbinding for MSs, the terminology below 3 has
been adopted in order to provide an unambiguous description of what should be observed
in order to achieve a coherent approach with
a common security baseline across Schengen borders.
SHALL This word, or the terms ‘REQUIRED’
or ‘MUST’, means that the definition is an
absolute requirement.
SHALL NOT This phrase, or the phrase
‘MUST NOT’, means that the definition is
an absolute prohibition.
SHOULD This word, or the adjective ‘RECOMMENDED’, means that there may exist
valid reasons in particular circumstances
to ignore a particular aspect, but the full
implications must be understood and
carefully weighed before choosing a different course.

3

20 of 60

See Bradner, Scott. Key words for use in RFCs to
indicate requirement levels, RFC 2119, 1997.

SHOULD NOT This phrase, or the phrase
‘NOT RECOMMENDED’, means that there
may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances when the particular behaviour is acceptable or even useful, but the
full implications should be understood
and the case carefully weighed before
implementing any behaviour described
with this label.
MAY This word, or the adjective ‘OPTIONAL’,
means that an item or feature is truly optional. A vendor may choose to include the
option because a particular marketplace
requires it or because the vendor feels that
it enhances the product, while another
vendor may omit the same item or feature. An implementation which does not
include a particular option MUST be prepared to interoperate with another implementation which does include the option,
though perhaps with reduced functionality. In the same sense an implementation
which does include a particular option
MUST be prepared to interoperate with
another implementation which does not
include the option.

1. Introduction
1.1. Purpose and audience

1.2. Scope and methodology

This document aims to provide a compendium of best practice guidelines on the technical design of automated border control
(ABC) systems. These have been prepared
in an effort to achieve harmonisation and
convergence in the basic technical features
concerning the document authentication, biometric verification and quality control processes, as well as consistent security levels
at the different border crossing points of the
European Union/Schengen Area where ABC
solutions are deployed.

The scope of this document is aligned with
the European Commission and International
Civil Aviation Organisation recommendations, as available at the time of writing, on
the use of e-Passports for automated border control without enrolment 4 .

The intended audience consists of technical
experts involved in the design and implementation of ABC systems in the EU Member States. The project managers and system
architects from border management authorities will find detailed information in order to
define its requirements and procure and implement a system that performs up to standards, while avoiding previously known risks
and dead-end streets. Finally, current and
prospective practitioners and decision-makers at national and EU levels may also benefit
from a better understanding of the technical
features of ABC systems.
It should be borne in mind that this report and
the best practices identified do not create or
alter any of the Member States’ obligations
as set out in the relevant legislation, in particular, the Schengen Borders Code, nor do
they constitute an amendment to the Schengen Catalogue and Handbook. Their purpose
is mainly descriptive and analytical: they aim
to provide additional reference material to
technical experts and practitioners working
in the area of ABC.

Travel documents considered
ABC systems can be divided into two types:
(a) systems without enrolment based on the
use of an electronic travel document; and (b)
systems based on pre-enrolment which generally take the form of registered traveller programmes. The EC encourages MSs to deploy
ABC systems without pre-enrolment for EU
citizens carrying ICAO compliant e-Passports.
This document focuses on ABC systems based
on first and second generation e-Passports
and also national e-ID cards5 . There are no

4

5

See in particular EC, ‘Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament, the
Council, the European Economic and Social
Committee and the Committee of the Regions:
Preparing the next steps in border management
in the European Union’, COM(2008) 69 final,
13. 2.2008; ICAO, ‘Guidelines for electronic
– Machine Readable Travel Documents &
Passenger Facilitation’, Version – 1.0, 17.4.2008.
ICAO ‘Doc 9303 Machine Readable Travel
Documents’, Third Edition 2008 defines the
e-Passport as ‘a machine readable passport
(MRP) containing a Contactless Integrated
Circuit (IC) chip within which is stored data from
the MRP data page, a biometric measure of the
passport holder, and a security object to protect
the data with PKI (Public Key Infrastructure)
cryptographic technology, and which conforms
to the specifications of Doc 9303, Part 1.’ First
generation e-Passports contain the facial image
of the holder; second generation (obligatory
in the EU since June 2009) also contain two
fingerprints in addition to the facial image.

21 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

specific provisions in this document for combined or stand-alone use of ABC systems
serving RTPs. However, given the future implementation of the Smart Borders Package6,
this document will be revised later to address
technical issues related to the use of ABC systems serving RTPs.

erlands, Portugal, Finland, and the UK (as of
2010) and Bulgaria, Czech Republic, and Ireland (as of 2013). In addition, Hong Kong joined
the WG in 2013. The WG was created to provide a platform for discussions on ABC related
topics among the MSs and other stakeholders so as to fill the knowledge gap and to derive best practices and guidelines in this area.

Biometric markers used
Most ABC systems currently in use support
facial recognition as the main biometric authentication method. However, there is a
large base of second generation e-Passports
carrying both facial and fingerprint data and
there are some MSs which have gained relevant experience in the use of fingerprints for
identity verification in ABC systems. Thus,
fingerprint recognition is explicitly covered in
the present version of this document.
The iris has been considered by a few MSs
as an alternative for identity verification, but
it has not been used as such until now. It is
therefore not addressed in this document,
but it might be in the future.
Types of Border Control Points
This document mainly focuses on the use of
ABC at air BCPs as these systems have so far
been mostly implemented at airports except
for a few cases in MSs where ABC is implemented at land and sea BCPs.
Methodology
This report has been drafted by Frontex in
cooperation with a Working Group (WG)
on ABC composed of the following Member
States: Germany, Spain, France, the Neth-

6

22 of 60

European Commission. Memo: ‘Smart
Borders’ for an open and secure Europe.
28.2.2013. http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release
_MEMO-13-141_en.htm

This document is based on the first release
of Best Practice Guidelines on the Design, Deployment and Operation of Automated Border
Control Systems, published in March 2011, and
the follow up release of Best Practice Technical
Guidelines for Automated Border Control Systems,
published in August 2012. The document is an
attempt to gather and disseminate knowledge on state-of-the-art technologies and
best current practices regarding ABC systems.
The methodology used by the WG to develop the initial BPGs was based on the tasks
listed below.
nnState the problem and goals.
nnElaborate the list of relevant topics to be
covered.
nnCarry out research on current practice
based on questionnaires, interviews and
technical meetings.
nnAnalyse results and extract individual best
practices.
nnDebate and agree on proposed best
practices.
nnBuild the document.
nnConduct an internal and external review
of the document.
nnApprove these guidelines.
The WG decided to revise the 2012 release of
the BPTGs to reflect new developments and
changes in MSs’ practice. The main changes
are summarised in the Table of changes included at the beginning of this document.
During the revision process, information has
been collected through regular expert discussions at the WG meetings, field visits to MSs
with ABC systems in operation, as well as by

gathering feedback from external stakeholders. The document has undergone extensive
internal and external revision and the main
modifications introduced have been debated
and agreed during the expert WG meetings.
While there are limitations to the reliability
of expert judgement in classifying certain
practices as ‘best’7, it is understood that the
BPGs outlined in this document are only recommendations that are useful and effective.
They have proved their relevance to meet
the needs and achieve the goals of the border management authority; they are potentially transferrable and adaptable.
This document is intended to be a living one,
subject to regular updates in an attempt to
gather and disseminate knowledge on stateof-the-art technologies and best current
practices regarding ABC systems. The aim is
to validate it through consultations with the
relevant stakeholders in the field of ABC and
with technical experts.

1.3. About best practices and
guidelines
The identification of best practices for automated border controls should be put into the
context of conceptual and methodological
issues pertaining to best practice research.
While there is not a generally agreed understanding of what ‘best practices’ are, the
Schengen Catalogue, which is used as a reference tool for Schengen evaluations, defines
the term as ‘a non-exhaustive set of working
methods or model measures which must be
considered as the optimal application of the
Schengen acquis, on the understanding that

7

As described in Bretschneider, S. et al., ‘Best
Practices Research: A Methodological Guide
for the Perplexed’, Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory, Vol. 15, No 2, 2005,
pp. 307–323.

more than one best practice is possible for
each specific part of Schengen cooperation’8.
For the sake of consistency, this is the definition followed in this document.
The mechanisms and limitations of best practice research (i.e. of the various methods and
approaches in use to identify best practices)
have been examined rather extensively in the
public policy and management literature9.
Yet, despite existing methodological shortcomings, the identification and sharing of
best practices present important added value
from a practical and policy-oriented point of
view. Crucially, best practice research enables organisations to learn from others in the
same domain and re-use their experiences.
Even the investigation of a simple exemplar
case may be useful to practitioners if it allows them to get ideas and to solve similar
problems they face10. In sum, best practice
research is a way to generate useful knowledge and to promote the accumulation of
experience in a given field.
A guideline, on the other hand, is any document that aims to streamline particular
processes according to a set routine. By definition, following a guideline is never mandatory (protocol would be a better term for

8

Council of the EU, EU Schengen Catalogue:
External borders control, Return and
readmission - Recommendations and best
practices, Council document No 7864/09,
19.3.2009, p. 6.
9 For an overview, see Veselý, A., ‘Theory and
Methodology of Best Practice Research: A
Critical Review of the Current State’, Central
European Journal of Public Policy, Vol. 5, No 2,
December 2011, pp. 98–117.
10 Ongaro, E., ‘A protocol for the extrapolation
of “Best” Practices: How to draw lessons from
one experience to improve public management
in another situation’, 2009, available at:
http://epsa2009.eu/files/Symposium/An%20
approach%20to%20the%20extrapolation%20
of%20practices_EOngaro.pdf last accessed on
2.6.2015.

23 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

a mandatory procedure). Guidelines may be
issued and used by any organisation (governmental or private) to make the actions of its
employees or divisions more predictable, and
presumably of higher quality.
Too often it is not easy to draw the line between best practices and guidelines, and often they are used together. Thus the term
Best Practice Guidelines has been widely
adopted in public and private organisations
to reflect that knowledge, typically based on
experience, which can be shared in order to
achieve improved results towards specific
objectives. Throughout this document, the
term Best Practice Guidelines will be used.

1.4. How to read this document
While the ABC Best Practice Technical Guidelines have been conceived as a stand-alone
resource, ideally they should be read in combination with the Frontex ‘Best Practice Operational Guidelines for Automated Border

24 of 60

Control (ABC) Systems’ (also referred to as
BPOGs) and ‘Guidelines for Processing Third
Country Nationals through Automated Border Control’.
This document provides detailed insight on
the functioning and requirements concerning:
nnthe physical architecture of an ABC system;
nnthe document authentication process;
nnthe biometric verification process; and
nnquality control and assurance aspects of
ABC systems.
A clarification of the terminology used, a
glossary and a list of acronyms and abbreviations can be found at the beginning of the
document. These guidelines are also complemented with a series of annexes outlining a
list of the reference material used and of additional reading, as well as providing an overview of the ABC systems which, at the time
of the writing, are operational and planned
in the EU MSs.

2.	General overview of ABC
systems
The traditional solution of border guard officers manually processing travel documents
and travellers has been working effectively for
as long as international travel has existed, but
this approach is not free from problems. In a
matter of few seconds, border guards have
the responsibility to verify that: (a) the traveller standing in front of the officer is carrying a valid travel document; (b) the traveller
is the person as claimed in the travel document (c) the traveller is eligible to enter the
country; and lastly (d) the traveller does not
pose a threat to the country’s citizens or institutions. With the improvement of technology applied to forging documents, the use of
aliases and look-alikes, and the time pressure
associated with border control, among others, it is not surprising that the traditional
manual approach is now under revision.
After some trials in different countries, ABC
systems have proved to be a promising way
to meet the need to increase throughput at
BCPs while maintaining the requisite levels
of security. Virtually all these systems rely on
some form of biometrics in order to verify
the identity of the travellers. Biometric technology uses a person’s unique physiological
characteristics – for example, the face and
the fingerprints – to verify their identity: in
short, to confirm that someone is precisely
who he or she claims to be. Computer technology is used to authenticate identity by
matching the characteristics of individuals in
real time against previously stored records.
ICAO recommends facial recognition as the
‘globally interoperable biometric technology
for machine-assisted identity confirmation’,
while acknowledging that some authorities
may supplement this with fingerprint and

iris recognition11. e-Passports contain traveller data (including the biometric markers) inside an embedded chip. This chip has
been designed with different data protection
mechanisms in place to ensure that only authorised parties can access the information
contained within. First generation e-Passports contain the facial image of the holder;
second generation (obligatory in the EU since
June 2009) contain also two fingerprints in
addition to the facial image12.
A number of ABC systems have been developed by the industry, according to requirements established by national border
management authorities, which are intended
to allow for more efficient and reliable border crossing by means of automation of routine tasks. Although no two ABC systems are
equal by design, they can be defined as the
use of automated or semi-automated systems that can verify both the authenticity
of the travel document used by travellers,
the identity of travellers and their authorisation to cross the border at a BCP without
the need for human intervention.

11

ICAO, ‘Doc 9303 Machine Readable Travel
Documents’, Third Edition 2008.
12 Under Regulation (EC) No 2252/2004 of
13.12.2004 on standards for security features and
biometrics in passports and travel documents
issued by Member States.

25 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

3.	Architecture of an ABC
system
In general, an ABC system consists of several components. This includes, but is not
limited to:
nnphysical barriers (single-door or doubledoor e-Gates);
nna monitoring and control station and
equipment for the operator;
nna document reader (optical devices including a radio frequency reader module);
nna biometric capture device (camera, fingerprint reader);
nnuser interfaces (monitors, LED signals, audio devices, panic button);
nnprocessing units and network devices (PC,
controller, hubs);
nncameras/sensors for surveillance (CCTV,
tailgate detection, left luggage detection).
There are different options for the deployment of ABC systems (see sub-section 3.6.1.
of the Frontex ABC BPOGs on ‘Topologies of
ABC system’):
One-step ABC system
nnThe traveller is able to complete all transactions (i.e. document, biometric verification and border passage) in one single
process without moving to another stage.
nnIt usually takes the form of a mantrap
e-Gate.
Integrated two-step ABC system
nnThe traveller verifies the document at the
first stage and then, if the document verification is successful, moves to a second
stage within the same physical structure
where the biometric verification is carried out.
nnIt is invariably implemented by using
a mantrap e-Gate.

26 of 60

Segregated two-step ABC system
nnThe processes of document authentication
and traveller verification are completely
separated from the passage through border control.
nnIt typically takes the form of a kiosk for
verification of the document and the
holder, while border passage occurs at
an e-Gate through the use of a temporary token.
In any of these options, the ABC system MUST
meet basic requirements regarding the physical installation and security and safety considerations. These requirements are described
in the following sub-section. Irrespective of
the physical design of the ABC system, the requirements on the document authentication
modules and the biometric components are
given in section 4 on ‘the document authentication process’ and section 5 on ‘the biometric verification process’ of this document.

3.1. Requirements of the physical
installation
For the modules of the ABC system that are
installed in public areas, appropriate mechanisms against tampering and vandalism
SHOULD be implemented. This includes the
use of secure locked panels for accessing the
interior of the system. Furniture, fixings, door
mountings, cylinders and locks SHOULD follow the respective standards. Materials and
parts SHOULD be scratch proof and impactresistant to a reasonable extent.
The physical parts of the ABC system MUST
comply with the applicable fire protection
requirements.

ABC systems SHOULD make the best use of
available space in a way that caters to all users. A smooth passage through the ABC system for everyone, including for travellers with
trolleys or other luggage, MUST be ensured.
The installation SHOULD be as non-invasive
as possible for the existing infrastructure. This
covers, among others, the need for drilling,
mounting of additional barriers, and wiring
requirements (power and data).

3.2. Security and safety
Physical barriers SHOULD be used to ensure
that only the traveller who has been cleared
is allowed to cross the border (i.e. no tailgating), and that travellers who have been rejected are properly handled (e.g. refused in
order to be redirected to the manual control).
ABC systems MUST be constructed in such a
way as to form a robust barrier so that a person may not gain access over, under, by the
side of or through the ABC system.
This is typically achieved by the use of singledoor or double-door e-Gates and tailgating
detection/prevention mechanisms, or by op-

erating the system in a secure area. In case
of errors, the traveller MAY be directed to
manual clearance or MAY be contained until handled by a border guard officer.
All equipment and fittings MUST comply with
EU safety requirements and applicable standards. When the physical barriers within the
ABC system are closing, they MUST NOT
close with such physical force as to cause injury to the traveller. Other moving parts (e.g.
the camera unit) SHOULD NOT be accessible by the traveller. If this cannot be ensured
by design, any risk of injury MUST be avoided
by other reliable means.

3.3. Long-term reliability
All mechanical and hardware components
MUST be reliable, robust and designed to
meet anticipated load and throughput for the
lifetime of the hardware (minimum of 5 years).
To be future-proof, an ABC system MAY be
designed and configured so that it does not
preclude any future enhancements for document authentication modules or biometric systems for the lifetime of the hardware.

27 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

4.	The document
authentication process
Document authentication is the process by
which the electronic machine readable travel
document (e-MRTD) – generally an e-Passport 13 – presented by the traveller is checked
in order to determine whether it is a genuine document, enabling the traveller to cross
the border.
A document reader is required as a hardware
subcomponent of the ABC system in order to
check the authenticity of an e-Passport. The
associated document authentication process
(typically performed by software) is considered to be composed of three separate steps:
nnCarrying out optical document checks.
nnAccessing and reading e-Passport data.
nnVerifying e-Passport data.
Requirements and best practices regarding the document reader and the document
authentication process are detailed in this
section.

4.1. Document reader
requirements
ABC systems SHALL use a full-page document reader that provides at least the key
technical specifications and capabilities detailed below.
It is generally recommended that the design
of the system SHOULD NOT exclude future
enhancements regarding document readers
that the market may provide for.

4.1.1. Technical requirements
The document reader subcomponent
SHOULD be designed so that it can be used
effectively in self-service environments. This
includes easy usage for both right- and lefthanded people and easy handling of e-Passports with flexible biographical data pages.
Note however that flexible biographical data
pages might cause difficulties as they may
get folded when placed on the document
reader, which must be avoided in order to
ensure that the e-Passport is properly read.
e-Passports SHOULD be placed on the document reader lengthwise, i.e. with the biographical data page facing down and the MRZ
side first, on the document reader.
The document reader SHALL have an integrated RF module according to ISO 14443
Type A and Type B that is accessible via a
PC/SC interface. The transfer rate of the RF
module SHOULD be as high as possible (at
least 424 Kbit/s).
The document reader SHALL have a dedicated
wired connection as physical interface to a
host system (e.g. a PC) with a state-of-theart transfer rate (e.g. USB 2.0, 480 Mbit/s).
It is RECOMMENDED to operate the document reader with a power supply that is independent from the physical interface to the
host system.
The document reader SHALL be able to capture images at IR, UV-A and visible light. The
optical resolution SHALL be at least 385 PPI.

13 Concerning the use of alternative e-MRTDs, see
section 4.6.

28 of 60

The document reader SHOULD have proper
shielding against the interference of external light.
The document reader MUST comply with
the existing regulations regarding EMC and
UV-A light emission.

UV-A brightness
ABC systems SHALL verify that no bright paper or remains of glue are visible in the UV-A
image of the biographical data page.
4.2.2. Optional optical checks

4.1.2. Capability requirements

The following are optional optical checks
which may be carried out on the e-Passport.

ABC systems SHOULD be equipped with a
document reader that is future-proof. Therefore, the document reader SHOULD support
all ICAO compliant e-MRTDs, including form
factors of ID1, ID2 and ID3.

MRZ vs VIZ
ABC systems MAY compare information taken
from the MRZ (e.g. name, nationality or gender) with data that was extracted from the
visual inspection zone.

The document reader MUST have a stateof-the-art operating speed. On average, optical images of the biographical data page
SHOULD be captured within 2 seconds,
and reading of the electronic data (at least
EF.SOD, EF.COM, DG1 and DG2) from a typical first generation e-Passport SHOULD NOT
take more than 8 seconds.

Pattern checks
It is RECOMMENDED that ABC systems verify
optical security patterns (UV, IR, visible) using a database for pattern checks. This verification MAY also be used to identify the type
of document. In this regard, it is RECOMMENDED to use a dedicated database for the
ABC scenario consisting of reliable patterns
for the targeted user group only. The patterns database MUST be updated on a regular basis; otherwise the False Reject Rate
(FRR) due to the pattern checks will increase
significantly.

4.2. Performing optical checks
on the e-Passport
ABC systems SHALL perform a verification of
the optical security features of the e-Passport as explained below.
4.2.1. Mandatory optical checks
The following are the mandatory optical
checks to be carried out on the e-Passport.
MRZ consistency
ABC systems SHALL verify that the optically
extracted MRZ is consistent, using the MRZ
checksum digits.
B900 ink
ABC systems SHALL verify that the MRZ is
completely visible in the IR image of the biographical data page.

It is further RECOMMENDED to use a pattern database that allows for maintenance
and support by the operating agency or by
a trusted third-party provider under a contract with the supervision of the operating
agency. The use of a pattern database that
does not allow for content modifications by
the operating agency (a black-box database)
is NOT RECOMMENDED.

4.3. Accessing and reading
e-Passport data
ABC systems MUST at least support reading and decoding of the following files/data
groups from e-Passports: EF.SOD, EF.COM,
DG1, DG2, DG14 and DG15. When fingerprints

29 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

are used in the biometric verification process
(see section 5), the ABC system MUST support the reading and decoding of DG3 as well.
ABC systems MUST at least support following security protocols: Passive Authentication
(PA)14 , Basic Access Control (BAC), Password
Authenticated Connection Establishment
(PACE), Active Authentication (AA) and Chip
Authentication (CA). If access to the chip
data of a specific e-Passport is protected by
PACE or BAC, the appropriate protocol (PACE
or BAC) MUST be performed prior to reading data groups. For e-Passports that support both PACE and BAC, either PACE or BAC
MUST be performed. Further details on PACE
and BAC are given in ICAO SAC and ICAO
9303. During the reading process, AA or CA
MUST be performed if supported by the specific e-Passport. For e-Passports that support both CA and AA, only CA is REQUIRED.
In such a case AA MAY be performed additionally, after CA. When fingerprints are used
in the biometric verification process, the ABC
system MUST support the security protocol
Terminal Authentication (TA) as well.

30 of 60

The EAC-Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) required for issuing and validating IS certificates
consists of the following entities.
nnCountry Verifying CA (CVCA) – root
CA (national trust point) that issues DV
Certificates.
nnA Document Verifier (DV) – an organisational unit within the EAC-PKI that manages a group of inspection systems (e.g.
terminals operated by a State’s border police) by issuing IS certificates.
nnAn Inspection System (IS).
Further details on EAC are given in BSI03110.
ABC systems SHOULD implement the general high-level sequence for the RF chip reading process as shown in Figure 1.

4.4. Verification of e-Passport
data
Once the e-Passport chip has been read, ABC
systems MUST verify the data. Such an ePassport data verification process is mainly
covered by the Passive Authentication (PA)
security method defined in ICAO9303.

TA requires the terminal to prove to the ePassport that it is entitled to access sensitive – protected with Extended Access
Control(EAC) – data on the chip. Such a terminal MUST at least be equipped with an
according set of card verifiable (CV) certificates – Document Verifier (DV) certificate
and Inspection System (IS)certificate – and
the private key corresponding to the public
key encoded in the IS certificate. After the
terminal has verified this private key, the ePassport chip will grant access to sensitive
data as indicated in the CV certificate chain.

The reliability of the PA security method
is only assured if trustworthy certificates
(Document Signer (DS)certificates and CSCA
certificates) are applied to the verification
process15 . If it cannot be verified that the DS
certificate originates from a trusted source
or has been issued by an official and trusted
CSCA, the result of the entire e-Passport data
verification process cannot be depended upon
and is thus rendered useless. Therefore, the
ABC system MUST be provided with certificates from a trusted certificate store.

14 See section 4.4 for a detailed description of the
process for verification of e-Passport data by
Passive Authentication (PA).

15 The ICAO PKD system as well as Master Lists
published by the responsible authorities on their
websites MAY for example serve as an external
source for DS or CSCA certificates.

Figure 1: High-level sequence for RF chip reading

Begin reading
RF chip

It is RECOMMENDED to implement this
trusted certificate store as a centralised system. In this case, the integrity and authenticity of the certificate store (which is absolutely
crucial for the reliability of the entire e-Passport data verification process) MUST be ensured ‘only once’ on the central side so that
efforts aimed at assuring the integrity and
authenticity locally on each client ABC system can be saved. As an add-on when implementing a centralised trusted certificate
store, sub-steps 2, 3 and 4 of the PA procedure (see below) MAY be implemented as a
centralised service as well. Note that details
about the technical implementation of the
trusted certificate store (e.g. central Lightweight Directory Access Protocol (LDAP) directory, local signed file, etc.) as well as the
mechanisms used to safeguard the trust relationship between the certificate store and
the ABC system (e.g. through a secure communication channel) are outside the scope
of this document.
The PA procedure consists of the following
sub-steps, which MUST be supported by the
ABC system.
1. EF.SOD verification.
2. DS certificate signature verification.
3. Certificate validity period check.
4. DS certificate revocation status.
5. Comparison between EF.SOD and EF.COM
if EF.COM is present.
6. Data group integrity check.
In addition to the PA procedure, the following sub-steps MUST be performed by the ABC
system in order to complete the e-Passport
data verification process.
7. Comparison of optical and electronic biographical data (DG1 vs MRZ).
8. Issuing country comparison (DG1 vs DS
certificate).
The overall result of the e-Passport data verification process MUST NOT be considered
as ‘Passed’ or ‘Successful’ by the ABC system

ePassport
supports PACE
or BAC?

YES

Perform
PACE or BAC

YES

Read EF.COM

NO

Read EF.SOD

EF.COM
present?
NO

Option for 2nd generation
ePassports supporting
both CA and AA

DG14
present?

NO

YES

Read DG14
and
perform CA

DG15
present?

NO

YES

Opt.

Read DG15
and
perform AA

Option for ABC systems
using fingerprints from
2nd generation ePassports
DG3
present?

Read DG1

NO

YES

Read DG2

Opt.

Perform TA

Read DG3

End reading
RF chip

31 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

if one or more of the particular sub-steps
4.4.1–4.4.8 (see details below) are concluded
with the result ‘Failed’.
During the PA procedure, additional information about DS certificates or data groups
(in particular regarding personalisation errors and defects) MAY be used to verify the
e-Passport data (see section 4.4.9.).
4.4.1. EF.SOD verification
The structure of EF.SOD is defined by ICAO
9303 as a Signed Data structure conforming
to RFC3369 and ABC systems MUST verify its
signature. To perform this signature verification procedure, a DS certificate corresponding to the particular EF.SOD is required. ICAO
9303 provides that the DS certificate MAY be
included in EF.SOD. In practice, most countries are issuing e-Passports that contain the
corresponding DS certificate. Thus, ABC systems MUST be able to process EF.SOD files
with zero or more DS certificates. Additionally, ABC systems SHOULD be able to obtain
a DS certificate from an external source (e.g.
PKD) if the particular EF.SOD does not contain the proper DS certificate.
If the verification of the EF.SOD signature is
successful, the result of this sub-step MUST
be considered as ‘Passed’ by the ABC system.
If the verification of the EF.SOD signature is
not successful or could not be completely performed (e.g. due to a missing DS certificate),
the result of this sub-step MUST be considered as ‘Failed’.
4.4.2. DS certificate signature
verification
Verification of the certificate chain up to
a known trusted certificate is an essential
step in the overall process. Claims by researchers regarding the faking of an official e-Passport often involve the creation of
a new EF.SOD and its signature with a new

32 of 60

key after a data group was modified or exchanged. If it is not verified that the DS certificate originates from a trusted source or has
been issued by an official and trusted CSCA,
the results of all other security checks become worthless.
Therefore, the following requirements SHALL
apply to ABC systems.
nnIf the signature of the EF.SOD has been
verified with a DS certificate that has
been taken from the EF.SOD or from a
non-trusted external source (like an unauthenticated database), ABC systems
MUST verify the signature of the DS certificate as well. This requires an appropriate CSCA certificate that originates from
a trusted source.
nnIf the DS certificate originates from
a trusted source (explicitly not from the
EF.SOD), ABC systems MAY skip the verification of the DS certificate signature.
nnExcept for very few exceptions, it is common that the DS certificate used to verify the signature of EF.SOD is contained
in EF.SOD itself and that its authenticity
is verified with the corresponding CSCA
certificate. In order to do so, ABC systems
have to search the proper CSCA certificate out of a larger set of certificates provided by the trusted certificate store. It is
RECOMMENDED that ABC systems extract the Authority Key Identifier extension from the DS certificate and search for
a CSCA certificate with the corresponding
value in its Subject Key Identifier extension. Although the usage of these extensions is specified as mandatory by ICAO
9303, there are some countries that have
issued e-Passports without them. Thus,
it is RECOMMENDED that in the event
that no matching CSCA certificate can be
found by comparing key identifiers, ABC
systems SHOULD perform only a subject-based search for CSCA certificates
using the issuer information from the DS
certificate.

nnWhen one or more suitable CSCA certificates have been found using the search
criteria described above, the DS certificate signature verification result MUST
be considered as ‘Successful’ if the signature of the DS certificate can be verified
with one of these CSCA certificates and
the particular CSCA certificate subject is
equal to the DS certificate issuer. If none of
the found CSCA certificates meets these
two requirements, the DS certificate signature verification sub-step MUST be considered as ‘Failed’.
nnAs some countries issue CSCA certificates that are not self-signed, it is RECOMMENDED that the signature of the
CSCA certificate is not verified, or it might
be unavoidable to use CSCA link certificates for the DS certificate signature verification. Since all CSCA certificates that
are used by the ABC system MUST originate from a trusted source this is not seen
as a security flaw.
4.4.3. Certificate validity period check
ABC systems SHALL verify that the current time is within the validity period of the
DS certificate. Additionally, ABC systems
SHOULD also check if the current time is
between the start and the end of the validity
period of the CSCA certificate. It is RECOMMENDED to set up appropriate mechanisms
to ensure that the current time is valid.
If the validity period checks performed are
successful, the result of this sub-step MUST
be considered as ‘Passed’ by the ABC system.
If the performed validity period checks fail,
the result of this sub-step MUST be considered as ‘Failed’.
4.4.4. DS certificate revocation status

garding the official distribution of certificate
revocation information, it is very difficult
to check the DS certificate revocation status for a broad range of e-Passport issuing
countries. Therefore, ABC systems SHOULD
check the DS certificate revocation status if
the corresponding revocation information
– for example a Certificate Revocation List
(CRL) – is available.
If the DS certificate revocation status could
be checked as ‘Not revoked’ on the basis of
trusted according-to-certificate revocation
information, the result of this sub-step MUST
be considered as ‘Passed’ by the ABC system.
If the DS certificate revocation check results
in ‘Revoked’ based on trusted according-tocertificate revocation information, the result of this sub-step MUST be considered as
‘Failed’. If the DS certificate revocation status
could not be checked, the result of this substep SHOULD NOT be considered as ‘Failed’.
4.4.5. Comparison between EF.SOD and
EF.COM
Because EF.SOD does not contain a digest
(hash-value) of EF.COM, a modification of
EF.COM cannot be detected by just verifying
the signature of the EF.SOD. Thus, ABC systems MUST use EF.SOD to receive a trustworthy list of data groups contained in a
given e-Passport chip. If EF.COM is present in
the e-Passport chip (in addition to EF.SOD),
ABC systems SHALL compare the content
of EF.COM with EF.SOD to ensure that each
DG listed in EF.SOD is also contained in
EF.COM and vice versa. If a mismatch between EF.COM and EF.SOD is detected, the
result of this sub-step MUST be considered
as ‘Failed’ by the ABC system. If EF.COM and
EF.SOD correspond to each other, the result of this sub-step MUST be considered as
‘Successful’.

Generally, checking the DS certificate revocation status is a mandatory sub-step of the
PA procedure. Given the present practice re-

33 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

4.4.6. Data group integrity check
For each data group that was read from the
e-Passport chip, ABC systems MUST calculate the data group’s digest (hash-value) and
compare it with the corresponding digest
contained in EF.SOD. ABC systems SHALL
rely on the content of a data group for further processing (e.g. biometric verification)
only if the digests are equal. In case the ePassport chip supports AA and/or CA, the
ABC system MUST also verify the digest of
the corresponding data group (DG14 in case
of CA and DG15 in case of AA).
If all of the performed data group integrity
checks are successful, the result of this substep MUST be considered as ‘Passed’ by the
ABC system. If one or more integrity checks
fail, the result of this sub-step MUST be considered as ‘Failed’.
4.4.7. Comparison of optical and
electronic biographical data
(DG1 vs MRZ)
If the overall border control process includes
background checks, the information to perform these queries is typically taken from the
optically scanned MRZ, which is usually the
first information available.
If an e-Passport enforces the performance
of the BAC protocol, some parts of the MRZ
are implicitly verified against OCR errors if
the protocol execution was successful. Nevertheless, it is possible for an attacker to falsify other parts of the MRZ that are not used
for BAC (e.g. surname and/or given names).
To prevent this attack, ABC systems MUST
verify the whole content of the optical MRZ
against DG1.
If the verification of the optical MRZ against
DG1 is successful, the result of this sub-step
MUST be considered as ‘Passed’ by the ABC
system. If the verification of the optical MRZ

34 of 60

against DG1 fails, the result of this sub-step
MUST be considered as ‘Failed’.
REMARK: Because of non-ICAO-compliant
use of optional MRZ data in some e-Passports these special entries may not be coded
identically in the DG1. Thus, it is the responsibility of the border management authority
of the Member State to define how to deal
with this special issue of the document verification sub-step.
4.4.8. Issuing country comparison
(DG1 vs DS certificate)
An attacker may also falsify an e-Passport
by managing to sign their manipulated data
using a DS of a country other than the purported e-Passport issuing country. By doing so they could, for example, try to bypass
visa regulations by appearing under a false
nationality.
Thus, ABC systems SHOULD extract the
country attribute from the issuer name in
the DS certificate and compare it to the issuing country information stored in DG1. This
check can only be performed if the following
preconditions are fulfilled.
nnA mapping table with a distinct mapping
between ICAO 3-letter country codes and
ISO 2-letter country codes MUST be defined. This is not necessarily a distinct
mapping for each particular country (e.g.
an ISO 2-letter country code may map
to multiple ICAO 3-letter country codes).
nnThe issuer name of the particular DS certificate contains a country attribute with
a properly encoded ISO 2-letter country code.
It is RECOMMENDED to implement this substep as follows.
nnExtract the ICAO 3-letter country code
from DG1 (called CountryICAO).
nnExtract the ISO 2-letter country code from
the DS certificate (called CountryISO).

nnCompare CountryICAO against CountryISO based on the defined mapping table.
If CountryICAO and CountryISO correspond
to each other according to the mapping table, the result of this sub-step MUST be considered as ‘Successful’ by the ABC system. If
CountryICAO and CountryISO do not correspond to each other according to the mapping table, the result of this sub-step MUST
be considered as ‘Failed’.

MRZ, particular data group, etc.) is available.
Performing these steps concurrently (that is,
running several tasks in parallel) as much as
possible allows for the minimisation of time
required for the entire document authentication process.
A high-level illustration of the RECOMMENDED document authentication process
for ABC systems is shown in Figure 2 (see
overleaf).

4.4.9. Defect handling

4.6. Alternative e-MRTDs

A ‘Defect’ is defined as a personalisation error affecting a large number of e-Passports
(e.g. the set of e-Passports based on one particular DS certificate). The withdrawal of already issued e-Passports affected by a Defect
is generally impractical or even impossible
if the Defect relates to foreign e-Passports.

Usually, travellers wishing to enter the EU
must carry a passport as a travel document.
However, there are additional e-MRTDs that
MAY be used in ABC systems.

A Defect List according to BSI03129 is a signed
data structure to handle such Defects. Particular Defects within a Defect List are identified by the corresponding DS certificates.
Defect Lists are thus errata that not only inform about erroneous e-Passports but also
provide corrigenda to fix the errors where
possible. Regular DS certificate revocation
information (e.g. from CRLs) can also be included into such Defect Lists.
It is RECOMMENDED to use such Defect information about erroneous e-Passports during the process of e-Passport data
verification.

4.5. Design of the document
authentication process
There are several interdependencies among
the separate steps of the document authentication process (optical checks, reading RF
data and e-Passport data verification). Generally, each step or sub-step SHOULD be started
as soon as the required input data (e.g. optical

It is at the discretion of MSs to decide what
kinds of alternative e-MRTDs, if any, are supported by their ABC systems.
4.6.1. MSs national identity cards
For verification of alternative e-MRTDs, the
ABC system MAY need a connection to the
specific national systems allowing for validation of the document and for access to its
protected data areas.
Currently, there are a number of approaches
to national ID cards with biometric capabilities. At the time of writing, Germany and
Spain had ABC implementations supporting
e-ID cards. Details on both systems are presented in the case studies below, for illustration purposes.
4.6.1.1. German electronic ID card
The German e-ID was introduced in November 2010. The card is in ID1 format and
a contactless chip (similar to e-Passports) is
embedded in it.

35 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Figure 2: Document authentication process
Begin document
authentication

Capture images
of biographical
data page

Option for e-Passports
without DS certificate
on the RF chip

Reading RF chip
Trusted certificate
store (CSCA and
possibly DS)

IR, UV
and visible light
image

Option for additional
defect information
(in addition to DS certificate
revocation information)

Optical MRZ

Datagroups
read from
e-Passport

Optical Document Checks

Defect information
(incl. DS certificate
revocation
information)

e-Passport data Verification

MRZ consistency

EF.SOD verification

B900 ink

DS certificate
signature verification

UV brightness
Certificate validity
period check
Optional checks
DS certificate
revocation check

Result of
optional checks

Comparison
EF.SOD vs EF.COM

Datagroup
integrity check

Comparison
DG1 vs MRZ

Comparison
DG1 vs DS certificate

Result of e-Passport
data verification

End document
authentication

36 of 60

The chip of the ID card contains three different applications:
nnbiometric application to serve as an
e-MRTD;
nne-ID application supporting secure e-Business and e-Government systems;
nnQES application for doing qualified electronic signatures.
For use within the border control context
only the biometric application of the ID
card is relevant. The data stored in the biometric application is exactly the same as
in the e-Passport with one exception: fingerprints in DG3 are optional for the ID
card, whereas they are mandatory for the
e-Passport. Further details on biometric
standards and use cases of the ID card are
specified in BSI 03121.
The main difference between the e-ID card
and the e-Passport as regards reading of
data groups is the protection of the stored
data from unauthorised access. While for
EU e-Passports DG1 and DG2 are protected
by BAC only, all data stored on the ID card
is protected by EAC, including DG1 and DG2.
EAC [BSI03110] provides security mechanisms
to ensure that only authorised instances and
readers get access to specific data on the
ID card. Therefore, a secure communication
(Password Authentication Connection Establishment, PACE) has to be established and access to sensitive data is granted to an IS if a
certificate chain with sufficient entitlements
is available for the mechanism of EAC Terminal Authentication. A corresponding Public
Key Infrastructure (EAC-PKI) is required to
provide a valid certificate chain for the IS.
While the establishment of the secure communication for BAC-protected EU e-Passports is based on the information derived
from the two-line MRZ, the PACE protocol
is established by using the Card Access Number (CAN) from the front side of the ID card

Figure 3: German electronic ID card
(front and back)

or, alternatively, from the three-line MRZ on
the back side.
The IS used by the German Federal Police to
verify ID cards and e-Passports follows a distributed approach. A Terminal Control Centre [BSI03129] (TCC) offers a central service
that connects the distributed readers (for
example, those that are part of an ABC system). The TCC supports different application
scenarios for BAC and EAC protected documents. Secure centralised key and certificate
storage are part of the solution allowing the
TCC to take over the authentication procedure for permitted readers. Besides the EAC

37 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Terminal Authentication protocol the TCC
additionally supports DS certificate verification (part of the ICAO Passive Authentication security method).
The main differences between e-Passport
and ID card are shown in the following table:
Since August 2011 the EasyPASS ABC system
in Germany has been ready to read and verify the electronic ID card in addition to ICAO
compliant e-Passports.
4.6.1.2. Spanish ID card
The Spanish national e-ID card was introduced in May 2006. The card is in ID1 format
and a contact chip (similar to EMV cards) is
embedded in it.

Optical Inks

Microlines

Demographic
Data

Background

The chip of the ID card contains two different applications:
nnmatch-on-card biometric application (ISO
7816–11 compliant) using fingerprint patterns (ISO 19794–2 compliant);
nnapplication for recognised electronic
signatures.
The data is stored in the biometric application
in ISO 19794-2 short format and the matchon-card software can be executed in secured
environments only. Currently, it is not possible to execute this component in systems
other than the Spanish ABC.
The interface of the match-on-card software is compliant with ISO 7816-11 standards.
In addition, the Spanish ID card stores a photograph of the citizen within the chip. The
access is secured and unavailable by general applications due to Spanish policy on
data protection.
Since May 2010 the ABC system in Spain has
been ready to read and verify the Spanish
electronic ID card in addition to ICAO compliant e-Passports.

Microchip

Card number

4.6.1.3. Comparison of Spanish and
German e-ID cards and EU e-Passport

Iáser image
Expiration date
National Identity
Card (DNIe) Number

Background
Signature

The main differences between e-Passport,
Spanish ID card and German ID card are
shown in the following table:

Expedition

Figure 4: Spanish electronic ID card (front)
MRZ

38 of 60

Table 1: Comparison of e-Passport, Spanish e-ID card and German e-ID card.
EU e-Passport (ID3 size)

German e-ID card (ID1 size) Spanish e-ID card (ID1 size)

MRZ

2 lines printed on front side of
data page

3 lines printed on back side of
ID card

3 lines printed on back side of
ID card (ICAO compliant)

CAN

Not available

printed on front side of ID card

Not available

(MRZ data)

Mandatory (DG1 format)

Mandatory

Mandatory (ASN.1 format)

(face image)

Mandatory (DG2 format)

Mandatory

Mandatory (ISO 19794-5)

(fingerprint
images)

Mandatory (DG3 format)

Optional

Mandatory (ISO 19794-2)

Access control

BAC (DG1, DG2) PACE (DG1,
PACE with EAC2 (all DGs)
DG2; from 2014 on) EAC1 (DG3)

Optical data

Electronic data

Secured by CWA 14890
protection profile CWA 14169

39 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

5.	The biometric verification
process
Biometric verification is the process whereby
the identity of the e-MRTD owner is verified
with the use of biometric technology.
Self-service ABC systems based on ICAO
compliant e-MRTDs SHALL follow the recommendations of ICAO9303 and SHALL use
face recognition technology as the main biometric marker for identity verification of
travellers. They MAY support fingerprints or
other biometric markers in compliance with
ICAO 9303 at present or in the future.
The biometric verification process is considered to be composed of two separate steps.
1. Biometric capture sub-process, carried
out by the face or fingerprint capture unit.
2. Biometric verification sub-process, carried out by the face or fingerprint verification unit.
Requirements and best practices regarding
the units and sub-processes are detailed in
this section.
It is generally recommended that the design
of the system SHOULD NOT exclude future
enhancements regarding biometric capture
and verification that the market may provide.

5.1. Face verification
5.1.1. Face capture unit
5.1.1.1. Architecture and setup
The face capture unit SHOULD be in the traveller flow (a straight-line for the traveller to
walk and look in the camera). If the camera

40 of 60

and the flow form an angle greater than 45°,
this is likely to slow down the flow.
The cameras within the face capture unit (one
or more cameras per capture unit) SHALL
have a resolution of at least 2 Megapixel. It
is RECOMMENDED to use high-quality cameras that are able to provide at least images
according to the photographic and digital requirements of ISO 19794-5. The depth of the
field depends on the setup (mantrap, single
e-Gate or kiosk); it MUST be adjusted to the
area where the traveller’s face is located in
the regular use case. A frame rate of at least
10 frames per second is RECOMMENDED.
The unit SHOULD contain lighting modules
to ensure a proper illumination of the face region. The lighting SHALL NOT cause reflections on glasses or the skin of the face. The
lighting be active during the complete capture process and brightness MAY be varied
to get best contrast and illumination. It MAY
be a permanent light source or it MAY be
switched off during times when no face images are captured. Sunlight will vary both on a
daily and seasonal basis. It is RECOMMENDED
to test that the system will perform adequately under different sunlight conditions.
It is RECOMMENDED that direct sunlight is
avoided, and environmental illumination is
controlled for best capture results. The unit
SHALL also fit with other environmental conditions (e.g. temperature and humidity) at
the place where the ABC system is installed.
The unit SHALL be able to capture frontal images of persons at the height of at least between 140 and 200 cm. For instance, most of
the deployed solutions make use of a moving

camera, a single wide angle camera, or several cameras at different heights.
The unit MAY automatically adjust to capture proper images for the biometric comparison. The time required for this adjustment
(e.g. height adjustment by movement of the
camera) SHOULD be minimised in order to
avoid unnecessary delays within the face
capture process.
The face capture unit SHOULD give feedback
to the traveller through an integrated display.
It is RECOMMENDED to show the live stream
that is currently captured (digital mirror) and
to give an indication if the image is of sufficient quality for it to be used by the face verification unit. If the feedback is realised as a
digital mirror on a display, the display MUST
move with the camera (if a movable camera
unit is used). The feedback SHOULD NOT interfere with the face capture process.
The capture unit MAY be connected directly
to the PC that controls the complete ABC process or indirectly via a pre-processing unit.
To connect the capture unit to the control
PC, state-of-the-art interfaces (e.g. USB2.0,
Ethernet, FireWire) SHALL be used.
It is RECOMMENDED to use standard interfaces according to BioAPI in ISO 19784-1 for
capturing the biometric data. The agency
operating the e-Gates MAY decide to allow
proprietary vendor-specific SDK interfaces for
the integration of the capture unit.

It is RECOMMENDED to provide pre-processed and quality-assessed images to the
verification unit. Pre-processing SHOULD
cover at least the following.
nnDetecting the face in a frame.
nnCropping the face from the frame.
nnDe-rotating the face to ensure that
the centres of the eyes are nearly on a
­horizontal line.
It is RECOMMENDED to perform a quality
assessment on the images. The quality assessment SHOULD cover at least face- and
eye-finding; it MAY contain a quality estimation based on criteria specified in ISO 19794-5.
If a quality assessment is performed within
the capture unit, the best image according
to the applied criteria SHOULD be provided
to the verification unit. This speeds up the
whole process because template generation and verification on clearly inadequate
images is avoided.
The parameters of the camera, the preprocessing and the quality estimation steps
MUST ensure the provision of face images
within a broad range of contrasts.
The face images provided by the capture unit
SHOULD have at least 90 pixels between the
centres of the eyes (see ISO 19794-5). Depending on the verification unit, additional
characteristics MAY be required.

The face capture unit MUST provide facial
images to the face verification unit.

It is RECOMMENDED to provide uncompressed (e.g. BMP) or lossless compressed
live images. Alternatively, non-lossless compression MAY be used, e.g. JPG. In this case it
MUST be ensured that the loss of information
has no significant impact on the recognition
performance of the face verification unit.

The term ‘pre-processing’ used here means
the provision of a face image from a frame,
whereas ‘quality assessment’ means the provision of an appropriate face image from a
set of face images.

The complete process of capturing (including
pre-processing, quality assessment and provision of the resulting face image to the face
verification unit) SHOULD NOT take more
than 1 second per frame.

5.1.1.2. Functionality

41 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

5.1.2. Face verification unit
5.1.2.3. Architecture and setup
The face verification unit SHOULD run on
standard, industrial grade PC hardware. The
agency operating the ABC system MAY decide to allow for more complex requirements.
The verification process MAY run locally
within each ABC system or as a centralised
service.
It is RECOMMENDED to use standard interfaces according to BioAPI [ISO19784-1] for the
biometric verification process. The agency
operating the ABC system MAY decide to
allow proprietary vendor-specific SDK interfaces for the integration of the face verification unit.
5.1.2.4. Functionality
The face verification unit MUST compare
the DG2 reference image and the captured
live image.
Additionally it is RECOMMENDED to compare
the DG2 reference image and the cropped image scanned from the biographical data page.
The benefit of this optional check concerns
the detection of forged data pages (substitution of printed face image). Note, however,
that because of the optical security features
within the data page, the comparison of DG2
and cropped image may result in a FRR of
about 10 per cent. Thus, this additional check
may alert the official to have a more detailed
look at the cropped image.
The verification unit MUST process DG2 reference images which may be stored in data
formats JPG and JPG2000. It SHOULD process
live images and cropped images in uncompressed or lossless compressed data formats.

42 of 60

One face verification attempt (consisting
of template generation and comparison)
SHOULD NOT take more than 1 second.
The configuration of the face verification
algorithm SHALL ensure a security level in
terms of the false accept rate of 0.001 (0.1 per
cent) or less. At this configuration (comparison threshold) the FRR SHOULD NOT exceed
0.05 (5 per cent). It is RECOMMENDED that
the achievable performance of the face verification algorithm is measured by an independent test laboratory or an official agency.
The operating agency SHOULD NOT rely on
performance figures given by the algorithm
provider only.
The operating agency SHOULD NOT rely
solely on the standard configuration of the
algorithm provider. For live operation of the
system, it is RECOMMENDED to determine a
proper algorithm configuration based on image data and verification results (cross-comparisons between different travellers) from
the actual operational environment and a
representative catalogue of test users. It is
RECOMMENDED to monitor the error rates
(especially the FAR) continuously or at least
periodically (e.g. once a year) and to adjust
the configuration if needed.
NB: For systems based on the facial image biometric, it is RECOMMENDED to perform the
FAR calculation of the ABC system as an independent but parallel process as shown below:
nnThe reference face images (DG2 images)
of the last 10 e-Passport verifications are
temporarily and anonymously stored in a
dynamic list.
nnThe live face image from the current face
verification process is compared against
all other faces in the dynamic list and the
comparison scores are saved (impostor
comparisons). It has to be ensured that
a comparison of face images of the same
person, which may happen due to multiple

verification attempts on a particular traveller, is avoided during the process.
nnThe actual live face image is compared
against the corresponding reference face
image and the comparison score is saved
(genuine comparison).
nnThe reference face image is added to the
dynamic list.
nnThe oldest face image in the dynamic list
and the actual live face image are discarded and deleted safely. Storage and
deletion of the face image data has to be
implemented in accordance with the applicable data protection regulations.
nnCalculate the FAR based on the impostor
comparison scores. Genuine comparison
scores MAY be used to calculate the corresponding FRR. Attention has to be paid
to the statistical base for the FAR calculation. In order to measure the performance
of the face verification algorithm up to a
FAR security level of 0.001 (0.1 per cent),
it is RECOMMENDED to perform the FAR
calculation on the basis of at least 30 000
impostor comparisons.

tion result SHALL be displayed in the summary
view appearing on the monitoring screen.
Additionally, the image data (DG2 image and
live image used for the verification) SHOULD
be shown in the summary view on the monitoring screen. It is RECOMMENDED that further details regarding the detailed checks of
the biometric verification process are displayed upon request by the operator of the
ABC system.
Figure 6: Face capture and verification
process
Begin face
verification

Load reference
image

Face Capture
Unit
Capture

Pre-Processing

5.1.3. Design of the face capture and
verification process
If the face image acquisition and/or the bio­
metric verification are not successful, the
process SHALL stop after a time-out. This
time-out SHOULD be configurable.
The process design SHALL guide the traveller to look straight into the camera. While
the live face images are captured, other actions by the traveller SHOULD NOT be necessary and no eye-catchers apart from the
camera or feedback modules SHOULD distract the traveller’s attention. The feedback
modules (display, LEDs etc.) SHOULD be installed very close to the camera.
The result of the biometric verification process SHALL be provided to a monitoring and
control station. At least the overall verifica-

Quality Assessment

Face Verification
Unit
Face comparison

YES

Match
NO
Time-out

NO

YES

End face
verification

43 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

The process SHOULD include a fake detection (or liveness detection) mechanism to
detect fake attacks or improper use. Therefore, the biometric components MAY provide
technical features for fake detection such as
dedicated sensors or software-based mechanisms. For this purpose, video streams MAY
also be provided to the operator through
video surveillance.
A high-level illustration of the RECOMMENDED face capture and verification process is shown in Figure 6.

5.2. Fingerprint verification
5.2.1. Fingerprint capture unit
In addition to the guidelines provided in the
following sub-sections, it is RECOMMENDED
to take account of ISO 19794-4, Annex D
‘Conditions for capturing finger image data’.
5.2.1.1. Architecture and setup
Any deployed fingerprint sensor SHOULD
comply with the quality specifications from
ISO 19794-4, sections B.1 or B.3. The sensor
SHALL be able to capture flat fingerprints;
additionally it MAY have the capability to
capture rolled fingerprints. The minimum
capture area SHOULD be 16 mm width and
20 mm height (for single fingerprint sensors).
Optionally, the sensor device MAY provide
methods for recalibration in the field or, at
least, necessary recalibration MAY be possible for qualified service staff. It is RECOMMENDED that the compliance of the sensor
device with the applicable quality standard
can be verified at any time in the operational
environment.
Any strong light sources SHALL NOT directly
illuminate the sensor prism. This applies to
all direct light. It is RECOMMENDED to ascertain through testing that the system will

44 of 60

perform adequately under different sunlight
conditions.
In order to prevent halo effects due to condensation in the captured images, the room
temperature SHOULD be set such that large
temperature differences between sensor surface and finger(s) are avoided (between 18 °C
and 25 °C). Some sensors are able to work under far larger temperature constraints, e.g.
because they have heated prisms. Furthermore, for other than indoor use, the chosen
sensors should be able to operate under other
(usually rougher) environmental constraints.
The unit SHALL be mounted in such a way
that users are easily able to position themselves in order to place their hands and
thumbs on it. The ideal height for acquisition is elbow height.
The fingerprint capture unit SHOULD give
feedback to the traveller. Feedback MAY be
given, for example, by:
nna screen attached close to the sensor;
nnilluminated pictograms;
nnLEDs assigned to pictograms directly on
the sensor.
The information listed below SHOULD be
given to the user.
nnAssistance for finger positioning with images and/or video on the screen and/or audio instructions (e.g. to instruct the user to
move fingers to the left/right/top/bottom).
nnVisual and/or audio notification when a
successful acquisition has been completed.
nnA quality indicator for each acquisition.
This indicator should be simple, for example a two-state logic (good/bad) or similar.
nnIf possible, the reason for a bad quality
acquisition (e.g. wrong positioning of the
hand).
The fingerprint sensor MAY be connected directly to the PC that controls the complete
ABC process or indirectly via a pre-process-

ing unit. To connect the capture unit to the
control PC, state-of-the-art interfaces (e.g.
USB2.0) SHALL be used.
It is RECOMMENDED to use standard interfaces according to BioAPI in ISO 19784-1
for the capturing of the biometric data. The
agency operating the ABC system MAY decide to allow proprietary vendor-specific SDK
interfaces for the integration of the capture unit.
5.2.1.2. Functionality
The fingerprint capture unit MUST provide
fingerprint images for the fingerprint verification unit.
The term ‘pre-processing’, used henceforth,
means the provision of a fingerprint image
from a frame, whereas ‘pre-qualification’
means the provision of an appropriate fingerprint image from a set of fingerprint images.
The activation of the acquisition MUST occur
automatically. For the acquisition process, a
pre-qualification of the fingerprints to prefer high-quality images is RECOMMENDED.
The process of capturing SHOULD prefer
the highest quality image of a sequence, or
at least the last-captured image (after timeout) of a sequence.
If the sensor was not able to capture an image (e.g. because no finger was placed on it),
it is not required to return an image after the
time-out. In this case, an adequate error code
SHALL be returned.
It is RECOMMENDED to provide pre-processed images to the verification unit. The
pre-processing MUST cover at least segmentation (segmentation for single-finger sensors is OPTIONAL).
For this segmentation process, the requirements listed below SHALL be fulfilled.

nnThe fingerprint capture unit should have
the ability to accept rotated fingerprints
having the same direction at an angle of
up to 45°.
nnRotated fingerprints having the same direction should be corrected to be vertical.
nnThe first phalanx of the finger should be
segmented. Segmentation SHALL occur
on uncompressed data.
The fingerprint images provided by the capture unit SHOULD comply with the quality
requirements of ISO 19794-4. Depending on
the verification unit, additional characteristics MAY be required.
It is RECOMMENDED to provide uncompressed (e.g. BMP) or lossless compressed
live images. Alternatively non-lossless compression MAY be used. In this case, fingerprint
images should be compressed according to
the recommendations of ISO 19794-4, section 8.3.17 ‘Image compression algorithm’.
The compression ratio SHOULD not be too
high; a maximum compression ratio of 15 is
recommended. The implementation of the
WSQ algorithm used SHOULD be certified by
the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and
SHOULD be referenced by the respective certificate number (coded in the WSQ header).
Multiple lossy compressions SHOULD be
avoided as they harm image quality.
The complete process of capturing (including
pre-processing, pre-qualification and provision of the resulting fingerprint image to the
fingerprint verification unit) SHOULD NOT
take more than 1 second per frame.
REMARK: Because of disabilities or very weak
fingerprints, it might not be possible to capture fingerprint images of sufficient quality
for a certain number of travellers. This Failure-to-Acquire (FTA) Rate is expected to be
lower than 0.03 (3 per cent).

45 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

5.2.2. Fingerprint verification unit
5.2.2.3. Architecture and setup
The fingerprint verification unit SHOULD run
on standard, industrial grade PC hardware.
The agency operating the ABC system MAY
decide to allow more complex requirements.
The verification process MAY run locally
within each ABC system or as a centralised
service.
It is RECOMMENDED to use standard interfaces according to BioAPI ISO 19784-1 for the
fingerprint verification process. The agency
operating the ABC system MAY decide to
allow proprietary vendor-specific SDK interfaces for the integration of the verification unit.
5.2.2.4. Functionality
The fingerprint verification unit MUST compare the DG3 reference image(s) and the captured live image. The verification unit MUST
process DG3 reference images stored in WSQ
data format. It SHOULD process live images
in uncompressed or lossless compressed or
WSQ data formats.
One fingerprint verification attempt (consisting of template generation and comparison) SHOULD NOT take more than 1 second.
The configuration of the fingerprint verification algorithm SHALL ensure a security level
in terms of FAR of 0.001 (0.1 per cent). At this
configuration (comparison threshold) the
FRR SHOULD NOT exceed 0.03 (3 per cent).
REMARK: The Operational Reject Rate consists of the algorithm-specific FRR and the
additional FTA (see section 5.2.1.2. above).
It is RECOMMENDED that the achievable
performance of the fingerprint verification

46 of 60

algorithm is measured by an independent
test laboratory or an official agency. The operating agency SHOULD NOT rely on performance figures given by the algorithm provider
only. For live operation of the system, it is
RECOMMENDED to determine a proper algorithm configuration based on image data
and verification results (cross-comparisons
between different travellers) from the actual
operational environment and a representative
catalogue of test users. It is RECOMMENDED
to monitor the error rates (especially the
FAR) continuously or at least periodically
(e.g. once a year) and to adjust the configuration if needed.
NB: It is RECOMMENDED to perform the FAR
calculation for the ABC system as an independent but parallel process as shown below.
nnThe reference fingerprint images (DG3 images) of the last 10 e-Passport verifications are temporarily and anonymously
stored in a dynamic list.
nnThe live fingerprint image from the actual
fingerprint verification process is compared against all other fingerprints in the
dynamic list and the comparison scores
are saved (impostor comparisons). A comparison of fingerprint images of the same
person, which may happen due to multiple
verification attempts of the same traveller, should be avoided.
nnThe actual live fingerprint image is compared against the corresponding reference
fingerprint image and the comparison
score is saved (genuine comparison).
nnThe reference fingerprint images are
added to the dynamic list.
nnThe oldest fingerprint images in the dynamic list and the current live fingerprint
image are discarded and deleted safely.
Storage and deletion of the fingerprint
image data has to be implemented in accordance with the applicable data protection regulations.
nnThe FAR is calculated on the basis of impostor comparison scores. Genuine com-

Figure 7: Fingerprint capture and
verification process

parison scores MAY be used to calculate
the corresponding FRR. Due attention
should be paid to the statistical base for
the FAR calculation. In order to measure
the performance of the fingerprint verification algorithm up to a security level
(FAR) of 0.001 (0.1 per cent), it is to perform the FAR calculation on the basis of
at least 30 000 impostor comparisons.

Begin fingerprint
verification

Load reference
image

Fingerprint
Capture
Unit

Capture

5.2.3. Design of the fingerprint capture
and verification process

Pre-Processing /
Segmentation

If the fingerprint image acquisition and/or
the fingerprint verification are not successful,
the process SHALL stop after a time-out. The
time-out SHOULD be configurable.

Pre-qualification

The process and the e-Gate design SHALL
guide the traveller directly to the capture unit.
While the live fingerprint images are captured, other actions by the traveller SHOULD
NOT be necessary and no eye-catchers apart
from the feedback modules SHOULD distract
the traveller’s attention. The feedback modules (display, LEDs, etc.) SHOULD be installed
very close to the fingerprint sensor device.

Fingerprint
Verification
Unit

YES

Fingerprint
comparison

Match
NO

Time-out

The result of the fingerprint verification process SHALL be provided to a monitoring and
control station. At least the overall verification result SHALL be displayed in the summary view on the monitoring screen. It is
RECOMMENDED that further details regarding the fingerprint verification process be
shown upon request by the operator of the
ABC system, e.g. the image data (DG3 images and live image used for the verification).
The process SHOULD provide a fake detection
(or liveness detection respectively) to detect
fake attacks or improper use. Therefore, the
biometric components MAY provide technical features for fake detection like dedicated
sensors or software-based mechanisms. Respective Common Criteria protection profiles
PP0062 or PP0063 MAY be considered. A

NO

YES

End fingerprint
verification

high-level illustration of the RECOMMENDED
fingerprint capture and verification process
for ABC systems is shown in Figure 7.

5.3. Multi-biometrics
The general diagram of the biometric system decision process presented in Figure 8
defines the process of biometric verification
in ABC (in this case, ‘data storage’ is provided
by e-MRTDs).

47 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Figure 8: General diagram of the biometric system decision process.
The reproduction of this figure has been authorised by ISO.

Multi-biometric systems take input from one
or more sensors to capture one or several
different types of biometric characteristics.
In order to enhance the performance of authentication subsystems, multi-biometrics
allow for better results than a process based
on a single biometric, reducing the risk of
false positives and negatives. The use of two
or more biometric modalities or other kinds
of multi-biometrics MAY be incorporated in
national implementations of ABC systems.
An overview of multi-biometrics is provided in
ISO 24722. Several types of multi-biometrics

can be applied directly to ABC systems in order
to improve their performance and accuracy.
Sample level
The biometric process captures a collection
of samples. The fusion process fuses these
collections of samples into a single sample.
If this model is used in ABC systems it
SHOULD be implemented in the biometric
capture unit. A fused image of the biometric feature is then provided to the biometric
verification process.

Figure 9: Sample level fusion in multi-biometric systems (from ISO 24722).
The reproduction of this figure has been authorised by ISO.
Templates

Sample 1
Sample 2

48 of 60

Sample
Fusion

Feature
Extraction

Matching

SCORE

Decision

MATCH
NON MATCH

Score level
The biometric process performs several comparisons of samples with the reference image(s)
resulting in multiple scores. The fusion process fuses these into a single score, which is then
compared to the system acceptance threshold.
If this model is used in ABC systems to fuse different biometric modalities like face and fingerprints, it SHOULD be implemented in a specific verification unit that is able to process the
input from several capture units.
Figure 10: Score level fusion in multi-biometric systems (from ISO 24722).
The reproduction of this figure has been authorised by ISO.
Templates 1

Sample 1

Feature
Extraction 1

Matching 1
Score
Fusion

Sample 2

Feature
Extraction 2

SCORE

Decision

MATCH
NON MATCH

Matching 2

Templates 2

Decision level
Each individual biometric process outputs its own Boolean result. The fusion process fuses
them together by a combination algorithm such as AND and OR, possibly taking further parameters such as sample quality scores, environmental conditions, etc. as input.
If this model is used in ABC systems to fuse different biometric modalities like face and fingerprints it SHOULD be implemented at the process level that is able to process the input
from several verification units.
Figure 11: Decision level fusion in multi-biometric systems (from ISO 24722).
The reproduction of this figure has been authorised by ISO.
Templates 1

Sample 1

Sample 2

Feature
Extraction 1

Feature
Extraction 2

Matching 1

Matching 2

SCORE

SCORE

Decision 1
Decision
Fusion

MATCH
NON MATCH

Decision 2

Templates 2

49 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

6. Q
 uality control and quality
assurance
Quality control (QC) is the process whereby
the quality of all factors involved in the operation and exploitation of the ABC system
are measured. Quality assurance (QA) of an
ABC service as such, in more practical terms,
is the perception of the degree to which it
meets the expectations of travellers and border management authorities.
Quality control is of importance when assessing the performance of a given ABC system and for identifying potential problems in
its operation. Therefore, this section focuses
on the minimum recommended anonymous
operational data to be collected for QC/QA
and the extraction of business statistics from
ABC systems.
While QC/QA and statistical analysis are not
part of the core functionality of an ABC system, it is nevertheless highly RECOMMENDED
to implement them. This section should be
read as a set of REQUIREMENTS and RECOMMENDATIONS for those cases where the
system designer decides to provide data storage for QC/QA and statistical analysis.
Note that the following aspects are explicitly
out of the scope of this document.
nnSpecific details on how to encode each
data item to be stored.
nnSpecific tools for statistical analysis and
performance indicator definition.

6.1. General recommendations
The following requirements and recommendations are broadly applicable when designing the dataset to be stored for QC/QA and
statistics extraction.

50 of 60

Any set of operational data to be stored on
a permanent basis in an ABC system MUST
comply with the limitations imposed by national and EU Data Protection regulations16.
Therefore personal data SHALL NOT be stored
for the purposes of QC/QA and statistics extraction unless properly anonymised.
Any information MUST be stored within a
structured data schema (e.g. a relational database, XML entries).
Anonymous operational data is stored in a
centralised way at least at the ABC installation level (i.e. at the group of e-Gates and
monitoring and control stations at a given
airport/port hall). Detailed maintenance and
SW debug traces MAY be stored at the local
level (e.g. at a given e-Gate computer), since
such data is unlikely to be of use when analysing operational performance.
It is RECOMMENDED that a clear interface
for data extraction is offered, since providing
built-in statistical analysis is out of the scope
of the basic functionality of an ABC system.
An entry in the operational register should
be created for any transaction taking place
in an ABC system, regardless of its degree
of success. Thus, apart from data from successful border crossings, anonymous data for

16 See in particular Directive 95/46/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of
24.10.1995 on the protection of individuals with
regard to the processing of personal data and on
the free movement of such data.

at least the following types of transactions
SHOULD be logged.
nnAccess attempts with documents not accepted by the system (e.g. non-electronic
passports).
nnAccess attempts with non-eligible documents (e.g. third country nationals holding an e-Passport).
nnAccess attempts by an eligible traveller
with a valid e-Passport but whose verification was not successful (e.g. due to a
biometric verification error).
It is RECOMMENDED that each entry within
the operational register is as complete as
possible, depending on how far the verification process could be completed. When
a field within the transaction entry cannot
be filled (e.g. unknown nationality or check
not applicable for a document), a distinctive
value MUST be used as placeholder, so that
these gaps can be easily identified when processing the data.
The following sections add details concerning
the sorts of data which are of interest when
logging for QC/QA and performance analysis.

6.2. Access data
In all cases, the data entry MUST be timestamped to allow for detailed performance
and trend analysis.
In all cases, a data entry MUST include a specific field summarising the final outcome of
the verification process, that is, whether the
traveller was granted permission to cross the
border without further manual action by the
officers monitoring the BCP. In its simplest
form this can be a Boolean value, or MAY include other information regarding the type(s)
of failure of the verification process. Although,
as depicted in the following sections, such details SHOULD be stored separately, so that
changes in access logic (the decision tree in
charge of granting or denying authorisation

for border crossing to a traveller) affecting
the outcome of the ABC verification process
do not hide the result of each sub-process.
It is RECOMMENDED that the following traveller information is part of a data entry:
nnnationality of the document issuer;
nnage (or alternatively age bands, e.g. 21–25,
26–35…);
nngender.
It is RECOMMENDED that the timing information shown below is included in a data entry.
nnTotal verification time: defined as the time
needed to fully verify an eligible traveller,
regardless of the outcome of each particular check (document authentication, biometric verification, background checks, etc.).
nnTotal access time: defined as the total time
spent in the process by an eligible traveller
since the first interaction with the system
(i.e. presentation of the travel document in
an integrated two-step process ABC system, entry in the mantrap space in a onestep process ABC system, first interaction
with the verification modules in a single eGate or segregated two-step process solution). The exact definition and estimate
of this time will ultimately depend on the
architecture of the system (e.g. when the
full verification process takes place within
a mantrap, this time measurement will always be greater than the verification time).

6.3. ABC installation data
It is RECOMMENDED that each ABC installation is uniquely identified within a national
ABC deployment. It is RECOMMENDED that
the identifier shows:
nna clear identification of the BCP (e.g. airport moniker);
nndetailed information regarding the location within the BCP (e.g. terminal number, floor, arrival/departure hall number);
nninformation regarding the type of BCP:
entries or exits.

51 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

It is RECOMMENDED that every component
of an ABC installation is uniquely identified.
This identification SHOULD be done at least
at the verification and access module level,
although a finer granularity MAY be used for
maintenance logging purposes. It is RECOMMENDED that the identifier includes the details shown below.
nnModule type (e.g. verification, access,
monitoring).
nnModule number. When numbering modules within a given ABC installation, designers SHOULD find the adequate criteria
for numbering consistency in a given installation and across all the ABC system
locations (e.g. the lower numbers are given
to modules closest to the actual exit of
the installation).

6.4. Document authentication
data
It is RECOMMENDED to include a subsystem
for the logging of statistical and technical
data regarding the document authentication
process, for the purpose of having continuous quality control, the extraction of business statistics and the improvement of the
ABC system.
It is RECOMMENDED that the following details on the document inserted are included
in each data entry:
nnissuing country and date of expiry of the ePassport (if allowed by the applicable national data protection regulations);
nndate of issue (if extracted from the VIZ);
nne-Passport type (e.g. first or second generation e-Passport).
It is RECOMMENDED that the following details of a document electronic and optical
authentication processes shown below are
part of a data entry.
nnTime period dedicated to the document
authentication process as a whole (i.e.
from the beginning of optical image cap-

52 of 60

turing until the provision of the final document authentication result).
nnTime period dedicated to the optical document checks.
nnTime period dedicated to the RF chip reading process.
nnTime period dedicated to the verification
of the e-Passport data.
nnOutcome of each of the authentication
checks actually performed in the document, depending on the type of document and the authentication algorithm
used. At least a Boolean value for each of
the checks SHOULD be included, although
the designer MAY choose to include more
details on each field (e.g. indicating that
a given check is/is not supported by the
document being read).
nnResult of the optical document check and
results of each optical sub-step (B900 ink,
UV-Brightness, MRZ consistency, etc.).
nnResult of the e-Passport data authentication process and results of each authentication sub-step (EF.SOD verification, DS
certificate signature verification, certificate validity period, etc.).
nnDump of the DS certificate used for the
EF.SOD verification.
nnError messages from the particular process
steps and document reader unit.

6.5. Biometric verification data
It is RECOMMENDED to include a subsystem for the logging of statistical and technical data regarding the biometric verification
process, for the purpose of having continuous
quality control, the extraction of business statistics and the introduction of improvement
to the ABC system. It is RECOMMENDED that
the following details of the facial verification
process are part of a data entry.
nnOverall result of the face capture and verification process.
nnError messages from the face capture unit
and the verification unit.

nnTotal time of the biometric verification
process (i.e. from the beginning of the image capture until the provision of the final verification result).
nnAmount of single verification events within
the verification process.
nnAt least the best comparison score of all
single verification events within the face
capture and verification process.
nnBest quality score of all successfully captured facial images.
nnThe threshold against which the verification scores were compared.
For any other biometric verification which
might be part of the system, it is RECOMMENDED that at least the following data is
part of an entry.
nnTime effort for the biometric verification
process (i.e. from the beginning of the live
sample capturing until the provision of the
final verification result).
nnOverall result of the verification process
or, alternatively, the verification score and
comparison threshold.
nnQuality indicator of the best live sample
(e.g. NIST NFIQ score for a fingerprint).
nnQuality indicator of the reference image,
if available (e.g. NIST NFIQ score for the
fingerprint stored in DG3).

6.6. Other Data Sets
Depending on the exact features of the border control process, an ABC system MAY run
other background checks in parallel with
the document authentication and biometric verification checks. It is assumed that
these background checks are performed by

accessing systems external to the ABC (such
as a query to a Lost & Stolen Document Database). For these background checks, it is
RECOMMENDED that at least the following
data is included within an entry:
nntotal connection (round-trip) time;
nnoverall result of the check.
For segregated two-step process systems
in which access tokens are used, the data
shown below SHOULD be part of an entry.
nnIf a physical token is issued, its serial number or any other identifier the token may
carry.
nnIf a biometric token is used, the quality of
the ‘enrolment sample’ captured at the
verification module (e.g. NIST NFIQ score
for a fingerprint).
nnTotal time invested in token generation or
capture at the verification module.
nnFor successful verifications and token generation/capture, delays between the completion of the verification process and the
crossing of one of the access modules. If
the delay is too great or the crossing process is discarded by the border guard officer, this SHOULD be clearly indicated
as a process abandoned or aborted by
the officer.
nnIf a biometric token is used, the quality
of the live sample captured at the access module (e.g. NIST NFIQ score for a
fingerprint).
nnTotal time invested in token reading/capture and authentication/verification at the
access module.
nnOverall result of token reading/capture
and authentication/verification at the access module.

53 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Annex 1: References
Bradner, Scott. Key Words for Use in RFCs
to Indicate Requirement Levels. BCP 14, RFC
2119, March 1997.
Bretschneider, Stuart, Frederick J. Marc-Aurele, and Jiannan Wu. ‘Best practices’ research:
a methodological guide for the perplexed.
Journal of Public Administration Research and
Theory 15.2 (2005), pp. 307–323.
Council of Europe. European Convention for
the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, as amended by Protocols
Nos 11 and 14. 4 November 1950, ETS 5.Council of the European Union. EU Schengen Catalogue: External borders control, Return and
readmission- Recommendations and best
practices, Council document No 7864/09, 19
March 2009, p.6.
European Commission. Communication from
the Commission to the European Parliament
and the Council: Smart borders – options
and the way ahead, COM(2011) 680 final,
25.10.2011.
European Commission. Communication of
13 February 2008 from the Commission to
the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee
and the Committee of the Regions: Preparing the next steps in border management
in the European Union, COM(2008) 69 final, 13.2.2008.
European Commission. Memo. ‘Smart Borders’: for an open and secure Europe, 28 February 2013.
European Council. The Stockholm Programme
– An open and secure Europe serving and protecting citizens, OJ C 115, 4 May 2010, pp. 1–38.

54 of 60

European Migration Network. Glossary [last
accessed: 30 June 2015].
European Union. Directive 95/46/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of
24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such
data, OJ L 281, 23 November 1995, pp. 31–50.
European Union. Regulation (EC) No 2252/2004
of 13 December 2004 on standards for security features and biometrics in passports and
travel documents issued by Member States,
OJ L 385, 29 December 2004, pp. 1–6.
European Union. Regulation (EC) No 444/2009
of 28 May 2009 amending Regulation (EC)
No 2252/2004 of 13 December 2004 on standards for security features and biometrics in
passports and travel documents issued by
Member States, OJ L 142, 6 June 2009, pp. 1–4.
European Union. Regulation (EC) No 562/2006
of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 15 March 2006 establishing a Community
Code on the rules governing the movement
of persons across borders (Schengen Borders
Code), OJ L 105, 13 April 2006, pp. 1–32 (consolidated version of April 2010).
Eurostat. Glossary [last accessed: 30 June 2015].
Federal Office for Information Security (BSI).
Fingerprint Spoof Detection Protection Profile based on Organisational Security Policies
(FSDPP_OSP), Version 1.7, 2010 [PP0062].
Federal Office for Information Security (BSI).
Fingerprint Spoof Detection Protection Profile
(FSDPP), Version 1.8, 2010 [PP0063].

Federal Office for Information Security (BSI).
Technical Guideline TR-03110 – Advanced Security
Mechanisms for Machine Readable Travel Documents and eIDAS Token, Parts 1, 2, 3 and 4, Version 2.20, 2015 [BSI03110].
Federal Office for Information Security (BSI).
Technical Guideline TR-03121 – Biometrics for
Public Sector Applications, Parts 1, 2 and 3, Version 3.0, 2013 [BSI03121].
Federal Office for Information Security (BSI).
Technical Guideline TR-03129 – PKIs for Machine
Readable Travel Documents, Part 1 and 2, Version 1.10, 2014 [BSI03129].
Federal Office for Information Security (BSI).
Technical Guideline TR-03135 – Machine Authentication of MRTDs for Public Sector Applications,
Version 2.0, 2014 [BSI03135].

ISO/IEC 19784-1:2006, Information technology
– Biometric application programming interface,
Part 1: BioAPI specification [ISO 19784-1] .
ISO/IEC 19794-2:2011, Information technology –
Biometric data interchange formats, Part 2: Finger minutia data [ISO 19794-2].
ISO/IEC 19794-4:2011, Information technology –
Biometric data interchange formats, Part 4: Finger image data [ISO 19794-4].
ISO/IEC 19794-5:2011, Information technology –
Biometric data interchange formats, Part 5: Face
image data [ISO 19794-5].
ISO/IEC 2382-37:2012, Information technology –
Vocabulary – Part 37: Harmonized biometric vocabulary [ISO 2382-37].

Frontex. Best Practice Guidelines on the Design,
Deployment and Operation of Automated Border Crossing Systems, Version 1.1 March 2011.

ISO/IEC 7816-11:2004, Identification cards –
Integrated circuit cards, Part 11: Personal verification through biometric methods [ISO
7816-11].

Frontex. Best Practice Operational Guidelines for
Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems, Version 2.1. June 2015.

ISO/IEC TR 24722:2007, Information technology – Biometrics – Multimodal and other multibiometric fusion [ISO 24722].

Frontex. Discussion paper on Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and operational challenges of certificate exchange/management at the borders,
14 June 2012.

ISO/IEC TR 24741:2007, Information technology
– Biometrics Tutorial [ISO 24741].

Frontex. Operational and Technical security of
Electronic Passports, July 2011.
ICAO. A Primer on the ICAO Public Key Directory – White Paper, Version 1.5, 20 May 2009.
ICAO. Doc9303 – Machine Readable Travel Documents, Part 1 Vol. 2 (second edition, 2006) and
Part 3 Vol. 2 (third edition, 2008) [ICAO9303].
ICAO. MRTD Glossary [last accessed: 30 June
2015].
ICAO. Supplemental Access Control for Machine
Readable Travel Documents, Version 1.1, 15 April
2014 [ICAOSAC].

Oxford University Press. Oxford Dictionaries
[last accessed June 2015].
Ongaro, Edoardo. A protocol for the extrapolation of ‘Best’ Practices: How to draw lessons from
one experience to improve public management
in another situation. European Public Sector
Award 2009, Final Symposium and Ceremony,
Maastricht, 2009 [last accessed: 30 June 2015].
RFC 3369, Cryptographic Message Syntax (CMS),
August 2002 [RFC3369].
Veselý, Arnošt. Theory and Methodology of
Best Practice Research: A Critical Review of
the Current State, Central European Journal
of Public Policy, Vol. 5, No 2, December 2011,
pp. 98–117.

ISO/IEC 14443, Identification cards – Contactless
integrated circuit cards – Proximity cards, Parts
1–4 [ISO 14443].

55 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Annex 2: Additional reading
Biometrics
This section lists additional, publicly available references on biometrics for ABC systems.
Software Architecture
Process of Biometric
Verification

Face Capture Unit

Operational Issues
User Interface
Evaluation of Error Rates

Quality Control and
Business Statistics

An example of detailed requirements on the software architecture can be found in BSI 03121-1 and BSI 03121-2.
An example of detailed requirements on the process of biometric verification based on live captured face images can be found
in BSI 03121-3, sections ‘Verification of e-Passport and Identity
Card using facial biometrics’ and ‘P‑PH-VID’.
An example of detailed requirements on the functionality of
the face capture unit can be found in [BSI03121-3], sections ‘BIPPH-VID’, ‘QA-PH-VID’, and ‘COM-PH-VID’.
An example of detailed requirements on the operational issues
and can be found in [BSI03121-3], section ‘O‑PH‑VID’.
An example of detailed requirements on the user interfaces can
be found in [BSI03121-3], section ‘UI‑PH‑VID’.
An example workflow and architecture for obtaining impostor
and genuine comparison scores for calculating FAR and FRR is
described in [BSI03121-3], section ‘P-PH-VID’.
An example of a detailed logging scheme can be found in
[BSI03121-3], sections ‘COD-PH-VID’, and ‘LOG-PH-VID’.

Document readers and document authentication
This section lists additional, publicly available references on document readers and document
authentication processes for ABC systems.
Document Reader
Requirements
Authentication of MRTDs

56 of 60

An example of detailed technical requirements and performance capabilities on document readers can be found in BSI
03135, section 3.
An example of detailed requirements on the process of document authentication and a comprehensive description of the
procedures that compose a full featured MRTD inspection
can be found in BSI03135, section 4.

In order to verify the compliance of e-MRTD
authentication subsystems (e.g. electronic
document reader hardware and software)
to the relevant ISO and ICAO standards (especially ISO 14443, ISO 7816 and ICAO 9303),
it is common to rely on established evaluation and certification schemes. Examples of
independent or official evaluation and certification schemes are:
nnFederal Office for Information Security:
Technical Guideline TR-03105 – Conformity

Tests for Official Electronic ID Documents,
Part 4: Test plan for ICAO compliant Proximity Coupling Device (PCD) on Layer 2–4
BSI 03105-4.
nnFederal Office for Information Security:
Technical Guideline TR-03105 – Conformity Tests for Official Electronic ID
Documents, Part 5.1: Test plan for ICAO
compliant Inspection Systems with EACv1
BSI 03105-51.

57 of 60

Frontex

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Annex 3:
Overview of ABC systems
in the EU / Schengen Area
1	Selected TCNs eligible for ABC processing:
DE – RTP for citizens of the US and Hong Kong
FI – Japanese, South Korean, US, Canadian and New Zealand nationals who hold an e-Passport
FR – TCNs who are family members of EU citizens
NL – US citizens who register with a dedicated RTP programme
PT – RTP for Angolan citizens
UK – RTP for citizens of the US, Australia, New Zealand, Canada and Japan
2 The system is being implemented within the frames of the FP7 by the Project Consortium.
3 At the time of writing Belgian ABC system is expected to be operational in June 2015.
4 The fingerprint verification functionality is a part of the system, however, at the time of writing, it is not
operational.
5 At the time of writing Danish ABC system is expected to be operational on 1 December 2015.
6 Spain has implemented both 1-step and 2-step segregated solutions; in case of the 1-step solution there
are 12 e-Gates, while in case of the 2-step segregated solution there are 19 kiosks and 4 e-Gates.
7 Eligible travellers who do not hold an e-Passport can register in a dedicated database.
8 The ABC system in Norway has been originally envisaged to cater for all EU/EEA/CH citizens of the age of
18 and older who are holders of an e-passport; however, due to unavailability of verified certificates from
other MSs, currently, only NO/SE/UK/FI/DK/IS citizens are eligible to use the system.
9 The fingerprint verification functionality is a part of the system, however, at the time of writing, it is not
operational.

58 of 60

■

■

FR

HU

UK

■

■

■

■

≥18

≥18

≥18

≥18

≥18

≥18

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

NO/SE/UK/
FI/DK/IS

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

7

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■9

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■
■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■4

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

Airport
Authority

RO

■

■

NO

PT

■

■

≥18

≥18

≥18

≥18

EU/EEA/CH

■

■

■

■

■2

System
provider

NL

LV

IT

IS

■

■

FI

IE

■

ES

≥15

■

■

2-step
segregated

■

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

■

■

■

■

Operator

System provider(s)

Fujitsu, Vision Box, Accenture

Vision-Box

Gemalto, Vision-Box

Accenture, Vision Box

SITA

SITA, Accenture

ARH Zrt.

Morpho

Vision-Box

Indra, Gunnebo, Neurotechnology

Vision Box

Vision Box

Bundesdruckerei GmbH and Secunet
Security Networks AG

L-1 Ident ity Solutions, Magnetic
Autocontrol, Vitkovice Solution,
Secunet

Atos Bulgaria, Vision Box

Vision Box

Project Consortium

Number of:

4

19

6

Kiosks

EE

■5

≥18

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

Selected
TCN1

DK

■

DE

Operational

≥15

≥18

National eID

■

Pilot
■

Finger

CZ

Planned
■

1-step

■

Age
■

Owner
Border/State
Authority

BG

Nationality

■3

ePassport
■

Face

EU/EEA/CH

Configuration
2-step
integrated

≥18

Eligible
document Biometrics
Airport
Authority

■

Eligible pax
Border
Authority

BE

Status

System
provider

AT

MS

111

2

81

4

36

2

8

4

1

41

38

166

2

9

117

3

16

6

1

E-gates

System
provider

59 of 60

Frontex

60 of 60

Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union

Print version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-51-2
DOI 10.2819/86138

Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland

Online version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-50-5
DOI 10.2819/39041

T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

