Best Practice Operational
Guidelines for Automated
Border Control (ABC) Systems

Best Practice Operational
Guidelines for Automated
Border Control (ABC)
Systems

Research and Development Unit

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders
of the Member States of the European Union
Research and Development Unit
Capacity Building Division
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

2 of 68

Print version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-51-2
DOI 10.2819/86138
Online version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-50-5
DOI 10.2819/39041
Date: September 2015

Contents
Legal notice #6
All rights reserved #6
Acknowledgements #7
About Frontex #8
Acronyms and abbreviations #9
Glossary #10
Executive summary #16
Terminology #20
1. Introduction #21
1.1. Purpose and audience #21
1.2. Scope and methodology #21
1.3. About best practices and guidelines #23
1.4. How to read this document #24
2. General overview of ABC systems #25
2.1. Concept #25
2.2. Main functions and features #25
2.3. Advantages of automation #26
3. Operational considerations for automated border control #28
3.1. Overview of the Border Checks Process #28
3.2. General process flow #28
3.3. Operational requirements #29
3.4. Functional requirements #30
3.4.1. Checking the document authenticity/validity #30
3.4.2. Identity verification #32
3.5. Implementation of ABC system #32
3.5.1. Decision-making process #32
3.5.2. Equivalence of performance #39
3.5.3. Cooperation with third parties #39
3.6. Deployment of ABC system #40
3.6.1. Topologies of ABC system #40
3.6.2.	Physical infrastructure: arrangement
of the e-Gates and the monitoring and control station #42
3.6.3. Environmental factors #42
3.6.4. Integration in the host environment #43
3.6.5. Flexibility to accommodate changes #43
3.7. Personnel management and ABC systems #46
3.7.1. Roles and tasks of personnel #46
3.7.2. Training of personnel #49

3 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

3.8. Handling of exceptions #49
3.8.1. System malfunctioning #50
3.8.2. e-Gates out of service #50
3.8.3. Tailgating #50
3.8.4. Minors #50
3.8.5. Travellers with disabilities #50
3.8.6. Trespassing #51
3.8.7. Ineligible travellers #51
3.8.8. e-Passport is wrongly placed into the reader #52
3.8.9. Non-cooperative behaviour at the e-Gate #52
3.8.10. Anomalies in chips #52
3.8.11. Database hit #52
3.8.12. Failed biometric verification #52
3.8.13. Wrong or no security features on the biographical data page #52
3.9. Quality assurance and statistics #53
4. Traveller experience #54
4.1. Awareness and education before the e-Gate #54
4.1.1. Key messages to be transmitted #54
4.1.2. Delivery methods #55
4.1.3. Need for standard signs, instructions and logos #55
4.2. Running a traveller-friendly service at the e-Gate #56
4.2.1. Instructions at the e-Gate #56
4.2.2. Effectiveness of delivery methods #57
4.2.3. Managing traveller flow #58
4.2.4. Learning by observation #58
4.2.5. Traveller interaction with the e-Gates #59
4.2.6. Use of text and multiple languages #59
4.2.7. Human support at the e-Gate #60
4.3. User-friendly design of the e-Gate #60
4.3.1. System design #60
4.3.2. Attractiveness and safety #61
4.3.3. Ergonomics #61
4.4. Privacy and data protection #61

4 of 68

Annex 1:

References #63

Annex 2:

Overview of ABC systems in the EU/Schengen Area #66

Release Note
and Table of Changes
The present report supersedes the previous version of the Best Practice Operational Guidelines for Automated Border Control (ABC) systems. The main changes are summarised in the
table below.

Table of changes
Section Altered

Change

Acknowledgements

Names of experts, stakeholders and Frontex staff who contributed to the revision
updated accordingly

About Frontex

Changes made to the title of this section as well as to the sentence about the core
objective of the Capacity Building Division

Glossary

Updated according to the text, definitions added, introduction of some clarifications

Section 1.1.

Introduction of clarification regarding the purpose of the guidelines

Section 1.2. and 3.5.1.3.

Introduction of updates regarding the biometrics used

Section 1.3.

Introduction of clarification and updates regarding the definition of best practices

Section 2.1.

Introduction of clarifications regarding the definition of the ABC systems and updates
regarding biometrics used

Section 2.2.

Introduction of updates regarding the Smart Borders Proposal and processing of third
country nationals

Section 2.3.

Introduction of clarifications and updates regarding the audience of ABC systems in the
EU

Section 3.2.

Introduction of clarifications regarding the diagram illustrating a border check process,
introduction of changes in the terminology used in Figure 1

Section 3.3.

Introduction of changes regarding monitoring and operation of e-gates as well as risk
assessment

Sections 3.4.1., 3.4.2.1.
and 3.4.2.3.

Introduction of clarifications regarding determining travellers’ eligibility, checking
document validity and authenticity

Section 3.5.1.4.

Introduction of updates and clarifications regarding software and hardware
procurement, in particular the interfaces between the system’s components,
obsolescence and creating one’s own software

Sections 3.5.1. and 3.5.1.5.

Introduction of recommendations regarding vulnerability study/assessment

Section 3.5.1.6.

Introduction of recommendations regarding white‑hat vulnerability and penetration
testing

Section 3.5.2.

Introduction of recommendations regarding biometric performance testing and the
assessment of ABC systems in operational environment

Section 3.6.1.

Introduction of clarifications regarding ABC systems topologies

Section 3.6.5.1.

Introduction of clarifications and updates regarding the assumptions of the usage of an
e-Gate in the context of the optimal dimensioning of the system

Section 3.6.5.3.

Introduction of an update regarding the usage of wireless connections

Section 3.6.5.5.

Introduction of recommendations regarding maintenance

Section 3.6.5.6.

Introduction of a section on business continuity

Section 3.7.1.3.

Introduction of updates and clarification regarding the supervision of e-Gates by an
operator

Section 3.7.2.

Introduction of a recommendation regarding the development of common EU training

Section 3.8.5.

Section expanded to include recommendations of the European Disability Forum

Section 3.8.7.

Introduction of clarifications regarding the ineligible travellers

Section 3.8.12.

Introduction of updates regarding recommended procedure in case of failed biometric
verification

Section 3.9.

Harmonisation of terminology regarding quality assurance

Section 4.1.3.

Recommended logo for ABC system updated

Section 4.2.1.

Introduction of updates regarding the use of audio and visual instructions

Section 4.2.6.

Introduction of updates regarding the use of multiple languages in ABC systems

Section 4.4.

Section expanded to include the information on the proposed Data Protection
Regulation, applicable provisions of international law and the European Data Protection
Supervisor’s recommendations on ‘Privacy by Design’

Annex 1

References updated according to the text

Annex 2

Introduction of updates regarding operational and planned ABC systems in the EU

5 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Legal notice
The contents of this publication do not necessarily reflect the official opinions of any institution or body of the European Union. Neither Frontex nor any person or company acting on
behalf of Frontex is responsible for the use that may be made of the information contained
in this report.

All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced
in any form or by any means electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording
or by any information storage retrieval system, without permission in writing from the
copyright holder.
Before citing the Frontex Best Practice
O perational Guidelines for Automated
­
­Border Control (ABC) Systems:
1.	Please contact the Frontex Research and
Development Unit in order to get the latest version of the guidelines and support
for using them in your document.
In the introductory part of the document:
2.	Include a brief text declaring that Frontex ABC guidelines have been used in the
document. Mention explicitly which sections in the document are (totally or partially) based on these.
3.	Explain briefly why Frontex ABC guidelines
have been used in the document, and in
case of total or partial use of particular
sections, explicitly state why these sections are copied in full and what the added
value is. Provide some background about
how using Frontex guidelines best serves
the purposes of the document.

6 of 68

4.	Briefly mention that Frontex guidelines are
the result of a collaborative effort among
EU Member States (coordinated by Frontex) who at the time of writing have an operational or piloting ABC system in place.
In the body of the document:
5.	In those parts of the document based on
Frontex guidelines, make a reference to
the Frontex document (see references
below).
In the references section:
6.	Include a proper reference to the Frontex
ABC guidelines document (title, version
and issuing date, ISBN reference, plus a
download link to the Frontex web page
hosting the latest version).
7.	Include Frontex Research and Development Unit contact data at the end of the
document.

Frontex RDU contact data:

Research and Development Unit
Capacity Building Division Frontex
Plac Europejski 6, 00-844 Warsaw, Poland
E-mail: rd@frontex.europa.eu
Tel. +48 22 205 96 25
Fax +48 22 205 95 01

Acknowledgements1
This report was prepared by the Research and
Development Unit (RDU) of Frontex in close
collaboration with experts from a number of
EU Member States which, at the time of writing, were operating or testing an ABC system at a number of border crossing points of
the European Union and other stakeholders
who have commented and provided contribution to the drafting and revision of the present report. Frontex would like to particularly
acknowledge the work of the following persons who participated in the Working Group
on Automated Border Controls:
nnBulgaria: Aleksandr Kamburov and Lyubomir Dilov (Border Police).
nnCzech Republic: Petr Malovec and Mylan
Frydrych (Border Police).
nnFinland: Alapelto Pentti, Max Janzon, Pasi
Nokelainen, Janne Kurvinen and Mikko
Väisänen (Finnish Border Guard).
nnFrance: Dominique Gatinet (French Secure Documents Agency), Laurent Mucchielli, Eric Clement and Pierre Alexander
Gelas (Border Police).
nnGermany: Markus Nuppeney, Florian Rienhardt (Federal Office for Information Security) and Maik Rudolf (Federal Police).
nnIreland: Kevin Ryan (Irish Naturalisation
and Immigration Service).
nnNetherlands: Yvonne Bakker, Kier-co Gerritsen, Joost van Aalst (Ministry of Justice),
Rijck van de Kuil and Hans De Moel (Royal
Netherlands Marechaussee).
nnPortugal: Paula Maria Azevedo Cristina
and Maria Conceição Bértolo (Immigration and Border Service).

nnSpain: Javier Núñez Alonso, Ángel L. Puebla
and Alberto Raez Liria (Spanish National
Police).
nnUnited Kingdom: Andrew Clayton, Daniel Soutar and Glen Wimbury (UK Border Agency).
In addition Frontex is grateful to Ciaran Carolan (eu-LISA, the EU Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems),
Kerry Kwan (Immigration Department of the
Hong Kong Administrative Region), and Ted
Dunstone (Biometrics Institute and Biometix) who have extensively contributed to the
revision of the present document. Furthermore, Frontex appreciates the comments
sent by European Civil Aviation Conference
(ECAC), and European Disability Forum (EDF).
Frontex have also taken on board the remarks reflected in FRA (Fundamental Rights
Agency) Annual Activity Reports2 during the
revision process.
Moreover, the following staff from the Frontex RDU participated in the drafting and
editing process: María Duro Mansilla, Rasa
Karbauskaite, Gustav Soederlind, Ignacio Zozaya, Aurelie Gaudron and Karolina Lopacka.
Frontex is also grateful to all those other
stakeholders (not mentioned here) who contributed to the review process.

2

1

Member States’ experts and Frontex staff
have been acknowledged in alphabetical order
according to the first letter of their surnames.

FRA Annual Activity Report 2012 http://
fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/annualreport-2012_en.pdf
FRA Annual Activity Report 2013
http://fra.europa.eu/sites/default/files/
fra-2014-annual-report-2013_en.pdf

7 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

About Frontex
The mission of Frontex is to facilitate and render more effective the application of existing
and future European Union measures relating to the management of external borders,
in particular the Schengen Borders Code. As
such, the Agency is to play a key role in analysing and defining the capability needs in
border control and in supporting the Member States in development of these capabilities. Frontex also provides qualified expertise
to support the EU policy development process in the area of border control.
The core objective of the Capacity Building
Division is to drive the process of harmonisation and standardisation for border con-

8 of 68

trol and promoting greater interoperability.
As part of the Capacity Building Division at
Frontex, RDU is tasked to develop best practices and procedures, both technical and operational, for border control. RDU proactively
monitors and participates in the development
of research relevant for the control and surveillance of external borders and keeps the
Member States and the European Commission informed concerning technological innovations in the field of border control. In
particular, one of RDU’s main areas of work
is the exploration of the potential offered by
new border management technologies to
meet the dual objective of enhancing security while facilitating travel.

Acronyms and abbreviations
ABC
BAC
BCP
BPGs
BPOGs
BPTGs
CBA
CCTV
e-MRTD
EC
ECtHR
EJEU
EU
EU/EEA/CH
FAR
FoM
FRR
ICAO
ISO
IT
ITIL
MMI
MRTD
MRZ
MS
NL
PKD
PKI
RF
RTP
SBC
SLA
TCN
UK
UV
VIZ
WG

Automated Border Control
Basic Access Control
Border Crossing Point
Best Practice Guidelines
Best Practice Operational Guidelines
Best Practice Technical Guidelines
Cost Benefit Analysis
Closed Circuit Television
Electronic Machine Readable Travel Document
European Commission
European Court of Human Rights
Court of Justice of the European Union
European Union
European Union/European Economic Area/Switzerland
False accept rate
Figure of Merit
False reject rate
International Civil Aviation Organisation
International Organisation for Standardisation
Information Technology
Information Technology Infrastructure Library
Man Machine Interface
Machine Readable Travel Document
Machine Readable Zone
EU Member State
Netherlands
Public Key Directory
Public Key Infrastructure
Radio Frequency
Registered Traveller Programme
Schengen Borders Code
Service Level Agreement
Third Country Nationals
United Kingdom
Ultra Violet
Visual Inspection Zone
Working Group

9 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Glossary3
Active Authentication (AA): Explicit authentication of the chip. Active authentication requires processing capabilities of the
e-MRTD’s chip. The active authentication
mechanism ensures that the chip has not
been substituted, by means of a challengeresponse protocol between the inspection
system and the e-MRTD’s chip. See also ‘Passive Authentication’.
Assisting Personnel: Border guard officer(s)
who are responsible for handling the exceptions that occur at an ABC system, redirect
travellers as required (for example, to second
line checks), and assist them on specific situations. Assisting personnel work in close cooperation with the operator of the e-Gates.
Authentication process: A process that validates the claimed identity of a participant in
an electronic transaction.

3

10 of 68

The definitions included in this section are
based on a number of relevant glossaries and
dictionaries, namely the European Migration
Network Glossary, the ICAO MRTD Glossary,
ISO Information Technology Glossary, the
OECD Glossary of statistical terms and the
Oxford Language Dictionary. Other sources
of definitions are the European Commission
‘Communication on Smart Borders’; the
European Union ‘Schengen Borders Code’;
the Federal Office for Information Security of
Germany ‘Defect List: Technical Guideline TR03129’; and ICAO ‘Doc 9303 Machine Readable
Travel Documents’, ‘Guidelines on electronic
– Machine Readable Travel Documents &
Passenger Facilitation’ and its ‘Primer on the
ICAO PKD Directory’ (for further details see
reference list in Annex I). Finally, a number of
definitions have been devised and agreed by the
Frontex Working Group on Automated Border
Controls.

Automated Border Control (ABC) system:
An automated system which authenticates
the electronic machine readable travel document or token, establishes that the passenger is the rightful holder of the document or
token, queries border control records, then
determines eligibility of border crossing according to the pre-defined rules.
Basic Access Control (BAC): Challenge-response protocol where a machine (RF) reader
must create a symmetric key in order to read
the contactless chip by hashing the data
scanned from the MRZ. See also ‘Extended
Access Control (EAC)’.
Biometric Capture: The process of taking
a biometric sample from the user.
Biometric Verification: The process of
confirming the identity of the holder of an
e‑MRTD by the measurement and validation of one or more distinctive properties of
the holder’s person.
Border Checks: The checks carried out at
border crossing points, to ensure that persons, including their means of transport and
the objects in their possession, may be authorised to enter the territory of the Member States or authorised to leave it. See also
‘Border Crossing Point (BCP)’.
Border Crossing Point (BCP): Any ­crossing
point authorised by the competent authorities for the crossing of external borders.
Border Guard: Any public official assigned,
in accordance with national law, to a border
crossing point or along the border or the immediate vicinity of that border who carries

out, in accordance with the Schengen Borders
Code and national law, border control tasks.
Border Management Authority: Any public law enforcement institution which, in accordance with national law, is responsible for
border control.
Certificate: An electronic document establishing a digital identity by combining the
identity name or identifier with the public
key of the identity, a validity period and an
electronic signature by a third party.
Certificate Revocation List (CRL): A list enumerating certificates whose validity is compromised along with the reasons for revocation.
Change Management: Within the context of
the present Best Practice Guidelines, the term
refers to the strategies adopted by the border management authority to deal in a constructive way with the uncertainty associated
with the introduction of new border control
technologies. The aim is to promote the development among the staff of new attitudes
and behaviour that are instrumental to the
introduction of the new processes required
for the operation of those technologies (i.e.
the ABC system).
Cost Benefit Analysis: Technique for deciding whether to make a change. As its name
suggests, it compares the values of all benefits from the action under consideration and
the costs associated with it.
Customer Service Personnel: Within the
context of the present Best Practice Guidelines, the term refers to the staff of the port
operator which is tasked with providing guidance, advice and assistance to travellers in using the ABC system. Some Member States use
the term ‘hosts’ to refer to such personnel.
Database: An application storing a structured
set of data and allowing for the management

and retrieval of such data. For example, the
Schengen Information System (SIS) is a joint
information system that enables the competent authorities in each Member State of the
Schengen area, by means of an automated
search procedure, to have access to alerts
on persons and property for the purposes of
border checks and other police and customs
checks carried out within the country in accordance with national law and, for some
specific categories of alerts (those defined in
Article 96 of the Schengen Convention), for
the purposes of issuing visas, residence permits and the administration of legislation on
aliens in the context of the application of the
provisions of the Schengen Convention relating to the movement of persons. See also
‘Schengen area’ and ‘Watch List’.
Database Hit: An instance of identifying an
item of data which matches the requirements
of a search. See also ‘Database’ and ‘Watch List’.
Defect: A production error affecting a large
number of documents. The withdrawal of
already issued documents is impractical or
even impossible if the detected defect is contained in foreign documents.
Defect List: A signed list to handle defects.
Defects are identified by the Document Signer
Certificate(s) used to produce defect documents. Defect Lists are thus errata that not
only inform about defects but also provide
corrigenda to fix the error where possible.
See also ‘Defect’.
EasyPASS: Automated Border Control System in Germany.
e-Gate: One of the components of an ABC
system, consisting of a physical barrier operated by electronic means. This covers different types of e-Gates: a single-door e-Gate is
a system with one barrier to pass; a doubledoor e-Gate is a system with an entry and
an exit barrier (mantrap).

11 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

e-ID: An electronically enabled card used as
an identity document.
e-MRTD: A machine readable travel document (MRTD) equipped with an electronic
contactless chip according to ICAO Doc 9303.
See also ‘MRTD’.
e-Passport: A machine readable passport
(MRP) containing a Contactless Integrated
Circuit (IC) chip within which is stored data
from the MRP data page, a biometric measure of the passport holder and a security
object to protect the data with PKI cryptographic technology, and which conforms to
the specifications of ICAO Doc 9303, Part 1.
EU citizen: Any person having the nationality
of an EU Member State, within the meaning
of Article 20(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. See also ‘Persons
enjoying the Community right to free movement’
and ‘Freedom of Movement (Right to)’.
Extended Access Control (EAC): Protection
mechanism for additional biometrics included
in the e-MRTD. The mechanism will include
the State’s internal specifications or the bilateral agreed specifications between States
sharing this information. See also ‘Basic Access Control (BAC)’.
False Accept Rate (FAR): The probability that
a biometric system will incorrectly verify an
individual or will fail to reject an impostor. The
rate given normally assumes passive impostor
attempts. The false acceptance rate may be
estimated as FAR = NFA/NIIA or FAR = NFA/
NIVA where FAR is the false acceptance rate,
NFA is the number of false acceptances, NIIA
is the number of impostor identification attempts and NIVA is the number of impostor
verification attempts.
False Reject Rate (FRR): The probability that
a biometric system will fail to identify an enrolee or verify the legitimate claimed identity

12 of 68

of an enrolee. The false rejection rate may
be estimated as follows: FRR = NFR/NEIA
or FRR = NFR/NEVA where FRR is the false
rejection rate, NFR is the number of false rejections, NEIA is the number of enrolee identification attempts, and NEVA is the number
of enrolee verification attempts. This estimate assumes that the enrolee identification/verification attempts are representative
of those for the whole population of enrolees. The false rejection rate normally excludes
‘failure to acquire’ error.
First-Line Check: Default checks carried out
at border crossing points to ensure that travellers are authorised to enter or exit the territory of the Member State. See ‘Second-Line
Check’.
Freedom of Movement (Right to): A fundamental right of every citizen of an EU Member State or another European Economic Area
(EEA) State or Switzerland to freely move, reside and work within the territory of these
States. See also ‘EU citizen’ and ‘Persons enjoying the Community right to free movement’.
Identification: The one-to-many process
of comparing a submitted biometric sample against all of the biometric reference
templates on file to determine whether it
matches any of the templates and, if so, the
identity of the e-Passport holder whose template was matched. The biometric system using the one-to-many approach is seeking to
find an identity amongst a database rather
than verify a claimed identity. Contrast with
‘verification’.
Impostor: A person who applies for and obtains a document by assuming a false name
and identity, or a person who alters his physical appearance to pass as another person
for the purpose of using that person’s document or a person who unintentionally passes
as someone else. See also ‘zero effort impostor attempt’.

Integrated Two-Step Process: One of the
possible topologies of ABC systems. In an ABC
system designed as an integrated two-step
process the traveller initiates the verification
of the document and of the traveller’s eligibility to use the system at the first stage, and
then if successful moves to a second stage
where a biometric comparison and other applicable checks are carried out. This topology
is invariably implemented by using a mantrap
e-Gate. See also ‘One Step Process’ and ‘Segregated Two-Step Process’.
Interoperability: The ability of several independent systems or subsystem components
to work together.
MRTD: Machine Readable Travel Document
(e.g. passport, visa). Official document, conforming with the specifications contained in
Doc 9303, issued by a State or organisation
which is used by the holder for international
travel (e.g. passport, visa) and which contains
mandatory visual (eye-readable) data and a
separate mandatory data summary in a format which is capable of being read by machine. See also ‘e-MRTD’.
Machine Readable Zone (MRZ): The area on
a passport containing two lines of data (three
lines on a national ID card) that are printed
using a standard format and font. See also
‘Visual Inspection Zone (VIZ)’.
Member State: A country which is a member
of the European Union. Within the context
of the present Best Practice Guidelines, the
term also applies to those countries that, not
being EU members, take part in the Schengen area. See also ‘Schengen area’.
Monte Carlo Method: The Monte Carlo
method for autocorrection is an automatic
correction method in which the corrected
data value is randomly chosen on the basis
of a previously supplied probability distribution for this data item. The method employs

computer algorithms for generating pseudorandom variables with the given probability
distribution.
Multibiometrics: Refers to the combination
of information from two or more biometric
measurements. It is also known as ‘Fusion’
and ‘Multimodal biometrics’.
One-Step Process: One of the possible topologies of ABC systems. An ABC system designed as a one-step process combines the
verification of the traveller and the traveller’s secure passage through the border. This
design allows the traveller to complete the
whole transaction in one single process without the need to move to another stage. It
usually takes the form of a mantrap e-Gate.
See also ‘Integrated Two-Step Process’ and ‘Segregated Two-Step Process’.
Operator: The border guard officer responsible for the remote monitoring and control
of the ABC system. The tasks performed by
the operator typically include: a) monitor
the user interface of the application; b) react
to any notification given by the application;
c) manage exceptions and make decisions
about them; d) communicate with the assisting personnel for the handling of exceptions at the e-Gates; e) monitor and profile
travellers queuing in the ABC line and using
the e-Gates looking for suspicious behaviour in travellers; and f) communicate with
the border guards responsible for second line
checks whenever their service is needed. See
also ‘Assisting Personnel’.
Passive Authentication (PA): Verification
mechanism used to check if the data on the
RF chip of an e-MRTD is authentic and unforged by tracing it back to the Country Signer
Certificate Authority (CSCA) certificate of the
issuing country. See also ‘Active Authentication’.
Persons enjoying the Community right of
free movement: According to Article 2(5)

13 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

of the Schengen Borders Code these are: a)
Union citizens within the meaning of Article
20(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the
European Union and third country nationals who are members of the family of a Union citizen exercising his or her right to free
movement to whom Directive 2004/38/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the right of citizens of
the Union and their family members to move
and reside freely within the territory of the
Member States; and b) third country nationals and their family members, whatever their
nationality, who, under agreements between
the Community and its Member States, on
the one hand and those third countries, on
the other hand, enjoy rights of free movement equivalent to those of Union citizens.
See also ‘Freedom of movement (Right to)’.
Port Operator: Also known as ‘Port Authority’. The public institution and/or private company which operates the port facility, either
at air or sea borders.
Public Key Directory (PKD): A broker service that publishes certificates and revocation lists for download.
Registered Traveller Programme (RTP): A
scheme aiming to facilitate border crossing
for frequent, pre-vetted and pre-screened
travellers, often making use of ABC systems.
Registered Traveller: See ‘Registered Traveller Programme’.
Schengen Area: An area without internal
border control encompassing 26 European
countries, including all EU Member States
except Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Ireland, Romania and the United Kingdom, as well as
four non-EU countries, namely Iceland, Lichtenstein, Norway and Switzerland. It takes
its name from the Schengen Agreement
signed in Schengen, Luxembourg, in 1985;
this agreement was later incorporated into

14 of 68

the EU legal framework by the 1997 Treaty
of Amsterdam.
Second-Line Check: A further check which
may be carried out in a special location away
from the location at which all travellers are
checked (first line).
Segregated Two-Step Process: One of the
possible topologies of ABC systems. In an ABC
system designed as a Segregated Two-Step
Process the process of traveller verification
and of passage through the border control
are completely separate. The traveller verifies at the first stage, a tactical biometric is
captured or a token is issued, and then the
traveller proceeds to the second stage where
the tactical biometric or token is checked
to allow exit. It typically takes the form of
a ­kiosk for verification of the document and
the holder, while border passage occurs at an
e‑Gate. See also ‘One-Step Process’.
Service Level Agreement (SLA): A part of a
service contract where the level of service
is formally defined. SLAs record a common
understanding about services, priorities, responsibilities, guarantees and warranties of
the services provided.
Spoofing: A tactic to exploit a biometric vulnerability caused by the manufacture of a
disguise, prosthetic or other obscuration designed to either avoid detection or to be incorrectly identified as another person.
Third Country National: Any person who is
not an EU citizen within the meaning of Article 20(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union and who is not a person enjoying the Community right to freedom of movement, as defined in Article 2(5)
of the Schengen Borders Code. See also ‘EU
citizen’ and ‘Persons enjoying the Community
right of free movement’.

Topology: The way in which the constituent parts of a system are interrelated and/
or arranged.

Vulnerability: A weakness in the ABC system that might be exploited to bypass some
aspect of the system integrity.

Verification process: The process of comparing a submitted biometric sample against
the biometric reference template of a single
enrolee whose identity is being claimed, to
determine whether it matches the enrolee’s
template. Contrast with ‘Identification’.

Watch List: A list of individuals, groups or
items that require close surveillance. See also
‘Database’ and ‘Database Hit’.

Visual Inspection Zone (VIZ): Those portions
of the MRTD (data page in the case of an ePassport) designed for visual inspection, i.e.
front and back (where applicable), not defined as the MRZ. See also ‘Machine Readable Zone (MRZ)’.

Zero Effort Impostor Attempt: An impostor attempt is classed as ‘zero-effort’ if an
individual submits his or her own biometric
characteristics as if he or she were attempting successful verification against someone
else’s template. See also ‘Impostor’.

15 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Executive summary
The present document constitutes a compendium of best practice guidelines on the
design, deployment and operation of automated border control systems, with a focus
on their operational dimension.
These Best Practice Guidelines (BPGs) have
been drafted by the Frontex Working Group
(WG) on ABC in an effort to promote harmonisation of practice, similar traveller experience and minimum required security levels at
the different BCPs where ABC systems have
been deployed. The intended audiences are
decision-makers, project managers and practitioners involved in the design, implementation and operation of ABC systems in the EU
Member States (MSs). While these ABC Best
Practice Operational Guidelines (BPOGs) have
been conceived as a stand-alone resource,
ideally they should be read in combination
with the Frontex ‘Best Practice Technical
Guidelines for ABC Systems (BPTGs)’. Additional documents such as Guidelines for Processing third country nationals through ABC
and ABC Challenge Catalogue (forthcoming)
should serve as the complementary documents to these BPGs.
The document focuses on ABC systems based
on the use of an electronic travel document
(generally an ICAO-compliant e-Passport)
which can be used by EU citizens without the
need of pre-enrolment. Registered Traveller
Programmes (RTPs) are outside its scope4 .
The biometric markers covered include both
facial recognition and fingerprints.

4

16 of 68

For a more detailed information as regards
processing third country nationals through ABC,
please refer to Frontex Guidelines for Processing
third country nationals through ABC.

The BPOGs are structured in two main areas. The first proposes guidelines and recommendations on the operational dimension
of ABC, such as its operational and functional
requirements, the implementation process,
the system possible topologies and its integration in the host environment, the roles
and tasks of personnel, the handling of exceptions and business continuity. The second addresses issues related to the traveller
experience, including methods for awareness-raising among travellers, to deliver usage instructions and to achieve a high-quality
and user-friendly service.
The Schengen Borders Code (SBC), the EU
Visa Code and national legislation set the
framework for the various measures which
are implemented at the BCPs of the Schengen Area. Yet the detailed operational model
followed at each BCP is designed to target
the specific situational requirements, which
often leads to differences among the various
implementations.
Border checks are the checks conducted
at BCPs to ensure that a person, including
their means of transport and the objects in
their possession, may be authorised to enter the territory of the MSs or authorised
to leave it. In the traditional, manual border control process, such checks are carried
out by border guards. In contrast, when an
ABC system is in use, some of the steps in
the process are automated whereas others
are carried out by the traveller as self-service. The overall traveller processing time of
an e-Gate should be comparable to or faster
than that of a manual line. However, in general the outcome (i.e. acceptance/rejection)
should be the same, irrespective of whether
checks are automated or manual. Further-

more, in order to achieve basic operational
harmonisation across EU implementations,
some general operational requirements
must be observed by any ABC implementation, for example in relation to the monitoring process and the handling of exceptions.
There are also some basic functional requirements which should be respected. ABC
systems must be able to confirm whether a
travel document is genuine by examining its
optical and electronic security features, and to
verify the identity of the traveller by comparing the biometric data stored in the e-Passport chip with a biometric sample captured
live from the traveller. In addition, the biographic data of the traveller may be checked
against available databases.
The implementation of an ABC system is
a complex process involving the mobilisation of significant economic resources and
requiring the cooperation of a number of
stakeholders. A phased decision-making approach can help the responsible authorities
stay away from previously known risks and
avoid costly mistakes.
The development of a sound Business Case,
which clearly identifies the key objectives
of the implementation, should be the starting point for any ABC deployment. An honest Cost Benefit Analysis (CBA) is the most
critical part of the business planning process.
If properly executed, the CBA should provide
a valuable insight into the cost and benefits
associated with the deployment and operation of the ABC system in comparison with
the baseline scenario, i.e. manual checks. It
is advisable to follow a proven methodology
that provides a structured, understandable,
efficient, repeatable and low-risk approach. To
foster harmonisation, Frontex has developed a
complete framework comprising the tools and
data for the modelling, simulation and CBA
of ABC systems and may be contacted before embarking on the CBA of an ABC system.

The procurement process can also play a
critical role in the delivery of the ABC implementation strategic objectives. Different possibilities exist regarding what to tender: (1) to
tender the product so that it will be the property of the tendering body, (2) to tender the
product as a service. The latter means that the
tendering body will not add property to their
inventories but will enter into a service management contract with the supplier based on
a Service Level Agreement (SLA), which has
the advantage of accruing greater flexibility.
In order to fulfil the needs of the primary
user, the authorities should define a set of
requirements that create or reshape a product or components which can be acquired
from the market. The tender terms of reference should also formulate knock-out criteria
specifying technical and functional requirements with which the supplier has to comply
in order not to be excluded from the tendering process. All offers need to be ranked on
the basis of the tender criteria according to
the offered prices, with a lower limit in place
to avoid ‘dumping’ practices.
Any large-scale installation should be preceded by a pilot to identify key issues and
reduce the risks of the final deployment. A
research or benchmarking phase can help the
authorities decide upon the system(s) which
should be implemented in the pilot stage. This
would involve testing and comparing a number of systems and designs available in the
market across several dimensions, the most
important of which are the system’s overall
stability, security and service management.
A pilot would then enable MSs to further
evaluate the design and performance of the
chosen system, including its Man Machine
Interface, and to make changes before committing to a large-scale deployment.
Besides the border management authority,
other key actors who need to be effectively
engaged in the implementation process are

17 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

the port operator, the relevant carriers and
the supplier of the ABC technology. The port
operator, in particular, can critically impact
on the levels of usage of the e-Gates by influencing the location of the ABC system and
facilitating awareness raising among travellers. Port operators may also contribute to
the installation of an ABC system by providing financial support as long as they also accrue benefits from the system.
Suppliers, on the other hand, are responsible for ensuring support to the operation of
the system. SLAs should be clearly defined,
including response times and penalties where
applicable, in order to guarantee that cooperation with the suppliers is maintained at
satisfactory levels.
In general there are three topologies of ABC
systems in use. ‘One-step process’ topologies
enable the traveller to complete the whole
transaction, including the document and the
biometric verification, in one single process
without the need to move to another stage.
A variation from this is the ‘integrated twostep process’ topology, in which the traveller
will initiate the verification of the document
and the eligibility to use the system at the
first stage and then, if successful, move to a
second stage where a biometric comparison
and other applicable checks are carried out.
Finally, in the ‘segregated two-step process
topology’ the verification processes and the
crossing of the actual border take place at
separate locations.
As regards the physical infrastructure for
the ABC system, synergies can be achieved by
placing the manual and the automated lines
(EU/EEA/CH) next to each other. The monitoring and control station for the e-Gates
may be built in a way so as to allow manual
first line checks in the case of an ABC system
being out of service due to system crash, repair or maintenance. Having a fall-back solution in place for the event of a system failure

18 of 68

is particularly relevant in the early stages of
an installation or if the design is untested.
There is an inherent trade-off between service excellence and cost‑effectiveness that
needs to be carefully balanced. For any given
amount of traveller flow, more e-Gates will
reduce queuing time but at the same time will
use more resources (financial, material and
human). A recommended way to determine
the optimum number of e-Gates for a new
installation or to decide on the upgrading of
an existing one is by means of operational research. In particular, queuing analysis would
show the relationship between the three key
variables: flow rate, service quality and lifecycle cost.
‘Cold lines’ (i.e. stand-alone unsupervised eGates) must not occur, as they would not
guarantee acceptable levels of facilitation and
security. Border guards may be assigned two
main roles in the operation of an ABC system: operator and/or assisting personnel. The
operator is responsible for the remote monitoring and control of the ABC system and its
users. A single border guard can typically supervise from three to 10 e-Gates, although
the average number in MSs with operational
ABC systems currently sits at five. Assisting
personnel (not to be confused with customer
service staff) work closely with the operator,
handling exceptions that take place at the eGates, redirecting travellers as needed and
assisting them on specific situations.
Acceptance of the ABC system by border
guards is crucial for its successful operation.
Pro-active change management to engage
staff and address their concerns has proven
successful in reducing resistance to the introduction of the ABC implementation. In
addition, initial and follow-up training will
be required so that officers can operate the
system successfully and contribute to its enhancements. A select number of officers may

be trained as expert users to act as a first
line of defence when technical issues occur.
Border guards need detailed instructions on
how to deal with specific exceptional situations, including system malfunctioning,
non-cooperative behaviour at the e-Gate,
anomalies in e-Passport chips, etc. These
could be usefully specified in a modus operandi handbook (e.g. ABC Handbook for Border Guards).
Quality assurance is a process by which the
quality of all factors involved in the operation and exploitation of the ABC system are
measured. The retrieval from the system of
a certain amount of anonymous operational
data is required for the purposes of quality
control and for the extraction of business statistics. ABC systems are subject to the same
privacy and data protection requirements
and legislation as applicable to any other
system entailing the processing of personal
data. The storage without proper justification of personal data identifying the traveller should be avoided.
Only if a significant number of travellers use
the system will the investment made be justified. Thus, achieving a satisfactory traveller
experience is key for the success of an implementation. While ABC systems currently
provide a similar service to travellers, there
are a number of differences between implementations, not only in appearance, but also
in functionality and usage. This lack of universality, together with the relative novelty of
such systems, makes the task of harmonising
the expectations and usability a difficult one.

to getting more travellers to leave the queue
for the manual control. Travellers should be
helped to understand the benefits that the
system brings to users, informed that they
are eligible if this is the case and instructed
on how to use the e-Gate. Information can
be delivered through a variety of methods,
including signs and logos, videos, leaflets and
human assistance.
Signs, in particular, are very important as
they often represent the first contact that
the traveller has with the system. One of
the key challenges lies in developing a set of
signs and standard terminology across different national implementations that can
be understood by the majority of the travellers. In the absence of a common name, the
term ‘Self‑Service Passport Control’ may
be used in order to denote the existence of
an ABC system.
Providing clear instructions at the e-Gate is
essential in order to run a user-friendly service. If possible, this should be combined with
the provision of human assistance at the eGates through customer service personnel.
This would generally consist of staff of the
port operator which is tasked with providing guidance and advice to travellers in using
the ABC system. Customer service personnel can also help manage the traveller flow
by balancing it among the different e-Gates.
Ultimately, the ability of travellers to use the
system easily and effectively will have a critical impact on its levels of usage and on the
volume of rejections yielded. An implementation which is attractive and user friendly
is thus crucial.

Making the traveller aware that an ABC system is available at a particular port is critical

19 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Terminology
Although the recommendations and guidelines presented in this document are nonbinding for Member States, the present
terminology has been adopted5 in order to
provide an unambiguous description of what
should be observed in order to achieve a coherent approach with a common security
baseline across the European Union’s external borders.

SHOULD NOT This phrase, or the phrase
‘NOT RECOMMENDED’ mean that there
may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances when the particular behaviour is acceptable or even useful, but the
full implications should be understood
and the case carefully weighed before
implementing any behaviour described
with this label.

SHALL This word, or the terms ‘REQUIRED’
or ‘MUST’, mean that the definition is an
absolute requirement.

MAY This word, or the adjective ‘OPTIONAL’,
mean that an item or feature is truly optional. A vendor may choose to include the
option because a particular marketplace
requires it or because the vendor feels that
it enhances the product while another
vendor may omit the same item or feature. An implementation which does not
include a particular option MUST be prepared to interoperate with another implementation which does include the option,
though perhaps with reduced functionality. In the same sense an implementation
which does include a particular option
MUST be prepared to interoperate with
another implementation which does not
include the option.

SHALL NOT This phrase, or the phrase
‘MUST NOT’, mean that the definition is
an absolute prohibition.
SHOULD This word, or the adjective ‘RECOMMENDED’, mean that there may exist
valid reasons in particular circumstances
to ignore a particular aspect, but the full
implications must be understood and
carefully weighed before choosing a different course.

5

20 of 68

See Bradner, Scott. Key words for use in RFCs to
indicate requirement levels, RFC 2119, 1997.

1. Introduction
1.1. Purpose and audience
The present report constitutes an update of
the ‘Best Practice Operational Guidelines for
Automated Border Control’ [last reviewed
on 31.8.2012] and presents a compendium of
best practice guidelines on the design, deployment and operation of automated border control (ABC) systems. These have been
elaborated in an effort to achieve harmonisation of practice, similar traveller experience,
and minimum required security levels at the
different border crossing points (BCPs) of the
European Union/Schengen Area where ABC
systems have been or are to be deployed.
The intended audiences are decision-makers,
project managers and practitioners involved
in the design, implementation and operation
of ABC systems in the EU Member States
(MSs). Decision-makers both at the EU and
national level will benefit from a better understanding of ABC systems, what they are,
how they work and more importantly how
these help to manage the unavoidable security, facilitation and cost trade-offs in border
checks, thus allowing for better-informed decisions when it comes to allocating scarce
human and financial resources.
The project managers from border management authorities will find detailed information in order to define its requirements and
procure and implement a system that performs up to standards while staying away
from previously known risks. Finally, current and prospective practitioners, i.e. border guards and port operator personnel, will
benefit from a wealth of practical information on what to do, and also what to avoid,
in order to run an ABC system in an effective, efficient and user-friendly way.

It should be borne in mind that this report
and the best practices identified do not create or alter any of the MSs’ obligations as set
out in the relevant legislation, in particular,
the Schengen Borders Code (SBC), nor do they
constitute an amendment to the Schengen
Catalogue and Handbook. Their purpose is
mainly descriptive and analytical: they aim
to provide additional reference material to
decision-makers and practitioners working
in the area of ABC.

1.2. Scope and methodology
The scope of the present document is aligned
with the European Commission (EC) and
the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) recommendations, as available
at the time of writing, on the use of e-Passports for automated border control without enrolment6.
Travel documents considered
ABC systems can be divided into two types:
(a) systems without enrolment based on the
use of an electronic travel document and (b)
systems based on pre-enrolment which generally take the form of Registered Traveller
Programmes (RTPs). The EC encourages MSs
to deploy ABC systems without pre-enrolment for EU citizens carrying ICAO compliant­

6

See in particular EC, ‘Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament, the
Council, the European Economic and Social
Committee and the Committee of the Regions:
Preparing the next steps in border management
in the European Union’, COM(2008) 69 final,
13.2.2008; ICAO, ‘Guidelines for electronic
– Machine Readable Travel Documents &
Passenger Facilitation’, Version – 1.0, 17.4.2008.

21 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

e-Passports. This document focuses on ABC
systems based on first- and second-generation e-Passports and also national e-ID cards7.
There are no specific provisions in this document for combined or stand-alone use of
ABC systems serving RTPs.
Biometric markers used
ABC systems currently in use support either
facial or fingerprint recognition as the main
biometric authentication method, with an
exception for a few RTP systems supporting
iris recognition. However, there is a large base
of second-generation e-Passports carrying
both facial and fingerprint data and there are
some MSs which have gained relevant experience in the use of fingerprints for identity
verification in ABC systems8.
Methodology
This report has been drafted by Frontex in
cooperation with a Working Group (WG)
on ABC composed of the following Member

7

8

22 of 68

ICAO (‘Doc 9303 Machine Readable Travel
Documents’, Third Edition 2008]) defines
e-Passport as ‘a machine readable passport
(MRP) containing a Contactless Integrated
Circuit (IC) chip within which is stored data from
the MRP data page, a biometric measure of the
passport holder, and a security object to protect
the data with PKI [Public Key Infrastructure]
cryptographic technology, and which conforms
to the specifications of Doc 9303, Part 1.’ Firstgeneration e-Passports contain the facial image
of the holder; second-generation (obligatory
in the EU since June 2009) contain two
fingerprints in addition to the facial image.
Fingerprint recognition is already implemented
in several MSs’ ABC systems. Additionally, the
EC is also considering face, fingerprints and iris
as the basis for an eventual EU RTP for third
country nationals (TCNs). Thus, fingerprint
recognition is covered in the present version of
this document. For further details please refer
to: PwC, ‘Technical Study on Smart Borders;
Final Report’, October 2014.

States: Finland, France, Germany, the Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, the UK (as of 2010)
and Bulgaria, Czech Republic, and Ireland (as
of 2013). In addition, Hong Kong joined the
WG in 2013. The WG was created to provide
a platform for discussions on ABC-related
topics among the MSs and other stakeholders so as to fill the knowledge gap and to derive best practices and guidelines in this area.
This document is based on the first release
of ‘Best Practice Guidelines on the Design, Deployment and Operation of Automated Border
Control Systems’, published in March 2011, and
the follow-up release of ‘Best Practice Operational Guidelines for Automated Border Control
Systems’ (BPOGs), published in August 2012.
The document is an attempt to gather and
disseminate knowledge on state-of-the-art
technologies and best current practices regarding ABC systems.
The methodology used by the Working Group
(WG) to develop the initial BPGs was based
on the following tasks:
nnstate the problem and goals,
nnelaborate the list of relevant topics to be
covered,
nncarry out research on current practice
based on questionnaires, interviews and
technical meetings,
nnanalyse results and extract individual best
practices,
nndebate and agree on proposed best
practices,
nnbuild the document,
nnconduct an internal and external review
of the document,
nnapprove these guidelines.
The WG decided to revise the 2012 release of
the BPOGs to reflect new developments, including those regarding policy direction and
the applicable legislative framework, and
changes in MSs’ practice. The main changes
are summarised in the Table of Changes included in the beginning of this document.

During the revision process, information has
been collected through regular expert discussions at the WG meetings, questionnaires9,
and field visits to MSs with ABC systems in
operation as well as by gathering feedback
from external stakeholders. The document
has undergone extensive internal and external revision and the main modifications introduced have been debated and agreed during
the expert WG meetings and teleconferences.
While there are limitations to the reliability of
expert judgement in classifying certain practices as ‘best’10, it is understood that the BPGs
outlined in this document are only recommendations which are useful and effective
– they have proved their relevance to meet
the needs and achieve the goals of the border management authority; they are potentially transferrable and adaptable.

1.3. About best practices and
guidelines
The identification of best practices for automated border controls should be put into the
context of conceptual and methodological
issues pertaining to best practice research.
While there is not a generally agreed understanding of what ‘best practices’ are, the
Schengen Catalogue, which is used as a reference tool for Schengen evaluations, defines
the term as ‘a non-exhaustive set of working methods or model measures which must
be considered as the optimal application of
the Schengen acquis, on the understanding
that more than one best practice is possible
for each specific part of Schengen coopera-

9

Operational and Technical Challenges of ABC
systems (August 2013); ABC summary table
(quarterly updates).
10 As described in Bretschneider, S. et al., ‘’Best
Practices’ Research: A Methodological Guide for
the Perplexed’, Journal of Public Administration
Research and Theory, Vol. 15, No 2, 2005,
pp. 307-323.

tion’11. For the sake of consistency, this is the
definition followed in the present document.
The mechanisms and limitations of best practice research (i.e. of the various methods and
approaches in use to identify best practices)
have been examined rather extensively in the
public policy and management literature12.
Yet, despite existing methodological shortcomings, the identification and sharing of
best practices present important added value
from a practical and policy-oriented point of
view. Crucially, best practice research enables organisations to learn from others in the
same domain and re-use their experiences.
Even the investigation of a simple exemplar
case may be useful to practitioners if it allows them to get ideas and to solve similar
problems they face13 . In sum, best practice
research is a way to generate useful knowledge and to promote the accumulation of
experience in a given field.
A guideline, on the other hand, is any document that aims to streamline particular
processes according to a set routine. By definition, following a guideline is never mandatory (protocol would be a better term for
a mandatory procedure). Guidelines may be
issued and used by any organisation (govern-

11

Council of the EU, EU Schengen Catalogue:
External borders control, Return and
readmission- Recommendations and best
practices, Council document No 7864/09, 19
March 2009, p. 6.
12 For an overview, see Veselý, A., ‘Theory and
Methodology of Best Practice Research: A
Critical Review of the Current State’, Central
European Journal of Public Policy, Vol. 5, No 2,
December 2011, pp. 98–117.
13 Ongaro, E., A protocol for the extrapolation of
‘Best’ Practices: How to draw lessons from one
experience to improve public management in
another situation, 2009, available at: http://
epsa2009.eu/files/Symposium/An %20approach %20
to %20the %20extrapolation %20of %20practices_
EOngaro.pdf last accessed on 2 June 2015.

23 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

mental or private) to make the actions of its
employees or divisions more predictable, and
presumably of higher quality.
Too often it is not easy to draw the line between Best Practices and Guidelines, and
many times they are used together. Thus
the term Best Practice Guidelines has been
widely adopted in public and private organisations to reflect that knowledge, typically
based on experience, which can be shared in
order to achieve improved results towards
specific objectives. Along the present document, the term Best Practice Guidelines
(BPGs) will be used.

1.4. How to read this document
While these ABC Best Practice Operational
Guidelines have been conceived as a standalone resource, ideally they should be read in
combination with the Frontex ‘Best Practice
Technical Guidelines for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems’ (also known as ‘BPTGs’).
The present document is structured in two
main areas, (1) operational considerations for
ABC and (2) traveller experience.

24 of 68

The operational area proposes best practice
guidelines and recommendations on:
nnoperational and functional requirements
of an ABC system,
nnimplementation of an ABC system including the decision-making process, procurement, and cost benefit analysis,
nnthe deployment of an ABC system with
particular emphasis on different topologies
and integration in the host environment,
nnpersonnel management, i.e. the roles and
tasks of border guards,
nnhow to handle the most common
exceptions.
The traveller experience area proposes best
practice guidelines and recommendations on:
nnhow to create awareness among travellers about an ABC system and educate
them on its proper use,
nnhow to run a high-quality and user-friendly
service, and help achieve a satisfactory
travel experience.
The document includes a glossary clarifying
the terminology used and a list of acronyms.
In addition, it is complemented with a series
of annexes listing additional reference material and providing an overview of the ABC
systems which, at the time of writing, are
operational or planned in the MSs.

2.	General overview of
ABC systems
2.1. Concept
ABC is defined as an automated system which
authenticates the electronic machine readable travel document or token, establishes
that the passenger is the rightful holder of
the document or token, queries border control records, then determines eligibility of
border crossing according to the pre-defined rules. Currently, the ABC systems based
on the use of an electronic travel document
which have been deployed in the MSs rely
on facial recognition as the basis for biometric verification, with the exception of France
and Hungary, which rely on fingerprints as a
primary biometric modality, as well as Spain,
Estonia and Bulgaria, which have introduced
the fingerprints alongside facial recognition.
The automated border check process starts
with e-Passport scanning. The traveller inserts the biographical data page of the passport into the passport reader. The reader
checks optical security features, extracts the
characters in the Machine Readable Zone
(MRZ) and communicates with the chip in
the e-Passport to verify the authenticity of
the document. A live captured facial image
of the traveller is then compared with the
one stored on the chip. In some implementations fingerprints are used as the additional
biometric identifier 14 . This process is fundamentally the same as in the manual border
control booth. Human oversight is provided
by a border guard in a monitoring and control

14 For additional details on the processes of
fingerprint capture and verification please refer
to the ABC BPTG.

station, who supervises the whole process.
In addition to the document authentication
and identity verification processes, this may
include other checks (such as database queries) to verify the eligibility for border crossing. If the process is successful the e-Gate
allows the traveller to cross the border. If
the process fails, the traveller is referred to
manual control.
The use of e-MRTDs (in most cases e-Passports) as the storage medium for travellers’
personal data means that no additional biometric registration of travellers is necessary.
As such, ABC systems are dependent on the
quality and accuracy of data stored in the
travel document.

2.2. Main functions and features
In short, an ABC system performs the following tasks (the same ones as in the manual border control) with a high degree of
automation:
nnCheck that the traveller trying to cross
the border is carrying a genuine and valid
travel document. This is more formally referred to as the ‘Document authentication process’.
nnVerify biometrically that this travel document belongs to the traveller trying to
cross the border. This is more formally
referred to as the ‘identity verification
process’15 .

15 For further details on the Identity Verification
Process, please refer to the ABC BPTGs.

25 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

nnCheck that the traveller is eligible for the
system and entitled/authorised to cross
the border.
nnAllow/deny passage according to a predefined logic, sometimes requiring the
intervention of the border guard operating the system.
nnGuarantee the security in the overall process, meaning that only a traveller who has
been cleared is allowed to cross the border (i.e. no tailgating), and that travellers
who have been rejected are properly handled (e.g. refused in order to be redirected
to the manual control). This is typically
achieved by the usage of single or double
automatic barriers (e-Gates) and tailgating detection/prevention mechanisms.
For the purpose of this document, these are
the basic functions that any ABC system must
perform. Other complementary or more advanced functions are also possible (e.g. automated profiling, registration of Entry/Exit),
but are out of the scope of this document.
However, in view of the Smart Borders proposal, processing of third country nationals
(TCNs) may be facilitated with the use of ABC
systems, thus additional features may be integrated into the ABC16.
In general, an ABC system involves the use of:
nnphysical barriers (single-door or doubledoor e-Gates),
nnfull-page e-Passport readers: optical recognition of the biographic data page, the
MRZ and a radio frequency (RF) reader for
communication with the chip,
nnmonitor displaying instructions,
nnbiometric capture device,
nnsystem management hardware
and software.

16 For detailed information on the processing of
TCNs with the use of ABC systems please refer
to Guidelines for ‘Automated Border Control Processing of third country nationals’, Frontex, 2015.

26 of 68

The systems may benefit from including
uniqueness and liveness detection, i.e. technologies which ensure that only one person
enters the e-Gate at a time and that the biometric feature is captured from a ‘live’ person.

2.3. Advantages of automation
The primary objective of ABC systems MUST
be to reconcile traveller facilitation and security. In other words, traveller facilitation is
the main objective to maximise, and security a boundary condition that has to be met.
The principal audience of ABC systems are
EU, EEA and Swiss citizens (EU/EEA/CH) who
according to the Schengen Borders Code are
subject to a ‘minimum check’17, with the exception of certain MSs who launched RTPs
and/or have the ABC system open for certain
TCNs. Accordingly, the ‘thorough check’ carried out on TCNs may set more requirements
on the ABC systems as regards the process
(e.g. stamping and visa checking), but the primary objective remains the same.
Cost-effectiveness is also an important dimension to be observed. Properly set ABC
systems allow for an increased rate of traveller checks in a given time at first‑line control without necessarily having to increase
the number of border guards. Moreover, it
can be expected that costs will go down
when ABC lines become more widespread,
while well-trained and motivated operators
can further contribute to the effectiveness
of the systems.
For every task in the border check process
that is modified by the introduction of the

17 Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006
establishing a Community Code on the rules
governing the movement of persons across
borders (Schengen Borders Code).

ABC system, it is important to carry out a risk
assessment in order to understand how the
automation has impacted on existing risks or
created new ones, and thus react accordingly.

ABC systems can be equally effective at air,
land and sea BCPs. However, their use at land
and sea BCPs has to be further explored because of the limited practice among MSs.

27 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

3.	Operational considerations
for automated border
control
3.1. Overview of the Border
Checks Process
The Schengen Borders Code, the EU Visa
Code18 and national legislation set the framework for the various measures which are implemented at the BCPs of the Schengen Area.
The detailed operational model followed at
each BCP is carefully designed according to
the specific situational requirements, the border check code of practice, the cooperation
schemes in place with neighbouring countries and risk analysis, among other factors.
Thus, differences are often found from one
implementation to another.
The notion of ‘border check’ means the checks
carried out at BCPs, to ensure that a person,
including their means of transport and the
objects in their possession, may be authorised to enter the territory of the MSs or authorised to leave it. In ABC some tasks are
automated and others are carried out by
travellers as self-service. As a general principle, there should be no difference in the
outcome (i.e. acceptance/rejection) if border checks are automated or carried out in

18 Regulation (EC) No 810/2009 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 13 July 2009
establishing a Community Code on Visas (Visa
Code).

28 of 68

the ‘traditional’ way. However, it is important to note that automating border check
procedures when it is technically feasible
with equal levels of accuracy and security
allows better use of personnel, e.g. by allocating more resources to check those categories of travellers whose checks cannot be
automated. On the other hand, the border
check process can be split into several subprocesses or tasks. Each sub-process is an individual part of the overall process.

3.2. General process flow
The following flow diagram illustrates a tentative border checks process for EU/EEA/CH
nationals. This is presented here for illustration purposes only, in an attempt to provide
the right context for the requirements and
guidelines hereby proposed. It should not
be considered as an explicitly recommended
practice since the specific needs of each border crossing point may require a different
approach. Moreover, border checks flow for
TCNs is different as it includes some additional steps19.

19 Specific aspects of border checks on third
country nationals with the use of ABC systems
are addressed in the Guidelines for ‘Automated
Border Control (ABC) Processing of Third
Country Nationals (TCNs)’, Frontex, 2015.

Figure 1: Border checks process flow

EU/EEA/CH NATIONALS

IDENTITY VERIFICATION

DATABASE QUERIES (DOC)

PROFILING

ABC MINIMUM CHECK

DOCUMENT AUTHENTICATION

RANDOM DATABASE QUERIES (PAX)

OPERATOR
2. LINE CHECK

The yellow colour indicates the tasks within
the process that can be automated by means
of an ABC system, hence these will be the focus of subsequent discussion.

The following general operational requirements MUST be observed by any ABC system
in order to achieve basic operational harmonisation across EU implementations:
1.	‘Cold lines’ (i.e. stand-alone unsupervised
e-Gates) MUST NOT occur. There SHALL
always be an operator present who monitors the functioning of the e-Gates20. The
operator MUST be trained to use the system and also be capable of reacting to

malfunctions and to non-cooperative behaviour on the part of the traveller.
2.	The operations of an ABC system MUST
comply with EU legislation (i.e. Schengen
Borders Code) and be compatible with
the Practical Handbook for Border Guards
(Schengen Handbook) where applicable
(e.g. systematic database queries shall not
be done on persons enjoying the Community right of free movement except on
their travel documents)21.
3.	Before e‑Gates can be operational there
MUST be an officer ready to operate them.
An ABC system MUST be easy to use by
travellers, requiring as little guidance as
possible. There SHOULD be adequate
instructions for the use of the e-Gates.

20 The Schengen Borders Code (Article 7) explicitly
assigns responsibility for conducting checks at
the external borders to border guards. Thus,
monitoring by an official constitutes a precondition to fulfil legal requirements.

21 European Commission, ‘Recommendation
establishing a common ‘Practical Handbook for
Border Guards (Schengen Handbook)’ to be used
by Member States’ competent authorities when
carrying out the border control of persons,
C(2011) 3918 final, 20.6.2011.

3.3. Operational requirements

29 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

If ABC systems are complicated or unintuitive to use, travellers will be likely to seek
manual lines instead of automated ones.
4.	Tailgating MUST NOT be possible. Regardless of whether lines have a mantrap configuration or not, there SHOULD
be an automated detection of tailgating
to alert the operator.
5.	The physical disposition of the area where
the ABC system has been set up MUST
prevent trespassing. There will be situations when some e-Gates are out of
service or the passenger flow does not
demand the whole line of e-Gates to be
opened. Therefore, a flexible configuration
is recommended to ensure a smooth operation of the e-Gate line. The system MUST
alert the operator to pay attention when
a minor is using an e-Gate. The Schengen
Borders Code commands that particular
attention SHALL be paid to minors crossing an external border, whether travelling
accompanied or unaccompanied22.
6.	Some MSs do not allow minors (i.e. persons under 18) to use e-Gates, but some
MSs have no legal basis to refuse them access to automated lines. If minors are allowed to use the ABC system, the border
guard operating the gates SHALL carry
out a further investigation in order to detect any inconsistencies or contradictions
in the information where there are serious grounds for suspecting that they may
have been unlawfully removed from the
custody of the person(s) legally exercising
parental care over them.
7.	A risk assessment MUST be undertaken to
look at any vulnerabilities in and threats
to the system integrity and apply appropriate mitigations.
8.	If a traveller is unable, for any reason, to
use the ABC, and is redirected to a manual border control booth, due attention
MUST be paid to ensure that the ensu-

22 Schengen Borders Code, Annex VII, paragraph 6.

30 of 68

ing procedures are in full compliance with
fundamental rights.
Additionally to the above requirements, the
following guidelines SHOULD be considered:
1.	The overall traveller throughput of a
bank of e-Gates monitored by one officer SHOULD be comparable to or higher
than that of a manual booth.
2.	As technical failures or breakdowns may
happen, contingency plans and procedures SHOULD be in place to inform the
travellers, airlines/carriers and all relevant
authorities working at the BCP on these
measures.

3.4. Functional requirements
This section outlines the process of how travellers are verified by the ABC system. It is not
intended to go into specific technical details
as these will be dependent on the pre-existing
IT infrastructure and are covered, to a much
greater extent, in the BPTGs. It is thus included
here for context and reference purposes.
The diagram in Figure 2 sets out the typical
process for the verification of travellers using an ABC system. The general principle is
that, if travellers fail any of the checks, then
either they will be rejected by the system and
will see an officer in the traditional manual
process, or the failure will be dealt with by
the operator and/or the assisting personnel.
While in general it is RECOMMENDED that
a process similar to the one outlined here is
adopted, there are a number of its aspects
which are essential. These are indicated in
the sections below.
3.4.1. Checking the document
authenticity/validity
As noted above, the ABC systems discussed
in this document are based on the use of
ICAO-compliant e-MRTDs. The process of
verifying that the document is authentic and

Figure 2: ABC process

Traveller presents
document

MRZ data is extracted

Biographical data
is used to confirm
eligibility

Database checks using
either biometric
or biographic data

Electronic
document check

Optical document
check

Biometrics are
retrieved from
the chip

Biometric data
and live biometrics
are compared

Traveller passes
through the border

valid for use begins with the reading of the
MRZ. Once the MRZ has been read, the eligibility of the traveller is determined. Next
the system can proceed with the subsequent
stages of document authentication. If the
MRZ cannot be read successfully the traveller will be rejected and will need to be processed manually by a border guard.
ABC systems MUST carry out multiple checks
to confirm that the document is valid and
genuine23 , including:
nna verification of the optical security features of the document,
nna verification that the chip in the document belongs to the physical document,
nna verification of the electronic security features of the chip contained in the
document.

The optical document check provides some
valuable assurance that the document is a
genuine one, but it SHOULD NOT be treated
as the sole method of verifying the document. The primary check that MUST be carried out is the electronic document check.
This will confirm that the chip is genuine and
has not been altered, which in turn gives certainty that the biometric data contained on
the chip is authentic.
The databases which support the verification of optical and electronic security features need to be updated on a regular basis
or otherwise significant numbers of travellers
will be rejected as new documents and chips
are released. The procedures for conducting
such updates are outside the scope of the
ABC system but it is essential that a reliable
system is in place.

23 For requirements on the Document Authentication Process, please refer to the BPTG.

31 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

3.4.2. Identity verification
3.4.2.1. Biographical data
Since the alphanumerical data extracted from
the MRZ is needed to perform the basic access
control (BAC) function in order to access the
chip in the e-Passport, it is RECOMMENDED
that the same data is used in other parts of
the process, such as eligibility checks, including database queries, if applicable. It is RECOMMENDED to compare the data in the MRZ
with the data in VIZ.
3.4.2.2. Biometric data
The ABC system MUST retrieve the biometric data from the chip in order to compare it
with the biometrics captured live from the
traveller. If the two sets of biometrics match,
the traveller will be able to proceed. The same
principles apply regardless of the biometrics
concerned.
3.4.2.3. Consultation of databases/
watch lists
The biographical data may be checked against
available databases24 . If there is a potential
match then the traveller SHOULD be directed
to an officer. The exact process will depend
upon the procedures in place within each
border management authority.
3.4.2.4. Recording of entry/exit data

tations particular attention should be given
to the existing legal framework 25 .

3.5. Implementation of ABC
system
3.5.1. Decision-making process
It is RECOMMENDED to have a phased approach regarding the decision-making process for the implementation of an ABC
system. This is particularly important for MSs
which are new to ABC because, although systems are beginning to become standardised
and it might seem that they can be bought
‘off the shelf’, in practice each MS has unique
requirements for the operation of their border control and so any system will need to
be designed to meet specific demands at the
local level. A number of MSs have followed
this model and it has helped to avoid costly
mistakes later on.
While the process may vary from one MS to
another, the following key phases are examined below:
1. ABC Business Case.
2. Cost Benefit Analysis.
3. Risk Assessment and Procurement.
4.	Testing Research and Validation, including a Vulnerability Study.
5. Running a Pilot.
By following this process the authorities
should be in a good position to take a dependable decision on the ABC implementation.

Depending upon the implementation, the
system MAY allow for the recording of a traveller’s Entry/Exit data. For such implemen-

24 Additionally, a check against a biometric watch
list may be performed offline.

32 of 68

25 Some MSs, but not all, already record entry
and exit data at their external borders. In
addition, the EC has announced plans to
launch a EU-wide Entry/Exit System as part
of the Smart Borders Package (see COM(2011)
680 final).

3.5.1.1. ABC business case

3.5.1.2. Cost benefit analysis

Innovative projects are often dependent on subsidies granted by governmental
institutions or provisioned funds by highly involved stakeholders. Before a budget can be
committed to the ABC project, however, it is
RECOMMENDED to develop a robust business case and to perform a sound cost benefits analysis (CBA).

This is the most critical part of the business
planning process. Defining a clear method for
calculating the financial benefits of the system is essential as the business case will rely
heavily on whether the ABC system delivers
efficiencies over the existing manual process.
With this in mind it is RECOMMENDED that
a detailed analysis is carried out of the cost
of operating the manual control as this will
provide a good platform for comparison with
the ABC system.

This section is not intended to go into detail
on how a business case for ABC should be
constructed, as this will be a matter for individual MSs. Yet it is important to emphasise that the development of a business case
SHOULD be the starting point for any ABC
deployment. It is critical to identify what the
problem is to be addressed by the roll‑out
of an ABC system. For example, is an ABC
system being introduced to clear queues,
or increase security? Is it to replace certain
functions of the border guard officers or to
lower the costs of operations? Is it to provide
a visible piece of technology for the travelling
public? A clear focus on business outcomes
will increase the chances that the system will
work effectively and address the key concerns of the border management authority.
ABC deployments have the potential to be
politically driven, and if this is the case then
one will need to be realistic about what the
system can achieve. Political drivers can have
a dramatic impact on any business case and
this could result in a system deployed without clear requirements at locations where
there is no strong benefit. Thus developing a
successful business case can provide a clear
line of argument in order to convince decision-makers and select among available offers from the market.
Once the business case for the system is
clearly defined, it is possible to begin defining
how and where the system should be deployed
(see section 3.6 for details on deployment).

The CBA is intended to support the decisionmaking process, by providing an insight into
the differential cost and benefits that come
from the deployment and operation of the
ABC system against the baseline scenario,
i.e. manual checks. A properly conceived and
executed CBA facilitates the decision-making
process around key questions, like:
nnDoes it pay off to invest in the project?
nnWhat are the costs and benefits for each
stakeholder?
nnWhat are the possible outcomes and their
likelihood?
nnWhat uncertainties and risks are really
relevant in this project?
nnShould we run a pilot first? How much
should we spend on it?
nnWhat is the optimal design and
dimensioning?
nnShould we buy, rent or pay per use?
nnWhat if…?
The first principle of good cost benefit analysis is that it should be honest (e.g. it should
not underestimate costs or outweigh benefits, or be specifically tailored to support an
already made decision). The second principle
is to follow a proven methodology that provides a structured, understandable, efficient,
repeatable and low-risk approach.
To foster harmonisation, Frontex has developed a complete framework comprising the

33 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

tools and data for the modelling, simulation
and cost benefit analysis of ABC systems, and
may be contacted before embarking in the
CBA of an ABC system.
The CBA process SHOULD be structured in
four stages:
1.	defining the requirements and goals that
the CBA will pursue,
2.	developing the models that reproduce the
system and environment,
3. gathering the data,
4.	carrying out a meaningful analysis towards
the decisions under study.
The CBA process is one of dialogue that involves at the very least decision-makers, ABC
technical and operational experts, and a facilitator who can steer the process and translate the discussion and group knowledge into
analytical/modelling/data components. The
CBA team MUST include all these stakeholders. Failing to do so will not only ensure that
relevant information and perspective are lost,
but also that the results will lack the buy-in
from the parties being left out.
The requirements and goals for the CBA
SHOULD be relevant for the decisions under study. Too often the requirements and
goals are unnecessarily detailed, complicating the next stages, making traceability of
results difficult and increasing the risk of incurring mistakes.
The models SHALL be no more complicated
or detailed than strictly needed for the purposes of the requirements and goals defined
in the previous stage. Expert validation is
RECOMMENDED, particularly if the analyst
is not familiar with modelling and simulation techniques.
It is also RECOMMENDED that the modelling
of the ABC system is flexible enough to target the largest possible traveller cohort. By
being able to accommodate ID cards holders,

34 of 68

partnership arrangements with other countries, minors, visa holders, residents and multiple biometrics the system will be able to
respond to changes in business (and potentially legal) requirements and provide greater
value for money over the long term. As noted
above, flexibility should be embedded into
the system so that it is able to accommodate changes.
Using good data is extremely important.
Field data SHALL be used whenever possible. In the absence of field data, tentative
data from other installations MAY be used.
When neither one nor the other is available,
or deemed to be not applicable, standard industry benchmarking figures MAY be used.
Figures obtained through industry or product
catalogues SHOULD be treated with caution.
The analysis stage SHOULD take into consideration the reliability of data and assumptions
made. It is RECOMMENDED that a sensitivity analysis is made (using tornado charts)
and relevant ‘what if’ scenarios are analysed.
The result of the analysis might uncover aspects that were left out in the definition
of the problem, factors that need remodelling or data whose uncertainty needs to
be narrowed down. In these cases, the process SHOULD be iterated taking into account the new requirements, knowledge and
considerations.
Headline cost of the system has a big impact
on the eventual benefits, so a system which
has been designed to deliver an agreed outcome will allow cost reduction and innovation. It is therefore RECOMMENDED that
the cost/benefit model makes some assumptions on the expected cost, but that
the requirements are not so tightly defined
so as to result in an increase in cost or that
opportunities to reduce cost are missed.
A good example of this is the debate over
mantrap vs single physical barrier design,
where the same outcome was achieved by

introducing a range of sensors, reducing
space and cost.
3.5.1.3. Risk assessment
It is RECOMMENDED that detailed work on
assessing the risks associated with ABC is
carried out as part of the planning process.
As the technology is relatively new to the
majority of border management personnel
it is important to capture the attitude to risk
and also be open about the potential areas
of uncertainty.
It is RECOMMENDED to launch a process of
change management in order to support the
border management authority personnel in
learning to work with the system26.
Border management authorities have to calibrate technical and operational requirements
for the ABC system, e.g. concerning the percentage of biometric match, thresholds and
secure data traffic (see the ABC BPTGs for additional details). As regards software risk in
terms of malicious software and back-doors,
a timely review of the source code with the
supplier in RECOMMENDED.

26 The introduction of new technology may create
uncertainty and lead to feelings of insecurity
among the border guard officers. In this
context, the expression ‘change management’
refers to the strategies adopted by the border
management authority to deal with such
uncertainty in a constructive way and promote
the development among the staff of new
attitudes and behaviour that are instrumental
to the introduction of the new processes
required for the operation of the ABC system.
For example, in relation to the installation of the
Dutch system, the Netherlands embarked on a
pro-active change management process which
focused on fostering open communication
through look and feel sessions and encouraged
operational feedback by border guard officers.

3.5.1.4. Procurement
Determining the manner of acquiring the
product
It is RECOMMENDED to set requirements
in order to create or reshape a product or
components which can be acquired from the
market. This can be accomplished by doing
research on what the market has to offer,
implementing pilots and determining how
components need to be adjusted to specific
demands. Moreover, one of the challenges in
acquiring a product is to come up with a set
of requirements that can fulfil the acceptance criteria as defined by the primary user.
In tendering a product there are different
choices to be made when it comes to acceptance criteria and to the decision-making process. Governments could tender the
product as a whole and make the supplier
responsible for an optimised decision-making process on the basis of government demands, or instead could tender the product
as a whole and make the supplier responsible
for an optimised technical process interacting with self-made decision-making intelligence. One reason for opting for the creation
of government decision-making intelligence
is that this would allow full control over the
actual business rules without having to consult the supplier to make functional changes.
It is RECOMMENDED to decide well in advance on the procurement model which
will be used in acquiring the product. This
SHOULD be done in accordance with national
and EU procurement policy27, and it may be

27 See in particular Directive 2004/18/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 31
March 2004 on the coordination of procedures
for the award of public works contracts, public
supply contracts and public service contracts
(OJ L 134, 30.4.2004, pp. 114–240).

35 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

determined on the basis of contracts which
already are in place.
Tendering hardware and/or software
A product involving hardware and/or software can be tendered through two different approaches. Governments may choose
to acquire the hardware itself and be responsible for creating and servicing the software
which steers the decision-making process.
However, it should be noted that creating
one’s own software may be challenging. Another option is to acquire both hardware and
software and make the supplier responsible
for setting the requirements wanted. In any
case it should be ensured that interfaces between the components of the system are
stable and tested, and that a responsible entity is designed.
When it comes to deciding on the tendering
process, there may be a closed tender with
a pre-selection stage in order to determine
which companies are qualified, on the basis of
experience and reliability, to provide a complete offer and receive classified information.
A tender based on a sound list of requirements should provide governments with a
qualitative product. Besides the qualitative
aspect, getting a cost-beneficial product
should obviously be a major goal of tendering.
Elaborating the Terms of Reference
In setting requirements it is advisable to generate internal studies to define functional and
technical demands based on security processes and traveller flows in the designated
area. Doing research in a real life environment can also supply valuable information
as to the criteria which the product should
meet. Support regarding the creation of a
tender document for the definition and tendering phases could be provided by external
and/or internal experts.

36 of 68

In order to warrant the acquisition of a product which fulfils key requirements, it is RECOMMENDED to formulate knock-out criteria
regarding technical and functional requirements with which the supplier has to comply.
Any non-compliance should imply exclusion
from the tendering process.
It is RECOMMENDED to ask competitors
to provide information on performed field
tests (if available) regarding experiences with
the implementation of the e-Gates or similar systems.
In the end all offers need to be ranked on the
basis of the tender criteria according to the
offered prices, with a lower limit in place to
avoid ‘dumping’ practices. These may happen if offers are ranked only by the lowest
price, which means that in the ranking criteria price has more value than qualitative
criteria. Thus, it is RECOMMENDED to set
up a pricing model which duly includes the
quality standards that have to be delivered.
For example, a 100 per cent total score could
equal 40 per cent price and 60 per cent quality requirements as defined by knock-outs
and options.
The tender documentation shall fulfil legal
requirements and the tendering process be
clearly defined, both in order to ensure transparency and to minimise any chances of lawsuits. The time it takes to tender can vary
depending on which body is tendering and
on how the process is being managed28. The
overall time for having a complete tender,
including the time devoted to the creation
of requirements and to the actual tendering until the signing of the contract, can be
more than one year.
The duration of the contract is dependent on
the type of product/service which has been

28 Public, private or public-private partnership.

tendered. Different possibilities exist regarding what to tender: (1) to tender the product
so that it will be the property of the tendering body, (2) to tender the product as a service. The latter means that the tendering
body will not add property to its inventories
but will engage into a service management
contract with the supplier based on a Service Level Agreement.
The service management model offers flexibility to generate various service management levels for ABC systems. In certain areas
there might be a need for enhanced service management or better performance depending on flow pressure or on the wear off
time. Moreover, with this model it is possible to introduce changes to the ABC system
without having to purchase all new components when there are innovations in the
market or when multimodal techniques are
to be installed. Additionally, in this regard, issues such as obsolescence and parts replacement should be taken into consideration. It is
RECOMMENDED that these issues are regulated in advance in the contract. Currently
in some MSs it is a practice to include in the
contract, for example, stipulations regarding
development of new algorithms or performing software updates.

nnSLAs which concern services of the supplier should be formulated as part of the
tender documentation.
nnSLAs concerning helpdesk services, incident management and energy support should be managed in a governance
framework. When such a framework is
already in place, an SLA may be incorporated into it.
nnSLAs can also be managed as part of the
activities of a Support Unit within a government department (ITIL, Service Operation). In this case, a flexible communication
framework should be put in place to make
sure that this Support Unit can operate effectively, especially when more than one
government body is involved in the provision of technical and/or functional support.
Operational, tactical and strategic levels should be clearly defined and responsibilities should be allocated to the different
bodies and suppliers taking part in the SLA
framework. When systems are operational
and SLAs need to be managed it is RECOMMENDED that SLA criteria are agreed upon
in a formal manner and are measured and
controlled according to the responsibilities
formulated in the framework. Failure to address this issue would entail the risk of disputes at later stages.

Evaluating proposals
3.5.1.5. Testing research and validation
Before implementing the ABC system, validation procedures SHOULD be developed
and executed by the primary user of the systems, both from the functional/operational
and technical sides. All installations need to
be subjected to these tests as part of the acceptance process.
Formulating and managing Service Level
Agreements (SLAs)
There are different approaches to the formulation of SLAs:

Before running a pilot, it is RECOMMENDED
that the authorities carry out a market consultation and related research in order to have
a clear overview of the present and future
possibilities available in the market.
After a market consultation has been performed, a request should be addressed to
different suppliers for the purpose of testing
their systems. Testing is important because,
when tendering a product in the future, governments should be quite certain that the re-

37 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

quirements set will result in acquiring flexible
and easily adjustable systems.
Once a clear view of the market possibilities
has been developed, the authorities should
consider having a pre-pilot-testing research
or benchmarking phase with different systems and designs. A testing-research phase
may assess the dimensions outlined in ­Table 1
below.
It is RECOMMENDED that the authorities
make a final report on the performance of
each of the systems tested. By comparing the
results outlined in such reports, it should be
possible to choose the system(s) which will
be implemented as a pilot. The most important of all the aspects considered should be
the system’s overall stability, security and
service management.

3.5.1.6. Running a pilot
It is RECOMMENDED that any large-scale installation be preceded by a pilot phase to identify key issues and implement improvements.
A pilot phase allows the MS to evaluate the
design and performance and fine-tune it before committing to a large-scale deployment,
while ensuring that the tender requirements
are met. Implementing a pilot is crucial to ascertain how stability, service management,
interfaces and security processes are performing. Furthermore, environmental aspects,
mainly lighting and the IT infrastructure, can
impact on the performance of the system and
thus need to be observed and tested.
A pilot would also allow validation of the
new border process. In order to work with
ABC systems and use them as a proper tool
in servicing travellers border guards have to
familiarise themselves with the system functionalities and such functionalities have to
be tested in the operational environment.

Table 1: Testing-research phase dimensions

38 of 68

Dimension

Focus

1

Installation

Physical characteristics of the product, eg. Does the product consist of a singledoor e-Gate or of a double-door e-Gate; of one or more fixed cameras or a
moving one?

2

Design and operational ability

System design, materials and usability from the perspective of the traveller and
of the border guard.

3

Usage of sub-products

Components being used in the ABC system: the document reader, the
biometric capture unit, the biometric verification unit, etc.

4

Compatibility

Various possibilities regarding interfaces and architecture.

5

Speed

Speed of the system as a whole and if possible of the different sub-processes.

6

Accuracy

Biometric performance.

7

Stability

Overall stability of the system and its different components, and service
management performed.

8

User acceptance

Experiences with the product from different perspectives, including from the
perspective of the border guard, high-level immigration officers, the traveller
and the port operator.

9

Security

Security aspects of software and hardware as well as their flexibility and
the possibilities for adjustment. The security aspect should also take into
consideration the securing of the data processed by the system as well as
system itself. Vulnerability assessment should be performed.

10

Service management

Requirements for technical, configuration, security and incident management.
The service management dimension should also encompass the helpdesk and
problem management levels as well as the procedures to escalate issues when
they cannot be solved at a certain level.

The white‑hat vulnerability and penetration
testing29 is RECOMMENDED during the pilot
and it should also be repeated on a regular basis in post implementation. White-hat testing
must be carried out by an independent third
party with access and expertise to carry out
the tests properly. It should include both systems and physical security tests.
The systems installed in the pilot phase will
have a certain design and Man Machine Interface (MMI). This MMI is as key for travellers as it is for border guards in creating a
smooth process. Testing the MMI is critical
and will help in sharpening the requirements,
as border guard officers and travellers will be
able to provide feedback and describe their
experiences in interacting with the system.
Acceptance of the system by border guards is
crucial for its successful operation. Explaining the technical aspects and processes of
ABC system will increase confidence, which
can be instrumental in change management
strategies with a view to strengthening the
process and the speed of innovation.
3.5.1.7. Taking a decision
By following the various steps of the phased
approach described above, the border management authority and the cooperating third
parties, if applicable according to the financial arrangements specific to a certain implementation (see Section 3.5.3. on cooperation
with third parties), should be in a position to
take a well-informed decision on the implementation of an ABC system which is tailored to their requirements.

29 White‑hat testing (or white‑hat hacking) is
penetration testing performed by a computer
security specialist aimed at ensuring the security
of information systems. It is performed as
‘breaking into’/attacking the system or network.

3.5.2. Equivalence of performance
ABC systems have allowed border management authorities to analyse processes and
decision-making in greater detail. Experience has shown that the principles of biometric comparison are not well understood,
and for this reason it is RECOMMENDED that
senior managers within the border management authority are educated on the principles of ABC functioning and on key concepts
such as False Accept Rate (FAR) and False
Reject Rate (FRR), as this will increase their
understanding of the limitations of the system and increase their confidence.
Implementations of the ABC systems have
highlighted the need to understand the facial
verification performance of officers, which is
unknown, and this prevents a fuller comparison of how ABC systems perform in relation
to the traditional manual alternative. An academic study assessing the performance of
ABC systems in the operational environment
would contribute to filling this gap in our collective knowledge. It is also RECOMMENDED
that MSs carry out biometric performance
tests of the implemented biometric systems30.
3.5.3. Cooperation with third parties
There are two main groups who need to be
effectively engaged besides the border management authority: the port operator and
the relevant carriers, on the one hand, and
the supplier of the ABC technology, on the
other. If successful engagement with these
two groups is achieved then the border management authority will be more likely to see
high levels of take-up by the travelling public.

30 In this respect one may refer to the BSI TR03121-3.1 Technical Guideline Biometrics for
Public Sector Applications. Part 3: Application
Profiles and Function Modules, Volume 1:
Verification Scenarios for e-Passport and
Identity Card, Version 3.0.1.

39 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

3.5.3.1. Working with the port operators,
carriers and other agencies
The border management authority MUST
have strong levels of support from the port
operator to achieve success. The e-Gates
SHOULD be situated in a prominent location (see section 3.6.4 on integration in the
host environment), and have good signage
and way-finding information. In most cases
this will demand some physical restructuring of the port environment, and this cannot be achieved without the support of the
port operator.
Additionally the port operator is the primary
point of contact with the carriers serving
the port, so they have a major role to play in
making travellers aware of the ABC system
prior to their arrival. Finally the port operator is also in a position to make a tangible
contribution to the ABC system, either in the
form of financial support or a partnership
agreement, or by providing customer service personnel to assist travellers on how to
use the system31.
3.5.3.2. Working with suppliers: Service
Level Agreement
The supplier has the most important role
to play in ensuring that the system is trouble free, as they are responsible for guaranteeing that it operates as intended and is
kept in service. The SLA (see section 3.5.1.4.
on procurement) with the supplier MUST be
clearly defined, and cover any sub-contractors. In particular it is RECOMMENDED that:
nnresponse times, fix times and penalties are
explicitly defined, and a workable service

31 Within the context of this BPG, ‘customer
service personnel’ refers to staff of the port
operator who are tasked with providing
guidance, advice and assistance to travellers in
using the ABC system. Some MSs use the term
‘hosts’ to refer to this personnel.

40 of 68

management framework is established to
enable faults to be reported quickly and
accurately;
nnpersonnel operating the service desk are
educated on ABC to increase their understanding of the system;
nnofficers are trained to troubleshoot problems on site to keep e-Gates operational;
nnthe supplier is transparent about the level
of engineering coverage – this is particularly important if there are multiple sites;
nnthere is a defined schedule of maintenance
to reduce the number of failures;
nnreliability is ‘designed in’ by ensuring the
system is as modular as possible, with the
fewest number of moving parts;
nnthere are regular stakeholder/supplier
forums;
nnthere is a defined change control
mechanism.

3.6. Deployment of ABC system
3.6.1. Topologies of ABC system
In general there are three topologies of ABC
systems in use. The WG has agreed on the following terms to describe each configuration:
nnOne-step process which combines the
verification of the traveller and their secure passage through the border. This
design allows the traveller to complete
the whole transaction in one single process without the need to move to another
stage. Please refer to the Figure 3.
nnIntegrated two-step process, which is a
variation on the one-step design described
above. The difference between the two
topologies is that in an ABC system designed as an integrated two-step process
the traveller will initiate the verification
of the document and the traveller’s eligibility to use the system at the first stage,
and then if successful move to a second
stage where a biometric comparison and
other applicable checks are carried out.

nnSegregated two-step process where the
process of traveller verification and their
passage through the border control are
completely separated. The traveller verifies at the first stage, a tactical biometric is captured or a token is issued, and
then the traveller proceeds to the e-Gate
where the tactical biometric or the token
is checked to allow border crossing.

Alternatively, a segregated two-step process
may be implemented/configured in a way allowing for its reconfiguration into a one-step
process topology with virtual mantrap (depending on the circumstances) with the use
of the same devices and software, i.e. reconfiguration from a segregated two-step process to a one-step process and back.

Figure 3: One-step process with
mantrap

Figure 4. Integrated two-step process with
mantrap

Figure 5: Segregated two-step process –
Step 1: Biometric Verification and
Document Authentication

Figure 6: Segregated two-step process –
Step 2: Biometric Token at the e-Gate

41 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

3.6.2. Physical infrastructure:
arrangement of the e-Gates and the
monitoring and control station
Queuing lines for the e-Gates SHOULD be located next or close to the queuing lines for
manual checks. Very often it is difficult for inexperienced travellers to orient themselves
towards the correct queuing lines, be they
manual or ABC. If the wrong line is chosen
by accident it SHOULD NOT be too complicated to reach the intended line. Some synergy on operations can also be achieved when
manual and automated lines (EU/EEA/CH)
are situated next to each other. In particular, this eases the pulling of travellers from
the manual queue to the ABC system by customer service personnel (see 4.2.3. on ‘managing traveller flow’).
The monitoring and control station may be
built in a way so as to allow manual first line
checks. A possible approach is to build the
monitoring and control station like a control booth for two manual lines. One post is
for the operator and the other for their assisting personnel (see section 3.7.1. on the
roles and tasks of personnel). If an incident
occurs that requires further inspection or an
interview, the system will prevent the traveller from proceeding and indicate what to
do next. The monitoring and control station
may have the same equipment as manual
lines and MAY also be used as two manual
lines in the case of an ABC system being out
of service (e.g. due to system crash, repair
or maintenance). Additionally, an open eGate (functioning as a queuing funnel) with
a supervisory booth could serve as a manual checking point.
3.6.3. Environmental factors
This section sets out the factors which should
be considered when deciding on the physical
location of the ABC system.

42 of 68

In the early stages of the implementation
there will probably be constraints (for example in relation to existing infrastructure,
cabling, hardware design and lighting) affecting where the system can be installed, as the
ABC will have to be accommodated within
the existing border control arrangement.
Yet it should be noted that the location of
the system will play a large role in determining how many travellers use it, how successful it is and what level of performance can
be achieved.
3.6.3.1. Location requirements
The location of the ABC system should be
accessible to everybody but will be partly
dictated by the size of the hall and the prevailing traveller flow. It is RECOMMENDED
that the system is placed:
nnIn front of the existing manual control.
Placing the system behind the manual
control has a detrimental effect on traveller usage. MSs have observed that in
those installations where, due to space
constraints, the e-Gates were placed behind the manual control stations, the system was left unused and this resulted in
poor customer satisfaction and wasted
resources.
nnIn a highly visible and prominent location. It is essential that the system is visible to travellers as soon as they enter the
hall. If travellers enter from a variety of locations then the system should be sited
to favour the prevailing traveller flow. In
some MSs ABC systems were placed at the
far end of the hall, and whilst this was better than situating them behind the manual control lines, it impacted on usage as
travellers tended to turn to the manual
lines closer to the entrance.
nnAlongside the manual lines (EU/EEA/
CH). This will allow the travellers who are
queuing for the manual lines to observe
the users of the e-Gates, which will pro-

mote further usage of the system and allow self-education to take place.
Consideration should also be given to the
location of the monitoring and control stations. A number of options are available, such
as behind the system, alongside it, or in an
elevated position overlooking it.
It is RECOMMENDED to place the monitoring
and control stations behind the ABC system
in order to enable their use as first line control booths if the ABC system is out of service
(see section 3.6.2. on physical infrastructure).
That way the traveller will still go straight
ahead and will not need to be redirected.
On the other hand, the chosen location of
the monitoring and control station may be
dictated by the space available in the hall.
Whatever location is chosen some account
should be taken of the potential need to relocate the stations in the future. A flexible
configuration is RECOMMENDED so that
this can be accomplished at a minimum cost.
3.6.3.2. Environmental lighting conditions
It is RECOMMENDED that environmental factors such as strong electric lighting, variable
daylight or illuminated advertising boards are
also taken into account when positioning the
ABC system. This is particularly relevant for
systems based on facial recognition where
variable lighting due to daylight can trigger
performance issues with travellers being ‘silhouetted’ by strong background light, which
may result in high numbers of rejections. This
challenge was experienced by some MSs.
3.6.4. Integration in the host
environment
It is RECOMMENDED that the system is integrated into the hall to contribute to the
smooth flow of travellers through the border control. Ideally such integration should

take place in such a way so as to allow for
the expansion of the system if traveller usage increases. This will facilitate the gradual
move of travellers from the manual process
towards the automated lines.
3.6.5. Flexibility to accommodate
changes
3.6.5.1. Optimal dimensioning of the
system
The number of e-Gates available for travellers will vary with the flow rate to be processed and the service quality delivered. For
any given amount of traveller flow 32, more
e-Gates will reduce queuing time but at the
same time will use more resources (financial,
material and human) and will complicate the
monitoring, support and risk profiling tasks.
There is an inherent trade-off between service excellence and cost‑effectiveness that
needs to be carefully balanced.
One way to determine the right dimensioning of the number of e-Gates is by means of
operational research. A queuing analysis, either analytical or by simulation, will reveal
the relationship between the three variables:
1) flow rate, 2) service quality and 3) lifecycle
cost, and will allow for the identification of
bottlenecks, resource consuming elements
and optimal trade-offs.
A possible way to carry out such analysis is
as follows:
nnThe flow of travellers is examined.

32 Please note that the traveller flow varies during
the day, during the week and per season;
queuing varies on the ratio of eligible and noneligible passengers as well as willingness to use
the system and if one family member cannot use
the system (like minors) the whole family might
choose to be non-eligible. The above aspects
should be taken into consideration when a
business case for an ABC system is developed.

43 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

nnA service quality Figure of Merit (FoM) is
defined (e.g. queuing time).
nnA desired value is chosen for this figure
of merit (e.g. less than 5 minutes for 95 %
of travellers)33 .
nnThe traveller flow is stochastically characterised (e.g. arrival rate as a log-normal distribution).
nnAn operational model is developed observing different arrangements and number of e-Gates.
nnA lifecycle cost model is developed for
the different arrangements and number
of e-Gates.
nnA FoM and lifecycle cost are calculated
for all possible combinations of arrangements and number of e-Gates (e.g. using discrete event simulation and Monte
Carlo simulation34). Combinations failing
to meet the security threshold or other
equivalent criteria are automatically discarded at this point (i.e. only points in the
Pareto frontier are considered).
nnDominant configurations providing the
best FoM for any given lifecycle cost are
drawn in a curve FoM vs Lifecycle Cost.
This is the cost-effectiveness Pareto efficiency frontier of the system.
nnA point in the curve, and thus a specific arrangement and number of e-Gates, is chosen on the basis of available budget and
comparison with manual checks.

33 See the IATA ‘Airport Development Reference
Manual’.
34 Monte Carlo simulation is a computerised
mathematical technique that allows an
accounting for risk in quantitative analysis
and decision-making. Monte Carlo simulation
performs risk analysis by building models of
possible results by substituting a range of values
– a probability distribution – for any factor that
has inherent uncertainty. It then calculates
results over and over, each time using a different
set of random values from the probability
functions. Monte Carlo simulation produces
distributions of possible outcome values.

44 of 68

The method described above can also be used
with minor modifications to forecast the tipping point when an already operational implementation might need to be upgraded,
and even to simulate the effect on service
quality of possible modifications.
It should be noted that in some cases the experience has shown that the assumptions on
the usage of e-Gates will be changed when
e-Gates are put into operation. Therefore, it
is necessary to review those assumptions in
the context of the identified discrepancies affecting the CBA. The following assumptions
of usage may deviate from expectations: the
number of actual e-Gate users, the false rejection due to inappropriate FRR threshold
settings and the percentage of irregular cases
that warranted further manual inspection.
In addition, the planned deployment should
take into account the anticipated use of the
ABC system in the future. For example it is
estimated that by 2016 all EU/EEA/CH passports will contain chips35 , and so at that point
it could be reasonably expected that all passport holders will be aware of the ABC system,
with the vast majority being capable of using
it. With this in mind the system SHOULD be
designed in a modular fashion which will allow it to be expanded, and located in a way
so that such expansion can be achieved with
a minimum of disruption and cost. A carefully designed system, which maximises the
throughput capacity and minimises the processing time, will be able to support increased
traveller volumes. The figure below illustrates
a modular system.

35 Under Regulation (EC) No 2252/2004 of 13
December 2004, MSs were required to begin
issuing e-Passports by August 2006. Assuming
a maximum period of validity of passports
of 10 years, the rollout of e-Passports could
then be completed by 2016 at the latest (see
COM(2008) 69 final, 13.2.2008.

Figure 8: Modular ABC system

3.6.5.2. Flexibility of configuration
The degree of flexibility is dependent on the
configuration chosen for the ABC system. A
description of the possible topologies is presented in section 3.6.1.
3.6.5.3. Physical relocation
As the lifetime of the system can span over
five years it can be reasonably expected
that the e-Gates will need to be relocated
at some point during that time. A MS found
that within 18 months the e-Gates at one of
their sites needed to be moved in order to allow the arrivals area to be refurbished at considerable expense in both time and money.
It is RECOMMENDED that the system is designed in such a way so as to allow it to be
relocated at minimal expense and effort.
Full mobility MAY NOT necessarily be needed
– one of the MSs has experimented with a
mobile design but ultimately decided that
they did not need this full functionality. Mobility can be achieved by designing a system
that will connect wirelessly (note: wireless

connection is not allowed in some MSs due
to IT security requirements) and securely to
the IT infrastructure and one that can be
deployed without extensive drilling or other
building work. However, it should be noted
that rules and regulations may require an
electrical appliance to be firmly fixed in order to comply with the applicable safety requirements in place.
3.6.5.4. Reliability
This can be covered to some degree by the
service levels that are in place with the supplier (detailed in section 3.5.5.2.), but it is
­RECOMMENDED that systems have reliability ‘designed in’, with a minimum of moving parts and integration of established and
trusted components to reduce the number of
failures. It is also RECOMMENDED to establish
maintenance schedules to ensure reliability.
Some MSs have experienced some reliability issues early in their installation lifecycles,
whereas others have had few issues reported.

45 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

However, the experience has shown that a
dust-free environment for the e-Gate equipment is very important, as the dust may affect the document readers and other parts of
the system. Practice has shown that to ensure
a dust-free and easy-cleaning environment
it is recommended to place ABC systems on
marble/stone/tiled floors which are better
to prevent the build-up of dust and fibres as
opposed to, for example, carpets.
Additionally, having easily replaceable components is RECOMMENDED in case of failure
(e.g. passport readers which can be removed
and replaced without affecting the entire
system).
3.6.5.5. Fall-back solution
A fall-back solution MUST be in place in case
the system fails. This is particularly relevant
in the early stages of an installation, or if the
design is untested. As the technology matures
it is expected that the need for a full fall-back
solution will diminish, as suppliers will learn
which factors contribute to good reliability.
Yet it is anticipated that this trend will ultimately reverse if automation becomes the
primary method of checking travellers at
the border control, because the traditional
fall-back response of deploying border guard
officers instead will no longer be feasible as
officers or manual control booths may not be
available in sufficient numbers. In any event,
the border management authority needs to
develop a reliable fall-back solution to guarantee that border checks continue to be conducted smoothly regardless of the system.

46 of 68

ency MSs have on the system and the effect
this will have on overall passenger processes.
The primary contingency solution if the ABC
system fails is to send passengers to the manual control desks. In future, as MSs become
more dependent on ABC systems there may
not be enough manual desks or staff to process passengers within set service standards.
If this is the case then other contingency plans
will need to be found. This can range from
the re-deployment of staff from elsewhere
to improving the resilience of the system so
that there are back-up servers and connectivity which can be utilised in the event of a
major failure (this will necessitate the need
for well-defined disaster recovery plans for
the ABC system and increased costs for additional IT capability).

3.7. Personnel management and
ABC systems
3.7.1. Roles and tasks of personnel
There are two main roles in the operation
of an ABC system: the one of operator and
that of assisting personnel. Other roles are
also possible, although these two are the
ones common to every ABC system in place
at the time of writing.
3.7.1.1. Operator

3.6.5.6. Business Continuity

The operator is responsible for the remote
monitoring and control of the ABC system.
The most important task of an operator is to
bring the necessary human factor into the
automated tasks. With unattended standalone lines it is impossible to reach an acceptable level of facilitation and border security.

It is RECOMMENDED that all MSs who install
and operate an ABC system have a business
continuity plan in place in case of a major
incident which affects the system’s operational use. The plan will reflect the depend-

An operator:
nnmonitors the user interface of the
application;
nnreacts upon any notification given by the
application;

nnmanages exceptions and makes decisions
about them;
nncommunicates with the assisting personnel for the handling of exceptions at
the e-Gates;
nnmonitors and profiles travellers queuing
in the ABC line and using the e-Gates to
look for suspicious behaviour in travellers. Note however that this is also among
the responsibilities of assisting personnel
(see below);
nncommunicates with second‑line checks
whenever their service is needed.
Operators do their job through the user interface of the control application located
at the monitoring and control station. This
SHOULD be positioned so as to allow the operator to monitor travellers at the ABC lines
(e.g. in an elevated position or equipped with
CCTV). When monitoring queuing travellers,
the operator SHOULD evaluate the traveller flow in order to detect suspicious behaviour and to identify travellers who should
be more closely checked. The evaluation or
assessment method is typically based on a
traveller’s actions and body language, i.e.
non-verbal communication. The process to
follow depends on the local implementation
and integration of the ABC system with the
border control procedures.
An operator MUST NOT 36 leave his post when
the e-Gates are active 37. If human intervention
is required at the e-Gates, the operator should
first alert the assisting personnel to handle it
(e.g. to assist a traveller in a mantrap).

36 However, in exceptional circumstances, in
particular in case of emergency (e.g. if someone
needs immediate assistance) the officer could
leave the post.
37 Human supervision constitutes a prerequisite
to fulfil legal requirements under the Schengen
Borders Code (see section 3.3. on operational
requirements).

In normal circumstances when the traveller flow is continuous without pauses, the
maximum surveillance time for an operator
SHOULD be no longer than 30 minutes. The
operator and the assisting personnel MAY
change their tasks at intervals of 20-30 minutes. If there are natural pauses in the traveller flow (e.g. because of flight schedules) or if
the frequency of the traveller flow is moderate an operator MAY work for periods longer
than 30 minutes.
The operator and the assisting personnel
MUST be linked with a communication system if they work separated from each other.
3.7.1.2. Assisting personnel
The assisting personnel are the border
guard(s), whose tasks are to handle the exceptions that take place at the e-Gates, redirect travellers as needed and assist travellers
on specific situations. Assisting personnel
work in close cooperation with an operator.
Assisting personnel may have the following tasks:
nnhandles exceptions and assists the
operator;
nncarries out short interviews in order to find
out if it is necessary to redirect a traveller
to a second line check;
nnmakes traveller assessments and informs
the operator. For instance, they profile
travellers queuing in the ABC line and using the e-Gates, and look for suspicious
behaviour among travellers;
nnescorts travellers to second line checks
when needed;
nnconducts manual checks at the first line
of border control if the ABC system fails;
nninforms and provides on-the-spot support to travellers (e.g. families, minors);
nnassists persons with disabilities.
Every operator MUST have assisting personnel available.

47 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

The location of the assisting personnel highly
conditions the time they will spend in each
of the above tasks. Placing the assisting
personnel behind the e-Gates will make
them focus mainly on handling exceptions
and assisting the operator, whereas being
located in front of the e-Gates will make
them spend more time in assisting travellers and profiling.

tors have to react and channel travellers
to manual first‑line or second‑line checks;
nnthe design of the user interface at the
operation desk and how much information the operator has to process and the
amount of human intervention required;
nnthe reliability of the system;
nnthe proficiency and training of border
guard officers.

3.7.1.3. Number of e-Gates supervised by
an operator

The above-mentioned factors MUST be
considered and analysed when deciding the
number of e-Gates to be simultaneously supervised by an operator. With time, when the
system has proved to be reliable and the operators have familiarised themselves with it,
this number may be adjusted.

During field tests it was observed that a single border guard can typically supervise from
three to 10 e-Gates. Those tests were carried out on inbound flow (travellers entering the territory of the MS operating the
ABC system).
There are limitations as to how many e-Gates
an operator can supervise in practice. Those
limitations are due to the limited ability of human beings to concentrate on several things
at the same time. It is therefore important
to assess how much attention the operator
needs to devote to stay focused. The number of e-Gates that one operator can monitor is inversely proportional to the level of
attention (and therefore energy) required
for maintaining a good and thorough situational awareness.
There are some known aspects that condition
the maximum number of e-Gates that can
be reliably controlled by an operator. These
are among others:
nnthe quality of face recognition, and automatic liveness detection as well as the
amount of human intervention required;
nnthe frequency of the traveller flow and
how busy the system is;
nnwhether the e–Gates are located at entry or exit checks;
nnthe profile of the traveller flow at the BCP,
what is the ratio of own nationals and
other EU citizens, and how often opera-

48 of 68

Experience has shown that one operator
should not monitor more than seven e-Gates
on arrivals or more than ten on departures.
The table below summarises the ratio of operator to e-Gates in a number of MSs with
operational ABC systems. The average number of e-Gates per operator currently sits at
five, so it could be argued that this has been
established as being the most effective level
at present. One MS has introduced a flexible approach whereby the operator manages
fewer e-Gates at peak hours, but more at periods of low traffic. This allows the system to
stay open and available without committing
extensive numbers of operators.
The key factor in increasing the e-Gate to officer ratio is the amount of data sent or displayed to the operator. If this can be reduced
and/or simplified by automating more steps
of the process, only displaying the most important information, or by reducing some of
the functionalities, then the officer may be
able to be responsible for more e-Gates. This
may be achieved by accessing less important
data through pop-ups or other means when
it needs to be viewed. It is important to understand that the information necessary for
Border Control responsibilities should not be

removed, rather the data displayed should
be simplified.
Table 2: Number of e-Gates per operator in
selected MSs
Country

from all involved plays an important role in
the success of the implementation. Pro-active change management to engage staff and
manage their concerns has proven successful in reducing resistance to the introduction
of the ABC implementation.

e-Gates per operator

Finland

5–10

France

3

Germany

4–6

Netherlands

3

Portugal

7

Spain

6

UK

5

The operator’s interface SHOULD be designed
in such a way that it can be easily split into
two or more monitoring and control stations
in order to quickly accommodate new operators into the task.
3.7.2. Training of personnel
Training is an essential component of the
successful implementation of an ABC system, and it is RECOMMENDED that a detailed
analysis of training needs is carried out before the system goes live. It is recommended
to develop common EU training for different
levels of expertise so as to cater and ensure
common training standards and knowledge
in this area.
Areas that SHOULD be considered are as
follows:
Change management and internal
marketing
Because of the likely impact that the introduction of an ABC system will have on operational staff, managers will need to be adept
at managing change and direct the integration of the new border control process at
their BCP. The staff will also need to be properly informed and educated on the system
and its purpose, since a positive approach

Operational training for the officers
The skills and personal aptitudes of officers
vary a great deal and it is possible that some
will not be immediately comfortable with
the introduction of the new technology. Initial and follow-up training will be required
so that officers can operate the system successfully and contribute to its enhancements.
Expert user training for a select number
of officers
Expert users are those who are able to bridge
the operational environment with the technical infrastructure. It is RECOMMENDED
that the border management authority educate a sufficient number of expert users to
assist in providing additional ad hoc training.
These officers can also be used to troubleshoot problems and diagnose faults, acting
as a first line of defence against technical issues. MSs’ experience indicates that introducing expert users early in the installation has
effectively contributed to develop local expertise within the border management authority staff.

3.8. Handling of exceptions
Border guards need detailed instructions on
how to proceed when specific exceptional
situations occur.
There MUST be a modus operandi handbook
(e.g. ABC Handbook for Border Guards) providing detailed instructions on how to proceed with the various unwanted/unexpected
situations that may present themselves at
ABC e-Gates. Those measures SHALL be de-

49 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

cided in advance and SHALL be exercised
through practice by operating personnel.
Provisions SHALL be made to ensure that all
forms of unwanted/unexpected situations
can be avoided or effectively neutralised.
Chosen measures may vary at different BCPs
depending on the infrastructure, the number of e-Gates, the frequency and the profile of the traveller flow.
The following section introduces a compilation of RECOMMENDED measures to deal
with a set of commonly encountered situations involving exceptions. Specific instructions MUST be tailored according to
the particularities of each implementation.
3.8.1. System malfunctioning
If there is a disruption in the normal operation
of the system (e.g. power shutdown, communication outage, component failure, random
errors), there are typically two possible ways
forward: the first one is to open one or two
e-Gates and perform manual checks at the
supervision station, which is the default recommended option. If that is not possible, the
e-Gates SHALL be closed and checks be carried out at the manual first line.
When establishing contractual agreements
with suppliers or when developing the own
service system, it is RECOMMENDED to define service quality agreements.
3.8.2. e-Gates out of service
If one or more e-Gates are out of service while
the rest operate normally, there MUST be an
option to physically close those e-Gates in order to prevent travellers from inadvertently
trying to use them.

the reason for the behaviour clarified and
the travellers processed accordingly.
3.8.4. Minors
Manual checks are RECOMMENDED for families with small or several children who are
unlikely to be able to use the e-Gates independently or assisted. If minors (under
18 years) are allowed to use e-Gates, there
SHOULD be information available on the
procedures, e.g. on the minimum height required and on the fact that e-Gates must
only be passed by one person at a time under all circumstances.
If a traveller enters an e-Gate with a child in
his arms, they MUST be stopped and redirected for manual checks.
3.8.5. Travellers with disabilities
Currently, ABC systems do not provide full
access for all travellers with disabilities. This
particularly applies to persons with limited
mobility, such as wheelchair users, those
who are unable to stand unaided, visually
impaired or those who cannot provide the
required biometric.
It is RECOMMENDED that the design of ABC
systems takes into consideration all categories of persons with disabilities as well as the
elderly and is adapted to cater for them to
the greatest possible extent (keeping in mind
the business case for the implementation).
Therefore, the ABC systems’ ergonomics,
dimensions, location and the environmental conditions SHOULD be considered with
a special focus on the needs of travellers
with disabilities. In particular, the following
is RECOMMENDED38.

3.8.3. Tailgating
If two persons try to go through an e-Gate
at the same time, they MUST be stopped,

50 of 68

38 The recommendations included in this section
are based on the input from the European
Disability Forum.

nnThe location of the ABC system in the terminal is accessible to everybody.
nnAdequate signage is used (e.g. floor guidance systems, tactile ‘footprints’ on the
floor, tactile and standardised signage for
blind people). The signage is harmonised
throughout the EU.
nnIf possible, the information before entering the e-Gate is available in different
formats (e.g. audio information, big print,
easy-to-read).
nnIf the environmental and practical aspects
permit (e.g. level of noise), audio instructions during the border check process at
the e-Gate are provided.
nnAdequate lighting and size of visual feedback are ensured, allowing travellers with
visual impediments to use the e-Gates
independently.
nnWider gates allowing for the use by travellers on self-propelled wheelchairs are
accessible. (Such gates have already been
installed in the UK, while Germany is currently running a pilot at the Hamburg
airport39).
nnThe passport and fingerprint scanner/
camera are installed at a height which is
easy to reach for everyone, including persons of small stature and wheelchair users.
nnIt is ensured that the e-Gate doors do not
close on travellers, especially if they move
slowly or if they have difficulties with orientation due to a disability or old age.
nnAn intercom is available in order to alert
assistance, especially if the area is very
crowded and it is difficult to communicate.
nnAll groups of staff are provided with adequate training as regards the needs of
persons with disabilities, how they can be
assisted efficiently and discretely.
nnClose cooperation among the disability
movement, the suppliers and the authorities responsible for ABC system implementation is in place with regard to all

39 However, the usage thus far has been low.

phases of the implementation process
as well as elaboration of any guidelines
in this respect.
nnAccessibility requirements are detailed in
the tendering procedure which is in line
with EU public procurement legislation.
It should also be noted that in EU MSs as a
general rule travellers with disabilities are
provided with special services and have priority to go through the manual border control.
3.8.6. Trespassing
The infrastructure at ABC lines and the surrounding site SHALL be such so as to prevent
trespassing. If trespassing happens despite
the measures in place, there MUST be a practised modus operandi to quickly react and
catch the trespasser. Methods may vary at
different BCPs from patrols to remotely controlled doors.
3.8.7. Ineligible travellers
The design of the e-Gate process MUST ensure that those travellers who are not allowed
to use the e-Gate based on their nationality,
the document issuance country and age are
rejected by the ABC system and redirected
to the appropriate manual control lanes 40.
Moreover, the eligible travellers who cannot use the e-Gate because of physical constraints should be provided with adequate
information and assistance.

40 As part of the Smart Borders package, the EC
is planning to present a legislative initiative to
establish an RTP which would allow certain
groups of frequent travellers (e.g. business
travellers, family members) from third countries
to enter the EU, subject to appropriate prescreening, using simplified border checks at
automated gates. It is foreseen that this could
speed up border crossings for 4 to 5 million
travellers per year (see COM(2011) 680 final).

51 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

3.8.8. e-Passport is wrongly placed into
the reader

SHOULD be considered as a red flag indicating a possible risk situation42.

When a traveller places the e-Passport onto
the reader in the wrong way, information
SHOULD be provided about the correct way
to handle this transaction. Information can be
provided through a system screen (see section 4.2.1. on instructions at the e-Gate), a
voice command from the operator or through
hand-to-hand guidance by the assisting personnel or by other customer service staff.

3.8.11. Database hit

3.8.9. Non-cooperative behaviour at the
e-Gate
Non-cooperative behaviour at the e-Gate
may occur when, for example, a traveller
moves too much during the face recognition
stage, looks in the wrong direction or stands
in the wrong place. In such situations, advice SHALL be given to the traveller on how
to proceed. If this has no effect, the person
SHALL be directed to manual first line checks.
3.8.10. Anomalies in chips
Some e-Passports may be rejected by
e-Gates. This will happen for instance when
these are not fully ICAO 9303-compliant genuine travel documents, containing so-called
‘defects’. This is the case when the public
key is missing, the certificates have expired
or there are some other technical issues41.
If a chip is broken or cannot be read for some
other reason, a traveller SHOULD be redirected to a second line for more thorough
checks on the travel document. Anomalies

41 For further information, please refer to Frontex,
‘Discussion paper on Public Key Infrastructure
(PKI) and operational challenges of certificate
exchange/management at the borders’,
14.6.2012.

52 of 68

If a database hit occurs and requires intervention, the traveller SHALL be redirected to
the second line check.
3.8.12. Failed biometric verification
In the case of a failed biometric verification
the operator – depending on the outcome of
biometric verification – should decide how
to proceed (some systems allow the Border
Guard monitoring the gates to accept a passenger who has failed facial recognition and
allow them to proceed). The traveller MAY
be redirected for manual identity verification and to a second-line check as necessary.
3.8.13. Wrong or no security features on
the biographical data page
The biographical data page SHALL be checked
with visual light, UV light and IR light. The
system MUST be configured to check for
and detect irregularities in the security features. If a security feature is missing or some
other hints suggest that the document may
be false or forged, a traveller SHALL be redirected to a second line check.

42 See Frontex, ‘Operational and Technical security
of Electronic Passports’, July 2011, section
2.5.4 on security issues. However, please
note that according to Article 4 of Regulation
(EC) No 2252/2004 of 13 December 2004 on
standards for security features and biometrics
in passports and travel documents issued by
Member States, as amended by Regulation (EC)
No 444/2009 of 28 May 2009, ‘the failure of the
matching in itself shall not affect the validity of
the passport or travel document for the purpose
of the crossing of external borders’.

3.9. Quality assurance and
statistics
Part of the planning process concerning the
set-up of an ABC system consists of defining what information needs to be retrieved
from the system itself. Such information may
comprise the operational data needed in the
form of statistics as required by the border
management authority or by other stakeholders, and the technical data required for
quality assurance. These data will also contribute to the continuing process of enhancing the business case discussed earlier and
the cost-efficiency of the system.
The requirements for information retrieval
must be defined together with other operational requirements as they have an impact on the technical implementation of the
system. The specifications should define the
categories of data to be saved and the basic data processing rules, i.e. where the data
is saved, for what purposes, who has access
to it, the retention time and what information is to be logged on the usage of the system. This information should be included in
the technical documentation of the ABC system provided by the contractor after – or as
part of – the tendering procedure, and it may
be used later to fulfil the legal requirements
applicable in relation to the provision of information on the processing of personal data.
For statistical purposes, it is RECOMMENDED
to use a minimum amount of anonymised
data, such as nationality of the traveller, for
each transaction. Storage of personal data
identifying the traveller, including the passport number, SHOULD be avoided without
proper justification.

Quality assurance is a process by which the
quality of all factors involved in the operation and exploitation of the ABC system are
measured. Quality of an ABC service as such,
in more practical terms, is the perception of
the degree to which it meets the expectations of travellers and the border management authority.
Quality assurance is important when assessing the performance of a given ABC system,
as it helps identify potential problems in its
operation and also feeds back to development of exception-handling procedures. For
the purposes of quality assurance and performance measurement, a variety of data may
be needed, for instance the temporary storage of the facial images captured live during
the verification process.
The storage and usage of this kind of personal data should be very limited, and sufficient safeguards MUST be in place to protect
the data. Other data can be collected to obtain key performance indicators, enabling the
supplier and the border management authority to carry out comparative analysis.
The present BPGs focus on the minimum recommended anonymous operational data to
be collected for quality assurance and for the
extraction of business statistics in ABC systems. ABC systems are subject to the same
privacy and data protection requirements and
legislation as applicable to any other system
entailing the processing of personal data.
For more details on the quality assurance,
refer to the BPTGs, section 6.

53 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

4. Traveller experience
The main goal of an ABC system should be
the facilitation of cross-border traffic. The
design of the system and the provision of
education and information to travellers are
essential to ensure that they have a positive
experience when using it.
ABC systems, as they currently stand, provide a similar service to travellers, although
there are a number of differences between
implementations not only in appearance, but
also in functionality and usage. This lack of
universality makes the task of harmonising
the expectations and usability a difficult one.
The novelty of such systems (while obviously
decreasing with time) is another major challenge. Many eligible travellers will be unfamiliar with the relevant concepts and steps of
the process, particularly since implementations tend to differ. In order to provide a successful traveller experience, attention must
be devoted in particular to:
nncreating awareness and educating travellers before their arrival to the e-Gate, and
nnensuring that the ABC system provides a
user-friendly service.
The following sections offer a number of recommendations, drawing on operational experience and surveys conducted by some MSs to
achieve the objectives outlined above. However, other approaches may be found to accomplish similar results.

4.1. Awareness and education
before the e-Gate
Delivering information before the traveller
arrives to the e-Gate is challenging.
nnSince it is given in advance, only a limited
amount of information will be retained.

54 of 68

Travellers may not remember detailed usage instructions for a long time.
nnSuch information does not have the visual support of the real system or of other
users using the system; hence interpretation may vary significantly from one individual to another.
It is RECOMMENDED that any information
given in advance be oriented towards creating awareness of the system and developing
willingness to use it. The earlier this information is given, the simpler it has to be in order
to be effectively retained.
4.1.1. Key messages to be transmitted
Making the traveller aware that an ABC system is available and can be used for their
own benefit is critical to getting more travellers to leave the queue for the conventional
manual control. Information provided in advance SHOULD convey the message that it
is better to use ABC than to opt for manual
border checks. Only if a considerable number of travellers use the system will the investment be justified.
The process of providing education before
the e-Gate can be usefully divided into the
following categories:
nnunderstanding the BENEFITS that the system brings to users,
nncommunicating that the system is EASY
to use,
nncommunicating that it is POSSIBLE to use
the e-Gate at the BCP,
nnexplaining who is ELIGIBLE to use the
e-Gate,
nndescribing HOW to use the e-Gate.

The latter category overlaps considerably
with the aim of providing information on
usage at the e-Gate, but can also differ, being aimed at different aspects of the process
such as instructing travellers about what signage to look for in order to find the e-Gate,
the queuing process and the preparations
required to use the system (e.g. have the ePassport ready).
4.1.2. Delivery methods
The following methods have been used at
the different ABC implementations to deliver
these messages to the travellers:
nnsigns (‘airport’ format)/logos,
nnvideos,
nnhuman assistance (either ahead of the
e‑Gates or at the e-Gate),
nnleaflets,
nnposters/banners,
nnliterature (a page in in-flight magazines),
nnaudio announcements,
nnonline information.
The locations in which this is done include:
nnon aircraft,
nnin waiting/transit areas (this could include
lounges, walkways and baggage handling
areas),
nnon port’s website.
No formal assessment has been carried out
yet on the effectiveness of the different methods used. Moreover, there is currently no uniform signage at ABC systems in operation in
the EU, which will be detrimental to the public understanding of such systems.
It is RECOMMENDED that:
nna study be conducted to establish the most
effective ABC awareness-raising methods,
nnthe target audience be carefully analysed,
and the best methods be chosen according to the specifics of this audience. It is
also important to remark that the composition of this audience will vary in time

and thus the methods of choice will also
have to be modified accordingly43 .
Other public information methods exist
which have not yet been tried by some or
all MSs, and are worth considering. Examples include:
nnan EU-wide awareness-raising campaign.
This will become more cost-effective when
ABC systems are extended to land BCPs,
where opportunity for pre-border education is limited or non-existent,
nnvideos on aircraft (and other vehicles),
nn‘live’ demonstrations by staff in appropriate areas,
nnliterature provided at issuance of
e-Passports.
4.1.3. Need for standard signs,
instructions and logos
Signs and any other form of graphical display are very important. They are often the
first contact that the traveller has with the
system, and to a large extent may condition
their willingness to use it.
MSs currently using or piloting ABC systems
have tried several different types of signage
but none has proven to be clearly more effective than the rest, probably because the
concepts e-Passport and ABC are not widely
known even among frequent travellers. One
of the key challenges lies in developing a set
of signs and standard terminology that can
be understood by the majority of the travellers44 . These have to be intuitive for travellers
to assimilate them, uniform across MSs and
easily deployable.

43 Currently, these issues are being examined with
the framework of FastPass – an EU FP-7 project.
44 At the time of writing, the UK implemented the
‘FaceSymbol’ Project, which aims at establishing
a standard set of symbols for use by passengers
on ABC systems based on facial recognition at
UK ports of entry.

55 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

In order to facilitate and harmonise the
travellers’ experience, common signage
and instructions are instrumental. While
the Schengen Borders Code and the Practical Handbook for Border Guards spell out
the common signage to be used for manual checks at the EU external borders (for
example to segregate lines for EU/EEA/CH
citizens from those for TCN), no similar provisions currently exist for ABC.

4.2. Running a traveller-friendly
service at the e-Gate

In the absence of a common name for referring to the ABC system, the following name
is RECOMMENDED in order to denote the
existence of automated border control lines:
Self‑Service Passport Control. The name
of choice MAY be used in conjunction with
a short brand ‘catchy’ name for the service
(e.g. EasyPASS in Germany).

These are broken down into six areas:
1.	instructions to travellers on the usage of
the system,
2.	effectiveness of the information delivery
methods,
3. managing the traveller flow,
4. learning by observation,
5. travellers’ interaction with the e-Gates,
6. support to help travellers use the service.

In the absence of a common and unique logo
depicting the system, the following logo is
RECOMMENDED in order to denote the existence of ABC 45:
Figure 9: Recommended ABC logo

EU/EEA/CH

Service excellence involves encouraging travellers to use the system, helping them understand that they are eligible, and facilitating a
successful transaction. This section outlines
a number of recommendations based on operational experience on how to make an ABC
service as user friendly as possible.

4.2.1. Instructions at the e-Gate
Travellers’ cooperation at the e-Gate is essential in order to ensure good performance
of the system, a positive experience for all
the users, and continuous and accrued use
of the e-Gates in time. Clear instructions are
thus paramount, and human behavioural factors should be taken into consideration when
designing the control process and assessing
the overall performance of the system. One
MAY consider providing audio instructions
at the e-Gate, as long as the environmental factors (e.g. level of noise) permit and the
solution will not cause confusion for the average traveller.
Instructions SHOULD be carefully crafted according to the specifics of each implementation.

45 Note however that the only official signs
indicating lanes at border crossing points are
those regulated in the Schengen Borders Code,
Annex III.

56 of 68

It has been consistently observed that the
most challenging part of the process relates
to the correct placing of the e-Passport by
the traveller. The way this step shall be handled is easily misunderstood, and if the document is incorrectly placed then this would

almost inevitably result in a failed transaction. Thus, this practical aspect MUST be prioritised when designing instructions at the
e-Gate. Clear instructions with an animated
display on the screen have proven helpful (see
Figure 10 for an illustration).
Figure 10: Graphic instruction – how to
place the e-Passport

Regarding fingerprints, it has been observed
that travellers sometimes have difficulties in
placing the finger(s) in the way which is required for capturing images of the best possible quality. Thus, it is RECOMMENDED to
provide visual instructions indicating how
the fingers should be positioned, as well as
feedback in the event of bad-quality capture.
When instructions are provided in an audible
form, the tone and volume SHOULD be regulated to avoid confusion with sounds from
adjacent kiosks or e-Gates.

PASSPORTE

4.2.2. Effectiveness of delivery methods

Another recurrent issue is that, during the
face capture process, the traveller sometimes does not know when to stop looking
at the camera. Thus, some feedback MUST
be provided. Visual feedback is preferred to
audible feedback as sounds from adjacent eGates may create confusion and increase the
exception rate (please refer to section 4.2.6.
for further information).
‘Footprints’ on the floor indicating where the
traveller should stand in front of the camera may help the traveller to position themselves in the appropriate location for face
capture. They may however be counterproductive, as some users concentrate on the
footprints and look down instead of looking
straight into the camera.

There are a variety of delivery methods that
can be used to show travellers how to interact with the e-Gates. These range from signage and informational videos to graphics
displayed on the e-Gates themselves.
Signage on how to use the e-Gates must be
clear and carefully placed for maximum impact. One solution is to provide a step-bystep series of images within the queuing zone
allowing travellers to see the sequence of
the e-Gate operation. Any video animations
should be at or just above eye level and these
should reflect the process in a clear and unambiguous way.
Signs SHOULD rely mainly on graphic images
and include as few words as possible. While
most ABC owners noted that simple graphics work best, it should be taken into account
that some icons mean different things to different cultures. Complex sentences are not
easily understood and SHOULD be avoided.
For instructions on how to use the system,
still images and animations have proved to
work better than video. The reason is that
the viewer has more information to process
when watching a video, and a 10-second
video simply adds an additional 10 seconds to
the transaction process, which is ineffective.

57 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

It has been concluded that informational videos being shown around the e-Gate area often remain unnoticed and travellers do not
seem to fully assimilate them. It is possible
that these would become more effective once
usage rises to the extent that travellers have
to queue to use the e-Gates, as then they will
be more likely to observe the informational
videos whilst queuing.

ing eligible travellers from the manual border
control queue. The queuing area SHOULD
be designed according to the specific layout
and available space of each implementation
to enable travellers to choose the queues.
In some implementations queues can cross
each other. This allows for better usage of
floor space, but during rush situations may
lead to conflicts between queuing travellers.

Audio announcements in the arrivals hall
are also considered no better than average
in raising traveller awareness.

4.2.4. Learning by observation

Leaflets have been used to raise awareness
with some success. The challenge with leaflets lies in identifying the most appropriate
area for distribution so that travellers are receptive to reading them.
4.2.3. Managing traveller flow
Traveller flow can greatly benefit if it can be
assisted by trained personnel in order to have
a smooth, uninterrupted flow avoiding unnecessary delays.
It is RECOMMENDED that officers or customer service personnel provide on‑the‑spot
support for queuing users and help distribute the traffic among the different e-Gates.
It has been observed that travellers tend to
be more receptive when personnel in this
role do not wear uniforms.
Travellers holding travel documents not recognised by the ABC system SHOULD be directed to manual border checks as early as
possible. Some sites have clearly segregated
areas for queuing for the e-Gates. This has
been found to be effective as it enables travellers to see the e-Gates clearly.
Strategies used to encourage travellers to use
the e-Gates have included the use of signs
distributed along the queuing area, and having customer service personnel actively seek-

58 of 68

Queuing contributes to the learning process as non-experienced users can observe
how other travellers interact with the system. This is an important aspect that needs
to be considered when designing the queuing space at the e-Gates.
Within the first period after the installation,
the system MAY be configured for the complete process to be slightly slower than strictly
necessary in order to facilitate this ‘learning
while queuing’ process. The effectiveness
of this measure will depend on a number of
other factors, like visibility, usability and previous understanding of the system.
The size of the screen SHOULD be large
enough for the user to interact easily AND
for the user queuing behind to observe the
whole process.
There is some evidence that non-experienced users tend to use the e-Gates closer
to their queuing line, that is, the specific eGates upon which the observation process
took place, as this reduces the feeling of uncertainty. Experienced users, on the contrary,
tend to use the e-Gates at the edges. As experienced users generate fewer exceptions
and have a somewhat shorter processing
time (e.g. the face capture process is faster
if the traveller knows how to look properly
into the camera) than inexperienced users,
the e-Gates at the edges may exhibit more
throughput and fewer exceptions than the

ones closer to the queuing lines, despite being exactly the same in terms of hardware,
software and configuration.

that travellers look for their documents inside the mantrap. This can cause unwanted
timeouts and frustration among travellers.

4.2.5. Traveller interaction with the
e-Gates

The design and the size of the e-Gates (width
and length) SHOULD be planned with consideration for the usage of trolleys and other
luggage (e.g. duty free bags). Trolley bags are
not easily catered for, and problems may occur even at the e-Gate with the largest secure zone (measuring 90cm × 200cm). This
is because travellers handle their bags in different ways, and trailing bags can easily obstruct the doors closing, which slows down
transaction times.

The screens used to display the graphics
vary in size, but generally a larger screen
works more effectively, particularly if it is
large enough to be observed by the travellers
queuing to use the e-Gates. Screens SHOULD
be tuned to be readable in all lighting conditions. If this is not the case, their effectiveness will be reduced.
Processes where the traveller simply goes
forward rather than having to turn or alter
course were considered to be most effective. It is RECOMMENDED that the design allows the traveller to move simply forward in
a straight line, rather than having to turn or
stop during the transaction process.
A camera mounted straight ahead has been
observed to be more effective than one where
a traveller has to turn their head 45 degrees
or more. Where the e-Gates are offset to
allow for this, travellers would benefit from
an audio cue prompting them to exit the eGate area.
Audio cues, such as soft ‘pings’ encouraging
the travellers to move to the next stage of the
process MAY be used. In the absence of other
indication, some mechanical noise is RECOMMENDED to allow the traveller to realise that
the e-Gate has actually opened. Whenever
audio feedback is given, there SHOULD be
acoustic isolation between e-Gates to prevent confusion or false feedback.
In one-step designs where all the transactions
take place inside the mantrap (i.e. e-Passport
reading is not required to enter the mantrap),
it is RECOMMENDED to give a ‘Have your
passport ready’ message in order to avoid

Unicity and tailgating prevention SHOULD
be carefully designed. A number of methods
exist to ensure that only the cleared traveller actually goes through the e-Gate. However, this is an area where research is ongoing.
4.2.6. Use of text and multiple
languages
In general it is RECOMMENDED that the use
of text in any instructions to travellers is as
far as possible kept to a minimum. This is
because travellers find it difficult to process
information when presented in this way, particularly if they are unfamiliar with using an
automated system.
Some countries outside the EU rely more
heavily on the use of text, but this is often
the result of the system purpose. For example in the Australian case, the ABC system
(SmartGate) also performs a customs function whereby travellers have to complete a
number of declarations during the process.
In the UK and NL systems the language of the
passport holder can be used after the MRZ
is successfully read. Therefore, the messages
such as ‘Take your passport’ once the transaction is complete or ‘Please see an officer’ if
the passenger needs to be referred to man-

59 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

ual inspection are displayed in the language
of the passport holder (determined from the
MRZ). This functionality has received positive feedback from travellers.
It is RECOMMENDED that:
nnthe use of text is minimised as far as possible, with graphics and short animations
being used instead (see section 4.2.2. on
the effectiveness of delivery methods)46;
nnwhere text is used, messages are kept
short, to a few simple recognisable words
or phrases, e.g. ‘stop’ or ‘thank you’;
nnif text is used, the language MAY be determined based on the nationality in the
MRZ or the language options available
MAY be limited to that of the host country and English.
4.2.7. Human support at the e-Gate
All new sites installing ABC systems SHOULD
include the use of customer service personnel or in some cases of assisting personnel,
depending on the method chosen, to show
travellers how to use the e-Gates, as this
has proved highly effective in reducing the
‘fear factor’ for first-time users, and educating travellers more successfully than passive
techniques such as signage. After the traveller has used the system once, it is generally
not necessary to show its functioning again.
This means that over time the need for staff
members tasked with showing travellers how
to use the e-Gates will be reduced. Such effect is likely to be reinforced by the installa-

46 However, UK experience shows that in two
areas a short text message improves the
passenger process flow: 1. ‘Try Again’ when a
placement error occurs; and 2. ‘Take Passport’
at the end of the transaction. Although both
messages are currently displayed in English only,
they have been found to be very beneficial. In
the absence of these messages, passengers
often seem not to understand the graphics on
their own, which slows down the flow.

60 of 68

tion of more ABC systems across Europe as
the technology becomes more widespread.
Where human support at the e-Gate is provided, the relevant personnel SHOULD be
wearing civilian clothing, as travellers find
them less intimidating and more approachable (see section 4.2.3. on managing the traveller flow). Many of the operational sites use
customer service personnel provided by the
port operator.
In some instances operators have requested
the installation of an intercom which would
enable them to communicate directly with
e-Gate users from the monitoring station.
Yet, communications between the traveller at the e-Gate and the officers SHOULD
be kept to a minimum in order to automate
the process as much as possible and minimise the interactions between the traveller and the border guard, as these may slow
down the flow. Intercoms may be installed
to interact with the traveller under specific
circumstances (e.g. ‘the door is open, please
proceed’). If used, communications SHOULD
be initiated by the officer, not the traveller
unless there is an emergency. The preferred
language options for verbal communication
are the local language(s) and English.

4.3. User-friendly design of the
e-Gate
4.3.1. System design
The ABC system SHOULD be designed so that
it can be operated effectively by both border guards and travellers. Even if the system
has been constructed so that process concerning verification and database checks are
clear (see section 3.4. on functional requirements), the ability of travellers to use the system easily and effectively will have a critical
impact on its levels of usage and on the volume of rejections yielded.

4.3.2. Attractiveness and safety
The system SHOULD be designed so that it
is attractive to travellers – if it is too austere
then travellers may find it intimidating and
will be discouraged from approaching it for
the first time. Consideration SHOULD thus
be given to those factors which make the
system more inviting, for example:
nnthere is some evidence that mantrap
e-Gates are less inviting than single e-Gate
or kiosk systems;
nnsmoked or darkened glass has a similar
effect and clear glass should be used if
possible;
nnideally human support at the e-Gate
should be provided by personnel who are
not in uniform (see section 4.2.7. on human support at the e-Gate).
Safety is also a necessary consideration and
local legislation in this area MUST be observed
when designing the system. In particular, trip
hazards should be avoided, and any doors
should be extensively pressure tested to ensure travellers are not hurt if they are caught
in them. Doors should also have a fail-safe
system so that uncontrolled closure on travellers is rendered impossible.
4.3.3. Ergonomics
Consideration SHOULD be given to ergonomics as these will impact on usage and transaction times. For example:
nne-Passport readers should be at a height
which makes them easy to reach by the
majority of travellers (average elbowheight), and placed on the right-hand side
of the e-Gate.
nnAny system should require the minimum
essential number of physical interactions.
This will reduce the number of times that
a traveller has to pass their luggage from
one hand to another. The system should
take into account the prevalence of large
trolley bags carried by travellers.

nnIf the system has a self-adjusting camera
then its default height setting should be
configurable so it can be later set to the
average traveller height.
nnUsing graphics with multiple colours or
harsh contrasts should be avoided to enable travellers with visual impairment to
use the system easily.
nnThe range of camera heights (minimum
and maximum height) should be as wide
as possible to enable more travellers to
use the system.
nnEnhancements such as blinking lights
or soft tones to attract the attention of
travellers at critical stages should also be
considered.

4.4. Privacy and data protection
This document does not make specific recommendations on how to comply with privacy
legislation as such legislation varies widely
across MSs. However the development and
implementation of any ABC system MUST
observe privacy and data protection legal
obligations in the host country, as well as
under the Council of Europe and EU legal
frameworks.
The main EU legal instrument on data protection is Directive 95/46/EC on the protection
of individuals with regard to the processing
of personal data and on the free movement
of such data 47. In January 2012 the European
Commission proposed a data protection reform package consisting of a Data Protection
Regulation48, meant to replace the Data Protection Directive, and a General Data Protec-

47 OJ L 281, 23.11.1995, p. 31–50.
48 Proposal for a REGULATION OF THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL on
the protection of individuals with regard to
the processing of personal data and on the
free movement of such data (General Data
Protection Regulation), COM(2012) 11 final,
25.1.2012.

61 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

tion Directive49, providing for data protection
in the areas of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters. At the time of writing this BPOG, discussions on the proposed
Data Protection Regulation were ongoing.
In addition, the right to protection of personal data is encompassed under the rights
protected under Article 8 of the European
Convention on Human Rights50, which guarantees the respect for private and family life.
This provision is closely mirrored by Article 7
of the EU Charter on Fundamental Rights51.
The Charter also establishes a right to data
protection under its Article 8, specifying that
such data must be processed only for specified purposes.

49 Proposal for a DIRECTIVE OF THE EUROPEAN
PARLIAMENT AND OF THE COUNCIL on the
protection of individuals with regard to the
processing of personal data by competent
authorities for the purposes of prevention,
investigation, detection or prosecution of
criminal offences or the execution of criminal
penalties, and the free movement of such data,
COM(2012) 10 final, 25.1.2012.
50 Council of Europe, European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, as amended by Protocols Nos. 11 and
14, 4 November 1950, ETS 5, available at: http://
www.refworld.org/docid/3ae6b3b04.html
[accessed 4 March 2015].
51 European Union, Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the European Union, 26 October 2012, 2012/C
326/02.

62 of 68

The European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) recommends that the key data
protection principles of ‘Privacy by Design’
(i.e. embedding privacy in all elements at the
early start of the deployment of a system) and
‘Privacy by Default’ (i.e. building the activities in the most privacy-friendly way by design) are taken into account when analysing
and identifying the requirements for the development of a border management system
involving the processing of biometric data52.
These principles should be applied to the design and implementation of ABC systems,
taking due consideration of the fact that,
unlike RTPs, ABC solutions based on the use
of e-passports do not store travellers’ personal data but only anonymous operational
data for the purposes of quality control and
the extraction of business statistics.

52 Opinion of the European Data Protection
Supervisor on the Proposals for a Regulation
establishing an Entry/Exit System (EES) and a
Regulation establishing a Registered Traveller
Programme (RTP), 18 July 2013.

Annex 1: References
Bradner, Scott. Key Words for Use in RFCs to
Indicate Requirement Levels. BCP 14, RFC 2119,
March 1997.
Bretschneider, Stuart, Frederick J. Marc-Aurele, and Jiannan Wu. ‘Best practices’ research:
a methodological guide for the perplexed. Journal
of Public Administration Research and Theory 15.2 (2005), pp. 307-323.
Council of Europe. European Convention for the
Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental
Freedoms, as amended by Protocols Nos. 11 and
14. 4 November 1950, ETS 5.Council of the
European Union. EU Schengen Catalogue: External borders control, Return and readmissionRecommendations and best practices, Council
document No 7864/09, 19 March 2009, p. 6.
European Commission. Communication from
the Commission to the European Parliament and
the Council: Smart borders – options and the way
ahead, COM(2011) 680 final, 25 October 2011.
European Commission. Communication of 13
February 2008 from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee and the Committee
of the Regions: Preparing the next steps in border
management in the European Union, COM(2008)
69 final, 13 February 2008.
European Commission. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to
the processing of personal data and on the free
movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation), COM(2012) 11 final, 25.1.2012.
European Commission. Recommendation
amending the Recommendation establishing
a common ‘Practical Handbook for Border Guards

(Schengen Handbook)’ to be used by Member
States’ competent authorities when carrying out
the border control of persons (C (2006) 5186 final), 20 June 2011.
European Council. The Stockholm Programme
– An open and secure Europe serving and protecting citizens, OJ C 115, 4 May 2010, pp. 1-38.
European Data Protection Supervisor. Opinion on the Proposals for a Regulation establishing an Entry/Exit System (EES) and a Regulation
establishing a Registered Traveller Programme
(RTP), 18 July 2013.
European Union Agency for Fundamental
Rights. Annual Activity Report 2012, June 2013.
European Union Agency for Fundamental
Rights. Annual Activity Report 2013, June 2014.
European Union. Charter of Fundamental Rights
of the European Union, OJ C 326/02, 26 October 2012, pp. 395-406.
European Union. Directive 2004/18/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 31
March 2004 on the coordination of procedures
for the award of public works contracts, public
supply contracts and public service contracts, OJ
L 134, 30 April 2004, pp. 114-240.
European Union. Directive 2004/38/EC of the
European Parliament and of the Council of 29
April 2004 on the right of citizens of the Union and their family members to move and reside
freely within the territory of the Member States
amending Regulation (EEC) No 1612/68 and repealing Directives 64/221/EEC, 68/360/EEC, 72/194/
EEC, 73/148/EEC, 75/34/EEC, 75/35/EEC, 90/364/
EEC, 90/365/EEC and 93/96/EEC, OJ L 158, 30
April 2004, pp. 77-123.

63 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

European Union. Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with
regard to the processing of personal data and on
the free movement of such data, OJ L 281, 23 November 1995, pp. 31-50.
European Union. Regulation (EC) No 2252/2004
of 13 December 2004 on standards for security
features and biometrics in passports and travel
documents issued by Member States, OJ L 385,
29 December 2004, pp. 1-6.
European Union. Regulation (EC) No 444/2009
of 28 May 2009 amending Regulation (EC)
No 2252/2004 of 13 December 2004 on standards for security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents issued by Member
States, OJ L 142, 6 June 2009, pp. 1-4.
European Union. Regulation (EC) No 810/2009
of the European Parliament and of the Council of
13 July 2009 establishing a Community Code on
Visas (Visa Code), OJ L 243 of 15 September
2009, pp. 1-58
European Union. Regulation (EC) No 562/2006
of the European Parliament and of the Council of
15 March 2006 establishing a Community Code
on the rules governing the movement of persons
across borders (Schengen Borders Code), OJ L 105,
13 April 2006, pp. 1-32 (consolidated version
of April 2010).
Federal Office for Information Security (BSI).
BSI TR-03121-3.1 Technical Guideline Biometrics
for Public Sector Applications. Part 3: Application
Profiles and Function Modules, Volume 1: Verification Scenarios for e-Passport and Identity Card,
Version 3.0.1. 2013.
Federal Office for Information Security (BSI).
Technical Guideline TR-03129 – PKIs for Machine
Readable Travel Documents, Part 1 and 2, Version 1.10, 2014 [BSI03129].

64 of 68

Frontex. Best Practice Guidelines on the Design,
Deployment and Operation of Automated Border Crossing Systems, Version 1.1 March 2011.
Frontex. Best Practice Technical Guidelines for
Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems, Version 2.1, June 2015.
Frontex. Discussion paper on Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and operational challenges of certificate exchange/management at the borders,
14 June 2012.
Frontex. Guidelines for Automated Border Control
Processing of Third Country Nationals, June 2015.
Frontex. Operational and Technical security of
Electronic Passports, July 2011.
IATA. Airport Development Reference Manual
(ADRM), 9th edition, January 2004.
ICAO. A Primer on the ICAO PKD Directory,
White Paper, Version 1.5, 20 May 2009.
ICAO. Doc9303 – Machine Readable Travel Documents, Part 1 Vol. 2 (second edition, 2006) and
Part 3 Vol. 2 (third edition, 2008) [ICAO9303].
ICAO. Guidelines for electronic – Machine Readable Travel Documents & Passenger Facilitation,
Version – 1.0, 17.4.2008.
ICAO. MRTD Glossary [last accessed on 2 June
2015].
ISO/IEC 2382-37:2012, Information technology –
Vocabulary – Part 37: Harmonized biometric vocabulary [ISO2382-37].
Ongaro, Edoardo. A protocol for the extrapolation of ‘Best’ Practices: How to draw lessons from
one experience to improve public management
in another situation. European Public Sector
Award 2009, Final Symposium and Ceremony,
Maastricht, 2009 [last accessed: 30 June 2015].

PricewaterhouseCoopers. Technical Study on
Smart Borders; Final Report. October 2014.
Royal Netherlands Marechaussee. Change
Management & Man Machine Interface, Presentation in the 5th Workshop on Automated
Border Crossing Systems based on Facial Recognition and Electronic passports, London,
31 March 2011.

UK Home Office. ‘FaceSymbol’ Project – Design,
development, testing and ISO adoption, Contribution to ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC 37 on Biometrics,
11 June 2012.
Veselý, Arnošt. Theory and Methodology of Best
Practice Research: A Critical Review of the Current State, Central European Journal of Public
Policy, Vol. 5, No 2, December 2011, pp. 98-117.

65 of 68

Frontex

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

Annex 2:
Overview of ABC systems
in the EU/Schengen Area
1	Selected TCNs eligible for ABC processing:
DE – RTP for citizens of the US and Hong Kong
FI – Japanese, South Korean, US, Canadian and
New Zealand nationals who hold an e-Passport
FR – TCNs who are family members of EU
citizens
NL – US citizens who register with a dedicated
RTP programme
PT – RTP for Angolan citizens
UK – RTP for citizens of the US, Australia, New
Zealand, Canada and Japan
2 The system is being implemented within the
frames of the FP7 by the Project Consortium.
3 At the time of writing Belgian ABC system is
expected to be operational in June 2015.
4 The fingerprint verification functionality is
a part of the system, however, at the time of
writing, it is not operational.
5 At the time of writing Danish ABC system is
expected to be operational on 1 December 2015.

66 of 68

6

7
8

9

Spain has implemented both 1-step and 2-step
segregated solutions; in case of the 1-step
solution there are 12 e-Gates, while in case
of the 2-step segregated solution there are
19 kiosks and 4 e-Gates.
Eligible travellers who do not hold an e-Passport
can register in a dedicated database.
The ABC system in Norway has been originally
envisaged to cater for all EU/EEA/CH citizens of
the age of 18 and older who are holders of an
e-passport; however, due to unavailability of
verified certificates from other MSs, currently,
only NO/SE/UK/FI/DK/IS citizens are eligible to
use the system.
The fingerprint verification functionality is
a part of the system, however, at the time of
writing, it is not operational.

■

■

FR

HU

67 of 68

UK

■

■

■

■

≥18

≥18

≥18

≥18

≥18

≥18

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

NO/SE/UK/
FI/DK/IS

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■7

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■9

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

■

Airport
Authority

RO

■

■

NO

PT

■

■

≥18

≥18

≥18

≥18

EU/EEA/CH

■

■

■

■

■2

System
provider

NL

LV

IT

IS

■

■

FI

IE

■

ES

≥15

■

■

■

2-step
segregated

■

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

■

■
4

■

Operator

System provider(s)

Fujitsu, Vision Box, Accenture

Vision-Box

Gemalto, Vision-Box

Accenture, Vision Box

SITA

SITA, Accenture

ARH Zrt.

Morpho

Vision-Box

Indra, Gunnebo, Neurotechnology

Vision Box

Vision Box

Bundesdruckerei GmbH and Secunet
Security Networks AG

L-1 Identity Solutions, Magnetic
Autocontrol, Vitkovice Solution,
Secunet

Atos Bulgaria, Vision Box

Vision Box

Project Consortium

Number of:

4

19

6

Kiosks

EE

■5

≥18

EU/EEA/CH

EU/EEA/CH

Selected
TCN1

DK

■

DE

Operational

≥15

≥18

National eID

■

Pilot
■

Finger

CZ

Planned
■

1-step

■

Age
■

Owner
Border/State
Authority

BG

Nationality

■3

ePassport
■

Face

EU/EEA/CH

Configuration
2-step
integrated

≥18

Eligible
document Biometrics
Airport
Authority

■

Eligible pax
Border
Authority

BE

Status

System
provider

AT

MS

111

2

81

4

36

2

8

4

1

41

38

166

2

9

117

3

16

6

1

E-gates

System
provider

Frontex

68 of 68

Best Practice Operational Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union

Print version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-51-2
DOI 10.2819/86138

Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland

Online version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-50-5
DOI 10.2819/39041

T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

