Guidelines
for Processing of
Third‑Country Nationals
through Automated
Border Control

Guidelines
for Processing of
Third‑Country Nationals
through Automated
Border Control

1 of 32

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders
of the Member States of the European Union
Research and Development Unit
Capacity Building Division
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

2 of 32

Print version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-51-2
DOI 10.2819/86138
Online version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-50-5
DOI 10.2819/39041

Contents
Legal notice #4
All rights reserved #4
Acknowledgements

#5

About Frontex #6
Acronyms and abbreviations #7
Glossary #8
Executive summary #11
Terminology #13
1. Introduction #14
1.1. Purpose and audience #14
1.2. Scope and methodology #14
1.3. A
 bout best practices and guidelines #15
1.4. How to read this document #16
2.	Legal framework for border checks on third-country nationals #17
3.	Current procedure for border checks on third‑country nationals #18
3.1.	TCN manual border check process #18
3.2.	Existing ABC and ABC-assisted processing of TCNs #20
3.2.1. Finland #21
3.2.2. Germany #22
3.2.3. Netherlands #22
3.2.4. United Kingdom #23
3.2.5. Local border traffic #23
4.	Perpectives on TCN ABC in the future #24
4.1. Legal framework #24
4.2.	Future scenarios for TCN ABC #25
4.3. TCN ABC topology considerations #28
5.	The document authentication and biometric verification processes #29
6. Quality assurance #29
7. Conclusions #30
Annex: References #31

3 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

Legal notice
The contents of this publication do not necessarily reflect the official opinions of any institution or body of the European Union. Neither Frontex nor any person or company acting on
behalf of Frontex is responsible for the use that may be made of the information contained
in this report.

All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced in any form or by any means electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying and
recording, or by any information storage retrieval system, without permission in writing from the copyright holder.
Before using the Frontex ‘Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals through
Automated Border Control’ (TCN Guidelines)
in a document please observe the following.
1.	Contact the Frontex Research and Development Unit in order to get the latest
version of the TCN Guidelines and support for using them in your document.
In the introductory part of the document:
2.	include a brief text declaring that Frontex TCN Guidelines have been used in the
document. Mention explicitly which sections in the document are (totally or partially) based on these guidelines;
3.	explain briefly why Frontex TCN Guidelines have been used in the document, and
in case of total or partial use of particular
sections, explicitly state why these sec-

4 of 32

tions are copied in full and what the added
value is. Provide some background about
how using Frontex guidelines best serves
the purposes of the document;
4.	briefly mention that the Frontex TCN
Guidelines are the result of a collaborative effort among EU Member States (coordinated by Frontex) which at the time of
writing have an operational or pilot ABC
system in place.
In the body of the document:
5.	in the parts of the document based on the
Frontex TCN Guidelines, make reference
to the Frontex document (see instructions
below).
In the references section:
6.	include a proper reference to the Frontex TCN Guidelines document (title, version and issuing date and ISBN reference,
plus a download link to the Frontex web
page hosting the latest version);
7.	include the Frontex Research and Development Unit contact details at the end of
the document.

Acknowledgements1
This document was prepared by the Research
and Development Unit (RDU) of Frontex in
close cooperation with experts from a number of European Union Member States which,
at the time of writing, were operating and/
or testing automated border control systems processing third-country nationals at
selected external border crossing points of
the EU. Frontex would like to particularly acknowledge the work of Pasi Nokelainen, System Manager for Border Checks at the Finnish
Border Guard, who took the lead in developing these guidelines. It would also like to
thank the following persons who participated
in the working group on Automated Border
Control and contributed to this document1
nnBulgaria: Lyubomir Dilov and Aleksandr
Kamburov (Border Police),
nnCzech Republic: Mylan Frydrych and Petr
Malovec (Border Police),
nnFinland: Janne Kurvinen and Pasi
Nokelainen (Finnish Border Guard),
nnFrance: Eric Clement and Pierre Alexandre Gelas (Border Police),
nnGermany: Markus Nuppeney and Florian
Rienhardt (Federal Office for Information
Security) and Maik Rudolf (Federal Police),

1

nnIreland: Kevin Ryan (Irish Naturalisation
and Immigration Service),
nnNetherlands: Yvonne Bakker (Ministry of
Justice) and Hans de Moel (Royal Netherlands Marechaussee),
nnPortugal: Paula Maria Azevedo Cristina
(Immigration and Border Service),
nnSpain: Javier Núñez Alonso and Alberto
Raez Liria (Spanish National Police),
nnUnited Kingdom: Andrew Clayton and
Glen Wimbury (UK Border Agency).
In addition, the following staff from the Frontex RDU participated in the drafting and editing process: Rasa Karbauskaite, Karolina
Lopacka, Maria Duro Mansilla and Ignacio
Zozaya.
Frontex would also like to express its gratitude to other stakeholders who contributed to the review process, including Ciarán
Carolan (eu-LISA) and Philippe Van Triel (Directorate-General for Migration and Home
Affairs, European Commission).

Member State experts and Frontex staff have
been acknowledged in alphabetical order
according to the first letter of their surnames.

5 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

About Frontex
The mission of Frontex is to facilitate and render more effective the application of existing
and future European Union measures relating to the management of external borders,
in particular the Schengen Borders Code. As
such, Frontex is to play a key role in analysing and defining the capability needs in border control and in supporting the Member
States in development of these capabilities.
Frontex also provides qualified expertise to
support the EU policy development process
in the area of border control.
One of the core objectives of the Capacity
Building Division is to drive the process of harmonisation and standardisation of the management of the EU external borders by the

6 of 32

Member States, by promoting greater interoperability. As part of the Capacity Building
Division at Frontex, the RDU is tasked with
the development of best practices and procedures, both technical and operational, for
border control. The RDU proactively monitors and participates in the development of
research relevant for the control and surveillance of external borders and keeps the
Member States and the European Commission informed concerning technological innovations in the field of border control. In
particular, one of the RDU’s main areas of
work is the exploration of the potential offered by new border management technologies to meet the dual objective of enhancing
security while facilitating travel.

Acronyms and abbreviations
ABC	automated border control
BCP
border crossing point
BPOG	
‘Best Practice Operational Guidelines for Automated Border Control (ABC)
Systems’
BPTG
‘Best Practice Technical Guidelines for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems’
EES
entry/exit system
eu-LISA	European Agency for the Operational Management of Large-Scale IT Systems
in the area of Freedom, Security and Justice
e-MRTD
electronic machine-readable travel document
EU
European Union
EU/EEA/CH European Union, European Economic Area, Switzerland
GPVIS	‘Good Practices in Practical Implementation of the Visa Information System at
EU Borders’
ICAO
International Civil Aviation Organisation
MRTD
machine-readable travel document
RT(s)
registered traveller(s)
RTP
registered traveller programme
SBC
Schengen Borders Code
TCN(s)
third-country national(s)
VE
visa exempt
VH
visa holder
VIS
Visa Information System
WG
working group

7 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

Glossary
The definitions included in this section are
based on a number of relevant glossaries,
dictionaries and documents, namely the
OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms, the Oxford Language Dictionary, the European Commission ‘Proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council establishing an entry/exit system (EES)’, the
European Commission ‘Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the
Council establishing a registered traveller
programme’, the European Union ‘Schengen
Borders Code’, the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) ‘Doc 9303 Machine Readable Travel Documents’, the ICAO
‘Guidelines for Electronic Machine Readable Travel Documents and Passenger Facilitation’, the ICAO ‘Machine Readable Travel
Documents Glossary,’ the ICAO ‘A Primer on
the ICAO Public Key Directory: White Paper’ and the Treaty on the Functioning of
the European Union (for further details see
reference list in Annex I). Finally, a number
of definitions have been devised and agreed
upon by the Frontex working group on Automated Border Controls.
Automated border control (ABC) system: an
automated system which authenticates the
electronic machine-readable travel document
and/or token, establishes that the passenger
is the rightful holder of the document and/
or token, queries border control records and
then determines eligibility of border crossing
according to the predefined rules.
Biometric capture: the process of taking a
biometric sample from the user.
Biometric verification: the process of confirming the identity of the holder of an e-MRTD

8 of 32

by the measurement and validation of one or
more unique properties of the holder’s person.
Border checks: the checks carried out at border crossing points in accordance with the
Schengen Borders Code (SBC), to ensure that
persons, including their means of transport
and the objects in their possession, may be
authorised to enter the territory of the Member States or authorised to leave it. See also
‘Border crossing point (BCP)’.
Border crossing point (BCP): any crossing
point authorised by the competent authorities for the crossing of external borders.
Border guard: any public official assigned,
in accordance with national law, to a border
crossing point or along the border or the immediate vicinity of that border who carries
out, in accordance with the SBC and national
law, border control tasks.
Certificate: an electronic document establishing a digital identity by combining the
identity name or identifier with the public
key of the identity, a validity period and an
electronic signature by a third party.
Cost-benefit analysis: technique for deciding whether to make a change. As its name
suggests, it compares the values of all benefits from the action under consideration and
the costs associated with it.
Database: an application storing a structured set of data and allowing for the management and retrieval of such data.
Entry/exit system (EES): an information system enabling storage of entry and exit data
of third-country nationals crossing the ex-

ternal borders of the Member States of the
European Union.

sons enjoying the Community right to free
movement’.

E-gate: one of the components of an ABC
system, consisting of a physical barrier operated by electronic means. This covers different types of e-gates: a single-door e-gate
is a system with one barrier to pass. A double-door e-gate is a system with an entry
and an exit barrier (man-trap).

Interoperability: the ability of several independent systems or subsystem components
to work together.

Electronic machine-readable travel document (e-MRTD): a machine-readable travel
document equipped with an electronic contactless chip according to the International
Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) Doc 9303.
See also ‘Machine-readable travel document’.
E-passport: a machine-readable passport
containing a contactless integrated circuit
chip within which is stored data from the
passport data page, a biometric measure of
the passport holder and a security object to
protect the data with public key infrastructure cryptographic technology, and which
conforms to the specifications of ICAO Doc
9303, Part 1.
EU citizen: any person having the nationality
of an EU Member State, within the meaning
of Article 20(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. See also ‘Persons
enjoying the Community right to free movement’ and ‘Freedom of movement (right to)’.
First-line check: default check carried out at
border crossing points to ensure that travellers are authorised to enter the territory of
the EU/EEA/CH. See also ‘Second-line check’.
Freedom of movement (right to): a fundamental right of every citizen of an EU Member State or another European Economic
Area country or Switzerland to freely move,
reside and work within the territory of these
Member States. See also ‘EU citizen’ and ‘Per-

Machine-readable travel document
(MRTD): an official document, conforming
with the specifications contained in ICAO
Doc 9303 (e.g. passport, visa), issued by a
state or an organisation which is used by the
holder for international travel (e.g. passport,
visa) and which contains mandatory visual
(eye-readable) data and a separate mandatory data summary in a format which is capable of being read by machine.
Member State: a country which is a member of the European Union. Within the context of the present guidelines, the term also
applies to those countries that, not being EU
members, are part of the Schengen area. See
also ‘Schengen area’.
Operator: the border guard officer responsible for the remote monitoring and control of
the ABC system. The tasks performed by the
operator typically include: (a) monitoring the
user interface of the application; (b) reacting upon any notification given by the application; (c) managing exceptions and making
decisions about them; (d) communicating
with the assisting personnel for the handling
of exceptions at the e-gates; (e) monitoring
and profiling travellers queuing in the ABC
line and using the e-gates, looking for suspicious behaviour in travellers; and (f) communicating with the border guards responsible
for second-line checks whenever their service is needed.
Persons enjoying the Community right of
free movement: according to Article 2(5) of
the Schengen Borders Code these are: (a)
Union citizens within the meaning of Article
20(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the

9 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

European Union and third-country nationals who are members of the family of a Union citizen exercising his or her right to free
movement to whom Directive 2004/38/EC of
the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on the right of citizens of
the Union and their family members to move
and reside freely within the territory of the
Member States; and (b) third-country nationals and their family members, whatever their
nationality, who, under agreements between
the Community and its Member States, on
the one hand, and those third countries, on
the other hand, enjoy rights of free movement equivalent to those of Union citizens.
See also ‘Freedom of movement (right to)’.
Port operator: also known as ‘port authority’. The public institution and/or private company that operates the port facility, either at
air or sea borders.
Registered traveller (RT): a third-country
national who has been granted access to
the registered traveller programme. See also
‘Registered traveller programme’.
Registered traveller programme (RTP): a
programme that allows third-country nationals who have been pre-vetted and granted
access to the RTP to benefit from facilitation of border checks at the European Union’s external border.
Schengen area: an area without internal
border control encompassing 26 European
countries, including all EU Member States ex-

10 of 32

cept Bulgaria, Cyprus, Ireland, Romania and
the United Kingdom, as well as four non-EU
countries, namely Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland. It takes its name from
the Schengen Agreement signed in Schengen, Luxembourg, in 1985; this agreement was
later incorporated into the EU legal framework by the 1997 Treaty of Amsterdam.
Schengen Borders Code: Regulation (EC)
No 562/2006 of the European Parliament and
of the Council of 15 March 2006 establishing a Community Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders.
Second-line check: a further check which
may be carried out in a special location away
from the location at which all travellers are
checked (first line).
Third-country national: any person who is
not an EU citizen within the meaning of Article 20(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning
of the European Union and who is not a person enjoying the Union right to freedom of
movement, as defined in Article 2(5) of the
Schengen Borders Code. See also ‘EU citizen’
and ‘Persons enjoying the Community right
of free movement’.
Topology: the way in which the constituent
parts of a system are interrelated or arranged.
Watch list: a list of individuals, groups, or
items that require close surveillance. See also
‘Database’.

Executive summary
The present document provides guidelines
on the implementation of automated border control (ABC) systems to process thirdcountry nationals (TCNs). ABC is defined as
the use of automated systems that can verify the identity of travellers at border crossing
points and automatically determine eligibility
for border crossing according to predefined
rules. A border guard stationed in a monitoring and control station supervises the process.
The aim of these guidelines is to clarify the legal, operational and technical aspects of ABC
implementations aimed to facilitate TCN border crossings as they exist today and could
exist in the future in line with the European
Commission’s proposals to establish an entry/
exit system (EES proposal), a registered traveller programme (RTP proposal) and amendments to the Schengen Borders Code (SBC
amendments). The guidelines will be regularly updated to reflect further development
of the Commission’s proposals within the
framework of the legislative procedure and
the results of the 2015 ‘Smart borders’ pilot.
The intended audience consists of technical
experts as well as decision-makers involved
in the design and implementation of ABC systems in the EU Member States. The guidelines should be read in conjunction with the
Frontex ‘Best Practice Operational Guidelines’
(BPOG) and ‘Best Practice Technical Guidelines’ (BPTG) for ABC and the ‘Good Practices in Practical Implementation of the Visa
Information System at EU Borders’ (GPVIS).
The guidelines are structured in three main
sections which focus respectively on: (1) the
legal framework of border checks of thirdcountry nationals; (2) current practice concerning border checks of third-country

nationals, both manual and with the use of
ABC; and (3) outlook on the development and
implementation of ABC solutions for the processing of TCNs in the future.
The Schengen Borders Code, the EU Visa Code
and national legislation set the legal framework for the various measures which are
implemented at the border crossing points
of the Schengen area. TCNs should undergo
a ‘thorough check’ comprising a number of
steps, such as the verification of the available
means of subsistence and the purpose of the
intended stay, which are difficult to automate.
In the case of TCNs who are visa holders, border guards must also verify the identity of the
visa holder and the authenticity of the visa
by using the traveller’s fingerprints.
Some Member States have launched pilots
and implemented operational ABC systems for
TCNs. The guidelines review the cases of Finland, Germany, the Netherlands and the United
Kingdom. These implementations are generally available to a limited group of eligible nationalities, sometimes on the basis of bilateral
agreements with third countries, and differ,
among other aspects, on whether pre-enrolment is required, the biometric markers used
and whether there are separate dedicated
ABC infrastructures for TCNs and EU citizens.
The future outlook of ABC for the processing of TCNs will be shaped by the adoption
of EU legislation on ‘Smart borders’. The document reviews the European Commission’s
EES and RTP proposals and SBC amendments,
focusing on the key elements that would
shape the use of ABC for TCNs, mainly: (1)
the establishment of an obligation to check
whether a person has been granted access
to the RTP and to verify the identity of the

11 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

registered traveller (RT); (2) the exemption
of RTs from certain aspects of the thorough
check; and (3) the replacement of the current stamping of travel documents by the
electronic recording and verification of data
in the EES. As proposed by the Commission,
both the EES and the RTP would require the
enrolment and verification of fingerprints.
These amendments open up three scenarios for the processing of TCNs through ABC.
For TCNs enrolled in the RTP, all the stages
can be fully automated at both entry and exit,
since the checks on the purpose of stay and
the means of subsistence have been waived.
For non-enrolled TCNs, the possibilities include an ABC or ABC-assisted implementation
where the entry requirements that are still
applicable could be performed by answering
the questions on a touch screen where the
decision to authorise entry or exit would be
done manually or electronically by a supervising border guard.
The ABC system may facilitate both EU/EEA/
CH citizens and TCNs. However, if different
workflows and biometrics apply to the two
groups, particular attention should be paid
to the provision of customer guidance and
instructions.
In ABC for TCNs all the applicable requirements and recommendations regarding the
document authentication, biometric verification and quality control processes listed in
the BPOG and BPTG shall apply. Additionally,
with respect to the fingerprint scanning process, the fingerprint quality control and requirements recommendations of the GPVIS
should be adhered to.

12 of 32

Terminology
Although the recommendations and guidelines
presented in this document are non-binding
for Member States, the present terminology2
has been adopted in order to provide an unambiguous description of what should be observed in order to achieve a coherent approach
with a common security baseline across the
European Union’s external borders.
SHALL This word, or the terms ‘REQUIRED’
or ‘MUST’, is to be understood as an
absolute requirement.
SHALL NOT This phrase, or the phrase ‘MUST
NOT’, is to be understood as an absolute prohibition.
SHOULD This word, or the adjective ‘RECOMMENDED’, means that there may
exist valid reasons in particular circumstances to ignore a particular aspect,
but the full implications must be understood and carefully weighed before
choosing a different course.
SHOULD NOT This phrase, or the phrase
‘NOT RECOMMENDED’, means that

2

there may exist valid reasons in particular circumstances when the particular behaviour is acceptable or even
useful, but the full implications should
be understood and the case carefully
weighed before implementing any behaviour described with this label.
MAY This word, or the adjective ‘OPTIONAL’,
means that an item or feature is truly
optional. For example, a vendor may
choose to include the option because a
particular marketplace requires it or because the vendor feels that it enhances
the product while another vendor may
omit the same item or feature. An implementation which does not include
a particular option MUST be prepared
to interoperate with another implementation which does include the option, although perhaps with reduced
functionality. In the same sense an implementation which does include a particular option MUST be prepared to
interoperate with another implementation which does not include the option.

See Bradner, Scott, ‘Key words for use in RFCs
[requests for comments] to indicate requirement
levels’, BCP 14, RFC 2119, 1997. (A request for
comments (RFC) is a formal document (type
of publication) from the Internet Engineering
Task Force (IETF) that is the result of committee
drafting and subsequent review by interested
parties. Some RFCs are informational in nature.
Of those that are intended to become internet
standards, the final version of the RFC becomes
the standard and no further comments or
changes are permitted).

13 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

1. Introduction

14 of 32

1.1. Purpose and audience

1.2. Scope and methodology

This document presents a generic technical and operational framework for the implementation of automated border control
(ABC) systems capable of processing thirdcountry nationals (TCNs), both visa holders
and visa exempt, at the EU’s external borders.
ABC is defined as the use of automated systems which can verify the identity of travellers at border crossing points (BCPs) and
automatically determine eligibility for border crossing according to predefined rules.
These rules need to observe the procedures
and requirements set in the Schengen Borders
Code (SBC) for carrying out border checks.
The system’s human oversight is provided
by a border guard stationed in a monitoring and control station, who supervises the
whole process.

The scope and content of the present document is aligned, when applicable, with the
European Commission’s proposals to establish an entry/exit system (EES proposal)3 ,
a registered traveller programme (RTP
proposal)4 and amendments to the SBC (SBC
amendments)5 constituting the ‘Smart borders’ package as well as the International Civil
Aviation Organisation’s (ICAO) recommendations on the use of e-passports for automated border control without enrolment6, as
available at the time of writing7. The existing

The document has been elaborated in an
effort to clarify the legal, operational and
technical aspects of ABC implementations
aimed to facilitate TCN border crossings as
they exist today and could exist in the future.
The intended audience consists of technical
experts involved in the design and implementation of ABC systems in the EU Member States. Project managers and system
architects from border management authorities will find here references to detailed
technical information allowing for the specification and implementation of a system
that performs to standards and complies
with the legal requirements. In addition,
current and prospective practitioners and
decision-makers at national and EU levels
may benefit from a better understanding of
the technical, operational and legal aspects
of the implementation of ABC systems processing TCNs.

4

3

5

6

7

Proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council establishing an Entry/
Exit System (EES) to register entry and exit data
of third-country nationals crossing the external
borders of the Member States of the European
Union, COM(2013) 95 final 2013/0057 (COD).
Proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council establishing a
Registered Traveller Programme, COM(2013) 97
final 2013/0059 (COD).
Proposal for a Regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council amending
Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 as regards
the use of the Entry/Exit System (EES) and
the Registered Traveller Programme (RTP),
COM(2103) 96 final 2013/0060 (COD).
See in particular ‘Communication from the
Commission to the European Parliament, the
Council, the European Economic and Social
Committee and the Committee of the Regions:
Preparing the next steps in border management
in the European Union’, COM(2008) 69 final,
13.2.2008; ICAO, ‘Guidelines for electronic
— Machine-readable Travel Documents &
Passenger Facilitation’, Version — 1.0, 17.4.2008.
It should be noted that at the time of writing, the
‘Smart borders’ pilot coordinated by the European
Agency for the Operational Management of
Large-Scale IT Systems in the area of Freedom,
Security and Justice (eu-LISA) is ongoing, thus the
proposals may, as a result, be subject to changes.

systems and legal framework for processing
TCN travellers by ABC systems are also described in order to provide information on
the changes, challenges and opportunities
offered by the proposals. In particular, the
present document provides insight into the
functioning and requirements concerning:
nnthe infrastructure and processes of ABC
for TCNs today and as proposed by the
European Commission;
nnthe physical architecture of an ABC system for TCNs;
nnthe document authentication process;
nnthe biometric verification process;
nnquality control aspects of ABC systems.
Travel documents considered and
biometric markers used
ABC systems can be divided into two types:
(a) systems without pre-enrolment based on
the use of an electronic travel document; and
(b) systems based on pre-enrolment which
generally take the shape of registered traveller programmes. The European Commission
encourages Member States to deploy ABC
systems without pre-enrolment for EU citizens carrying ICAO-compliant e-passports.
Most ABC systems currently in use support
facial recognition as the main biometric verification method. However, the RTP proposal
and the SBC amendments assume the use of
fingerprints for TCNs and, if implemented as
proposed, would require the use of a separate token for TCNs and enable the usage
of regular machine-readable travel documents (MRTDs).
Methodology
The methodology used by the ABC working
group (WG) to develop this document included thorough analysis and discussion of
the current regulatory framework of the border checks applicable to TCNs, current ABC
implementations processing TCNs in Mem-

ber States and changes to the legislation
regulating TCN processing proposed by the
European Commission, as well as consultations with experts and with the Commission.
In particular, the following tasks were undertaken by the WG members:
nnstating the problem and goals;
nnanalysing the SBC amendments and the
EES and RTP proposals;
nnelaborating the list of relevant topics to
be covered;
nndebating and agreeing on proposed
guidelines;
nnconstructing the present document;
nnconducting an internal and external review of the document;
nnapproving these guidelines.
This document is intended to be a dynamic
one, subject to regular updates in an attempt to gather and disseminate knowledge on state-of-the-art technologies and
best current practices regarding ABC systems for TCNs, to reflect further development
on the three legislative proposals within the
framework of the legislative procedure and
to follow the implementation of the ‘Smart
borders’ pilot carried out in 2015. The guidelines will be validated through consultations
with relevant stakeholders and with technical/operational experts in the field of ABC.

1.3. About best practices
and guidelines
Frontex has published best practice guidelines
on the operational and technical aspects of
ABC solutions, namely the ‘Best Practice Operational Guidelines’ (BPOG) and ‘Best Practice Technical Guidelines’ (BPTG) for ABC. A
best practice is a technique, method, process, activity, incentive or reward which conventional wisdom regards as more effective
at delivering a particular outcome than any
other technique, method, process, etc. when
applied to a particular condition or circum-

15 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

stance. In the Schengen context, for example,
best practices are defined as ‘a non-exhaustive set of working methods or model measures which must be considered as the optimal
application of the Schengen acquis, on the understanding that more than one best practice
is possible for each specific part of Schengen
cooperation’8.
For a best practice to be identified there
needs to be conclusive evidence of its effectiveness based on sufficiently broad experience. This is the case concerning the
development and implementation of ABC systems without pre-enrolment for EU/EEA/CH
nationals carrying ICAO-compliant e-passports, as these kinds of solutions have been
in operation in a significant number of Member States for an extended period of time.
In contrast, there is only limited experience
in the EU as regards the use of ABC systems
to process TCNs. In this light, the scope of
the present document is circumscribed to
the provision of guidelines, that is, of gen-

8

16 of 32

Council of the EU, ‘EU Schengen Catalogue:
External borders control, return and readmission
— Recommendations and best practices’, Council
document No 7864/09, 19.3.2009, p. 6.

eral, non-mandatory principles aiming to
streamline particular procedures according to
a set routine. The aim is to complement the
BPOG and BPTG as well as the ‘Good Practices in Practical Implementation of the Visa
Information System at EU Borders’ (GPVIS) by
clarifying the legal, operational and technical aspects of ABC implementation aimed at
processing TCNs as they exist today and as
foreseen in the European Commission’s proposals to establish an RTP and an EES.

1.4. How to read this document
These guidelines should be read in combination with the aforementioned Frontex documents, namely the ABC BPOG and BPTG, as
well as the GPVIS. In particular, technical aspects are not repeated in this document, but
references are made to the BPTG and GPVIS,
when applicable.
Clarification of the terminology used, a glossary and a list of acronyms can be found at
the beginning of the document.

2.	Legal framework for border
checks on third-country
nationals
The Schengen Borders Code sets the framework for the various border control measures which are implemented at the external
BCPs of the Schengen area. The notion of ‘border checks’ means the checks carried out at
BCPs, to ensure that a person, including their
means of transport and the objects in their
possession, may be authorised to enter the
territory of the Member States or authorised to leave it.
According to the SBC, EU citizens and those
enjoying the right of free movement are subject to a ‘minimum check’, which consists of
establishing their identities on the basis of
presented travel documents and a straightforward verification of their validity and authenticity, including consultation of databases,
when necessary. With the issuance of e-passports by Member States, an infrastructure for
travel document authentication and biometric verification emerged; this made it technically feasible to perform minimum checks
automatically with the use of ABC systems.
Some Member States have successfully implemented such solutions to facilitate border
crossings by EU/EEA/CH passport holders.

The SBC, however, sets a number of additional requirements for border checks on
TCNs, such as the examination of the entry
and exit stamps in order to verify that the
person has not already exceeded the maximum duration of authorised stay in the territory of the Member States, the verification
of the purpose of the intended stay and that
the person has sufficient means of subsistence. These requirements limit the possibilities to automate the processing of TCNs, as
some of the required checks cannot be performed by ABC systems but have to be completed manually.
Moreover, one of the most challenging aspects of border checks on TCN visa holders
is the obligation to verify the identity of the
visa holder and the authenticity of the visa
by using the fingerprint of the traveller. This
requirement, set by the SBC on the basis of
the provisions of the Visa Information System (VIS) regulation9, has been mandatory
since October 2014.

9

Regulation (EC) No 767/2008 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 9 July 2008
concerning the Visa Information System (VIS)
and the exchange of data between Member
States on short-stay visas (VIS Regulation).

17 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

3.	Current procedure
for border checks on
third‑country nationals
3.1.	TCN manual border check process
The manual border check process for a TCN traveller consists of the following steps.
Figure 1. TCN on entry
1. Document/s

1. Document/s

2. Allowed stay?

2. Allowed stay?

3. Purpose of stay?

3. Consult systems

4. Financial means?

4. Accept/reject

5. Consult systems

5. Stamping

6. Accept/reject

6. Entry/exit

7. Stamping

8. Entry/exit

18 of 32

Figure 2. TCN on exit

Figure 3. TCN-VH on entry

Figure 4. TCN-VH on exit

1. Document/s

1. Document/s

2. Fingerprint scan

2. Fingerprint

3. Allowed stay?

3. Allowed stay?

4. Purpose of stay?

4. Consult

5. Financial means?

5. Accept/reject

6. Consult systems

6. Stamping

7. Accept/reject

7. Entry/exit

8. Stamping

for processing TCNs through ABC systems. In
practice, only the steps of document authentication, identity verification (referred to as the
‘Document check’) and database queries (referred to as ‘Consult systems’) can be automated. The configuration of an ABC system
can, however, also include processes such as
entry/exit recording into national systems or allow for checking the eligibility of the traveller’s
nationality to use ABC where eligible nationalities have been restricted, for example to visaexempt nationalities only. These requirements
have so far, regardless of the growing number
of e-passport holders among TCN travellers,
limited the expansion of ABC systems for the
processing of TCN and had a negative impact
on the cost-efficiency of the systems.

9. Entry/exit

Figures 1 and 2 illustrate the content of a thorough check as defined by the SBC; dotted lines
indicate that the step is optional. In practice,
these steps can take place in parallel or in sequence. In some Member States, the process
also includes the consultation and entering of
data into a national entry/exit system.
As noted above, currently the requirements set
by the SBC considerably limit the possibilities

19 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

While Figures 1 and 2 describe the basic border
check process for both TCN traveller groups
— visa exempt (VE) and visa holders (VH) —
the VIS verification process for TCN-VH, illustrated in Figure 3, comprises yet another
phase, i.e. fingerprint scan. This additional
phase, which has been depicted as a separate step, is in reality part of the document
check as it is connected to the visa verification and authentication.

3.2.	Existing ABC and ABCassisted processing of TCNs
Despite the fact that many of the TCN processing phases, in particular on entry (Figure 1), cannot be automated, some Member
States have launched pilots and implemented
operational ABC systems for TCNs. In these
implementations, the basic process flow can
be depicted as below (Figures 5 and 6).

Figure 5. ABC-assisted control for TCN on entry
ABC

MANUAL CONTROL

1. Document/s

2. Consult systems

3. Visa/permit

4. Allowed stay?

5. Purpose of stay?

6. Financial means?

7. Accept/reject

8. Stamping

9. Entry/exit

20 of 32

Figure 6. ABC-assisted control for TCN on exit
ABC

MANUAL CONTROL

1. Document/s

2. Consult systems

3. Visa/permit

4. Allowed stay?

5. Accept/reject

6. Stamping

7. Entry/exit

3.2.1. Finland

or

7. Entry/exit

The Finnish Border Guard has piloted an ABC
solution for the assisted processing of TCNVE travellers at the exit controls of HelsinkiVantaa Airport. The exit e-gates are available
to a limited group of nationalities. At the time
of writing, TCN-VE travellers holding passports issued by Australia, Japan, New Zealand, South Korea and the United States are
allowed to use ABC. At entry, the e-gates are
available only for Japanese travellers.

similar and based on facial verification against
the traveller’s photograph stored in the eMRTD chip. Both workflows can be enabled
by the supervising officer and, if necessary,
used at the same time, thus enabling joint
usage of the gates by the two groups of
passengers. However, due to the stamping
requirement, the gates used by the TCN-VE
are separated by a barrier guiding the travellers to an officer to have their passports
stamped. Registration of eligible TCNs is not
required.

A specific workflow has been created in the
ABC system to support systematic database
queries (as opposed to the randomised ones
used for the EU/EEA/CH workflow) and the
recording of entry and exit data in the national EES system. Otherwise the processes
for TCN-VE and EU/EEA/CH processing are

Finland has also launched a pilot to test the
ABC for TCN-VH travellers at the Port of
Helsinki. The purpose of this pilot is to study
the aspects of the ‘Smart borders’ proposals
mentioned above and contribute to the creation of the EES and the RTP through a real
life experiment. This process comprises both

21 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

fingerprint scanning and facial recognition as
well as entry/exit recording.
3.2.2. Germany
EasyPASS in Germany has a built-in RTP functionality that can be used by TCNs of certain nationalities at entry and exit controls
of participating airports. Based on agreements in place with the United States and
Hong Kong concerning the mutual use of
ABC systems, the holders of e-passports issued by the United States and Hong Kong
aged 18 years and above are eligible to register for the programme.
Participation in EasyPASS-RTP is free of
charge. To register in EasyPASS-RTP, the
traveller should visit an enrolment centre
at a participating airport 10. The enrolment
procedure comprises a questionnaire and
a personal interview. The enrolee is asked
to sign a form confirming his or her voluntary participation in EasyPASS-RTP and consenting to the storage of his or her personal
data. Subsequently the Federal Police checks
whether the RT meets the participation requirements, the validity and authenticity of
the travel document and whether there are
any security issues that preclude the enrolee’s participation in the RTP. The RT data is
checked against available police information
systems. Provided that there are no objections for security reasons, the personal data
is stored in the EasyPASS-RTP database of
the Federal Police. If the RT completes the
procedure successfully, he or she is able to
use EasyPASS-RTP immediately and for the
remaining validity of his or her e-passport. A
confirmation of the recorded data and of the
purpose of its use (in accordance with German law) is issued.

10 As of June 2015, enrolment centres are available
at Frankfurt Airport and Munich Airport. Other
enrolment centres will open shortly.

22 of 32

EasyPASS is a two-step solution whereby the
RT is directed towards the ABC system at
the airports participating in the programme.
The RT has to place his or her passport on
the document reader; after the passport has
been recognised and the participation status has been checked in the EasyPASS-RTP
database, the door to the lane will open and
the live image of the face of the RT will be
verified against the passport photo. If face
recognition is successful, RTs have to wait
until a border guard opens the exit door and
then have to move forward to the monitoring booth, where the additional entry requirements are checked and the passport is
stamped. After these actions have been performed the border check is completed.
3.2.3. Netherlands
The regular e-gates in the Netherlands are
targeted at EU/EEA/CH travellers, but there
are RTPs in place allowing TCN travellers to
use biometric gate systems as well. These
programmes require a pre-vetting and enrolment and the traveller is issued a separate
token on which his/her iris image has been
stored. The options for facilitating the border crossing of these RTP travellers through
the e-gates in the future are currently being explored.
As regards TCNs, the programme is now available only to US citizens based on a bilateral
agreement enabling the use of similar facilitation schemes for Dutch travellers in the
United States. The discussed new processing
of these TCNs foresees that residence permit holders would be able to use the gates
as EU/EEA/CH citizens as they are not subject to the stamping requirement, while those
not having a permit would be guided to an
officer for stamping.

3.2.4. United Kingdom
The UK Border Force recently began its own
RTP. This has been introduced in two stages,
the first as a pilot to allow testing of the processes for a small cadre of eligible enrolees
and the second to increase the eligible pool,
allow the use of e-passport gates (ABC) and
charge a fee for the service.
Currently, membership in the RTP is restricted
to TCNs from Australia, Canada, Japan, New
Zealand and the United States who travel
regularly to the United Kingdom. To enrol,
the TCN first registers his or her details and
agrees to the terms and conditions of the
scheme on the RTP website11. Background
checks are carried out against government
systems and if successful the TCN is sent a
confirmation letter. On his or her next arrival to the United Kingdom the TCN gives
this letter to the border guard who carries
out their usual checks. The border guard confirms that the travel history and intentions
of the TCN are acceptable for the scheme. If
successful, the border guard confirms his or
her acceptance into the scheme. From this
point onwards the TCN is allowed to use either a dedicated RTP desk or the EU channel to enter the United Kingdom (depending
on the configuration of the port concerned).

e-gate at the point at which they enter the
United Kingdom. As part of the terms and
conditions, RTs acknowledge acceptance of
this leave and they agree to abide by the rules
in accordance with their enrolment.
A subscription fee is charged for successful
RTs. It is also foreseen that eligibility will be
extended to other ‘low-risk’ traveller groups
over time, including TCN-VH, and that the
ability to undertake fingerprint capture to
carry out identification/verification will be
incorporated into the system. Business cases
for ABC already take into account the usage
by RTs as part of their cost–benefit analysis
on a port-by-port basis.
3.2.5. Local border traffic
Member States having local border traffic
agreements in accordance with Regulation
(EC) No 1931/200612 could also benefit from
the use of ABC or ABC-assisted processing of
TCNs, but so far no Member State has implemented ABC systems for this purpose.
Spain has been planning the introduction of
an ABC system for Gibraltar which in principle would be similar to an implementation
serving local border traffic.

TCNs who hold an e-passport will be allowed
to use the e-passport gates (ABC) where
available. The majority of RTs will be expected
to use ABC, which will work in broadly the
same way as for EU passengers (facial recognition against the passport photo and live
checks against government watch lists).
Legislation stipulating that the RTs who use
the e-passport gates will not have their passports stamped was passed in 2010. Instead
they will be granted ‘authorised leave’ by the

11

See: http://www.gov.uk/registered-traveller

12 Regulation (EC) No 1931/2006 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 20 December
2006 laying down rules on local border traffic at
the external land borders of the Member States
and amending the provisions of the Schengen
Convention (OJ L 405, 31.12.2006).

23 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

4.	Perpectives on TCN ABC
in the future
4.1. Legal framework
The European Commission has put forward
legislative proposals on the establishment
of an EES and an RTP together with amendments to the SBC within the context of the
‘Smart borders’ package13. The aim is to facilitate border checks at the EU’s external
borders and to enable the usage of the ABC
infrastructure by a larger population.
The purpose of the proposed EES is to establish an information system which would allow
the recording of entry and exit information of
TCNs. The EES would also comprise an automated stay duration calculator to inform the
border guards of the time the TCN has spent
in the territory of the Member States and
alert them on overstayers. The RTP would
allow certain groups of frequent travellers
from third countries to pre-register in order
to use ABC facilities when available at BCPs.
Like the VIS, both systems would require the
enrolment and verification of fingerprints.
The main proposed amendments to the SBC
that would impact the implementation of the
ABC for TCNs are the following.
1.	Establishment of an obligation to check
whether a person has been granted access to the RTP and verification of the
identity of an RT.

13 It should be noted that, at the time of writing,
the European Commission initiated a proof of
concept exercise aimed at identifying options for
implementing the ‘Smart borders’ package, which
included a technical study led by the Commission
and a pilot project led by eu-LISA.

24 of 32

	According to the RTP proposal, an RT
would be issued with a token containing the RT’s unique identifier number in
a machine-readable format. This unique
identifier number (token) and the number of the travel document shall be used
in order to verify that access to the RTP
has been granted. Additionally, verification of the RT’s identity by verifying his
or her fingerprints shall be performed.
2.	Introduction of an exemption for RTs from
certain parts of the thorough check.
	An RT would be exempted from the thorough check of the travel document as well
as from the verification of the points of
departure and destination, the purpose of
the stay, including supporting documents,
and the possession of sufficient means of
subsistence.
3.	Replacement of the current stamping of
travel documents by the electronic recording and verification of data in the EES.
	The SBC amendments contain a general
obligation for TCNs entering the Schengen area to be registered in the EES. In addition, during the border checks on entry
and exit there will be the obligation to verify whether a TCN has already been registered in the EES and to check whether
the person has not exceeded the maximum duration of authorised stay.
4. Other relevant amendments include:
nnthe introduction of a compulsory authenticity check of the chip in travel
documents containing an electronic

storage medium; according to the
draft provisions if the passport or other
travel document contains an electronic
storage medium (chip), the authenticity of the data stored on the chip
shall be ascertained using the complete valid certificate chain, unless this
is impossible due to the non-availability
of valid certificates or for other technical reasons;
nnthe obligation to provide information
to the traveller on the remaining period of authorised stay when requested;
nnthe setting of three groups of indications/pictograms to be used at ABC
gates: one for EU/EEA/CH citizens, one
for third-country nationals and one for
all passports.
The proposed systems are based upon the
usage of fingerprints as biometric identifiers in both the EES and RTP with the exception that visa holders’ fingerprints already
entered in the VIS would not be entered in
the EES.
These amendments would enable the processing of TCNs through ABC; however, they
also present some challenges and create
new requirements. According to the proposals, an ABC system targeted at TCNs or
the assisted processing of TCNs through
ABC would be possible under the following
circumstances.
1.	Checks on RTs on entry may be carried out
through ABC supervised by a border guard.
This applies only to those TCNs who have
been pre-vetted and have been granted
the access to the RTP.
2.	For TCNs whose fingerprints are stored
in the VIS or on a travel document from
which fingerprints may be technically and
legally accessed by the border guard, thorough checks on entry may be carried out
through ABC in combination with self-service kiosks to examine the aspects of thorough checks listed in Article 7(3) of the SBC.

The process shall be monitored and followed by an individual decision by the border guard to authorise or refuse entry. In
practice, this option means that the selfservice kiosks provide the means to answer
questions concerning the entry requirements listed in Article 7(3) of the SBC and
it is not a fully automated ABC system.
3.	Thorough exit checks on RTs and TCNs
whose fingerprints are stored in the VIS,
or on a travel document from which fingerprints may be technically and legally
accessed by the border guard, may be carried out with the use of ABC systems under the supervision of a border guard.

4.2.	Future scenarios for TCN ABC
In the above scenarios the content of the
border checks on TCNs established by the
SBC would consist of the following phases.
When these border checks are implemented
by ABC or ABC-assisted means, they should
comprise the following stages.
The document scan phase refers to the scanning of the travel document and the RT’s token or the visa, if applicable. All the document
authentication procedures described in Section 4 of the BPTG SHALL apply, with the exception of Subsections 4.3 and 4.4 in case of
a non-electronic passport.
When the biometric capture is performed the
recommended practices described in Sections
5.1 and 5.2 of the BPTG and those in the GPVIS
SHALL be taken into account. The amount of
biometric data and the quality requirements
thereof shall be defined in the legal and implementation instruments of the EES and RTP.
Processing the scan results refers to a phase
where the travel document, token and biometric capture results are being processed
and data is being collected to perform the
required database and system queries.

25 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

Figure 7. Border check of an RT-TCN on
entry and exit

1. Document/s

Processing the results will provide the system and the operator with the necessary information to decide how the traveller should
be processed further, including the calculation of the allowed duration of stay.

2. Visa/permit

In this phase, the traveller will either be allowed to cross the border or rejected or referred to the second line.

For RT-TCN

3. Biometric

4. Consult systems

5. Allowed stay?

6. Accept/reject

7. Entry/exit

Processing the collected data refers to a process where the data in the third phase is being processed by the system and required
messages are being created in defined formats to query the necessary central and national databases.
System consultation refers to performing
queries in all required databases both at central and national levels. These queries include
queries to any watch lists, the RTP central
repository and the EES, which would also
provide information about the allowed stay
duration of the traveller.

26 of 32

In this phase, the system creates a message
in accordance with the EES technical specifications to create the entry/exit record in
the EES; this is done on the basis of the decision to accept entry and making use of the
information collected in the first and second
phases, complemented with other data provided by the system and received from the
EES query. As noted above, these messages
SHALL be created in compliance with the EES
specifications. It should be noted that depending on the required information, it may
only be possible for a TCN-VE RT to use the
ABC from the second entry onwards.
In order to ensure that all entries and exits are recorded and entered into the EES in
accordance with the legal requirements, it
is RECOMMENDED that the system is provided with an electronic transaction receipt
either from the national system or from the
central EES confirming that the transaction
was successful. This receipt may also contain the end date of the maximum allowed
stay duration of the traveller, which may be
made visible to the traveller.
When all the required transactions and processes are successfully performed, the system allows the traveller to cross the border.
The proposed legal instruments foresee biometric verifications being performed at the
central system level only.
The details applicable to the consultation of
the EES and the RTP will be defined in the le-

Figure 8. Border check of a non-RT-TCN on entry and exit
For non-RT-TCN on entry

For non-RT-TCN on exit

1. Document/s

1. Document/s

2. Visa/permit

2. Visa/permit

3. Biometric

3. Biometric

4. Consult systems

4. Consult systems

5. Allowed stay?

5. Allowed stay?

6. Purpose of stay?

6. Accept/reject

7. Financial means?

7. Financial means?

8. Accept/reject

8. Entry/exit

9. Entry/exit

gal instruments, the technical specifications
and the technical implementing measures of
these systems.
For an RT-TCN, all the stages can be fully
automated at both entry and exit, since the
checks on the purpose of stay and the means
of subsistence have been waived.

For a non-RT-TCN, the SBC amendments
offer other possibilities regarding ABC or
ABC-assisted implementation, where the
still applicable checks of entry requirements
could be performed by answering the questions on a touch screen by the border guard
or where the decision to authorise entry or
exit would be done manually or electronically

27 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

by a supervising border guard. Additionally,
the document scanning and biometric capture phases could be implemented with the
use of a self-service kiosk.

Figure 9. ABC implementation for TCNs for
whom full automation is allowed
1. Document scan

4.3. TCN ABC topology
considerations
The SBC amendments foresee the possibility to deploy both a full ABC system and a
self-service kiosk solution for TCNs. The ABC
system may facilitate both the EU/EEA/CH
citizens and TCNs. If this option is selected
for cost-efficiency or other reasons, particular attention should be paid to the provision
of customer guidance and to the instructions
displayed by the system if different biometric markers and workflows are used for the
two groups. Also, due to a growing cultural
diversity of ABC users, the used instructions
and/or animations should be globally understandable to the highest extent possible.
The different options for the deployment of
ABC systems as regards their architecture
and topologies have been discussed in detail in Subsection 3.6 of the BPOG and Section 3 of the BPTG.

2. Biometric

3. Process results

4. Process data

5. Consult systems

6. Process results

7. Accept/reject

8. Submit EES entry

9. Receipt from EES

10. Proceed

28 of 32

5.	The document authentication
and biometric verification
processes
In an ABC for TCN(s) all the applicable requirements and recommendations listed in the BPOG
and BPTG shall apply. When considering the fingerprint scanning process in general and for
the VIS verification purposes, attention should be paid to the recommendations of the GPVIS.

6. Quality assurance
With respect to quality assurance, the recommendations listed in Section 6 of the BPTG shall
apply. Regarding the fingerprint quality control and requirements, the recommendations of
the GPVIS should be adhered to.

29 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

7. Conclusions
The present document has provided guidelines on the implementation of ABC systems
to process TCNs at the EU’s external borders.
The legal framework applicable to border
checks on TCNs was first introduced, with
particular regard to those legal requirements
that pose a challenge to their automation. By
reviewing pilot projects and implementations
in four Member States, namely Finland, Germany, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, the guidelines then presented current
practices at the national level concerning
the use of ABC for TCN processing. Finally,
the document illustrated a number of possible scenarios concerning the development
and implementation of ABC solutions for
TCNs, in light of the European Commission
proposals to establish an RTP and an EES. It
is concluded that the proposals open up the
possibility to use ABC as a fully automated
system on both entry and exit, for RT-TCNs
for whom checks on the purpose of stay and

30 of 32

the means of subsistence have been waived,
or as an assisted implementation checking
entry requirements through a self-service kiosk or by a supervising border guard, in the
case of TCNs who are not RTs.
Importantly, these guidelines draw heavily
on the configuration of the EES and RTP as
proposed by the European Commission.
However, the content of the proposals may
undergo significant modifications throughout the legislative procedure, including the
possibility of the presentation of new legislative proposals by the Commission and/or
the introduction of amendments during the
negotiations between the European Parliament and the Council of the EU. The guidelines will be subject to updates to reflect
such changes, as well as to reflect technical improvements and developments in national practices.

Annex: References
Bradner, Scott, ‘Key words for use in RFCs
to indicate requirement levels’, BCP 14, RFC
2119, March 1997.
Council of the European Union, ‘EU Schengen Catalogue: External borders control,
return and readmission — Recommendations and best practices’, Council document
No 7864/09, 19.3.2009.
European Commission, ‘Communication from
the Commission to the European Parliament
and the Council: Smart borders — options
and the way ahead’, COM(2011) 680 final,
25.10.2011.
European Commission, ‘Communication of
13 February 2008 from the Commission to
the European Parliament, the Council, the
European Economic and Social Committee
and the Committee of the Regions: preparing the next steps in border management
in the European Union’, COM(2008) 69 final, 13.2.2008.
European Commission, ‘Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and
of the Council amending Regulation (EC)
No 562/2006 as regards the use of the entry/exit system (EES) and the registered traveller programme (RTP)’, COM(2103) 96 final
2013/0060 (COD).
European Commission, ‘Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of
the Council establishing an entry/exit system
(EES) to register entry and exit data of thirdcountry nationals crossing the external borders of the Member States of the European
Union’, COM(2013) 95 final 2013/0057 (COD).

European Commission, ‘Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of
the Council establishing a registered traveller
programme’, COM(2013) 97 final 2013/0059
(COD).
European Union, Consolidated versions of the
Treaty on European Union and the Treaty on
the Functioning of the European Union, OJ
C 326, 26.10.2012, p. 47.
European Union, Regulation (EC) No 1931/2006
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 laying down rules
on local border traffic at the external land
borders of the Member States and amending the provisions of the Schengen Convention, OJ L 405, 31.12. 2006, p. 1.
European Union, Regulation (EC) No 562/2006
of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 15 March 2006 establishing a Community
Code on the rules governing the movement
of persons across borders (Schengen Borders
Code), OJ L 105, 13.4.2006, p. 1 (consolidated
version of October 2013).
European Union, Regulation (EC) No 767/2008
of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 9 July 2008 concerning the Visa Information System (VIS) and the exchange of data
between Member States on short-stay visas
(VIS Regulation), OJ L 218, 13.8.2008, p. 60.
Frontex, ‘Best Practice Operational Guidelines for Automated Border Control (ABC)
Systems’, Version 2.0, August, 2012.
Frontex, ‘Best Practice Technical Guidelines
for Automated Border Control (ABC) Systems’, Version 2.0, August, 2012.

31 of 32

Frontex

Guidelines for Processing of Third-Country Nationals
through Automated Border Control

Frontex, ‘Good Practices for the Practical Implementation of the Visa Information System
at EU Borders’, Release 2.1, September, 2014.
ICAO, ‘A Primer on ICAO Public Key Directory: White Paper’, Version V1.5, 20.5.2009.
ICAO, ‘Doc 9303 — Machine Readable Travel
Documents’, Part 1 Vol. 2 (2nd edition, 2006)
and Part 3 Vol. 2 (3rd edition, 2008) [ICAO
9303].
ICAO, ‘Guidelines for electronic — Machine
Readable Travel Documents & Passenger Facilitation’, Version 1.0, 17.4.2008.

32 of 32

ICAO, ‘Machine Readable Travel Documents
Glossary’, (http://www.icao.int/Security/
mrtd/Pages/MRTDGlossary.aspx) (accessed
1.6.2015).
OECD, ‘Cost-benefit analysis,’ OECD Glossary of Statistical Terms, 2015 (https://stats.
oecd.org/glossary/detail.asp?ID=6377) (accessed 24.4.2015).
Stevenson, Angus, ed. ‘Watch list’, Oxford Dictionary of English, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2010.

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union

Print version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-C
ISBN 978-92-95205-51-2
DOI 10.2819/86138

Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland

Online version:
TT-02-16-152-EN-N
ISBN 978-92-95205-50-5
DOI 10.2819/39041

T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu

