Short Summary – Public Release

THE DOCUMENT
CHALLENGE II
Testing human and machine performance in detecting and
classifying genuine and false travel documents

European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the
Member States of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
frontex@frontex.europa.eu
www.frontex.europa.eu
Warsaw, 21 October 2014
Research and Development Unit
Frontex reference number: 17640a

DISCLAIMERS
This is a Frontex document. The information and views set out in the Document Challenge II Technical
Report are based on the observations and data collected by the contributing experts during the test
period and do not necessarily reflect the official opinion of the European Union. Neither any European
Union institutions and bodies nor any person acting on their behalf may be held responsible for the use
which may be made of the information contained therein.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Document Challenge II Technical Report has been prepared by the Frontex Research and
Development Unit (RDU) in cooperation with experts from the UK National Document Fraud Unit (NDFU),
the Forensic Science Institute of the German Bundeskriminalamt (BKA), the German Federal Office for
Information Security (BSI), the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee and the Portuguese Immigration and
Borders Service (SEF).
The RDU is grateful for the contribution of many colleagues at Frontex, for the participation in the
exercise of border guards from several EU Member States and for the cooperation of the industry.

2 of 7

Introduction
Travel document fraud is widely perceived as a serious problem affecting border control and the
internal security of the European Union. The verification of the authenticity of travel documents is a
key element of border checks and a pre-requisite for efficient border control. The continuous
development and sophistication of the physical, optical, and electronic security features of travel
documents currently in circulation brings significant challenges for border control officers, who need
to increasingly rely on the support of document inspection systems (DIS) using advanced functionalities
and automated components.
The performance of document inspection solutions, although of importance for the effectiveness of
border checks, is rarely taken into consideration when assessing the risk of document fraud. Analyses
tend to focus on the threat of document fraud as detected at the border, rather than also encompassing
an evaluation of the vulnerabilities related to the capacities (means) deployed (human and
technological). However, although some vulnerabilities are technical in nature, others are more related
to the integration and up-take of new technologies in the border management process.
In line with its mandate, Frontex works in close cooperation with the Member States on the development
of a portfolio of border check capacities and on the increasing of the capacity to assess and overcome
existing and future challenges related to identity verification, travel document authentication, risk
management and travel facilitation at the EU’s external borders.
The current technical report is part of a wider range of activities developed by the Agency in order to
provide facilitation assistance to Member States with regard to the roll-out of new technology for border
checks, and to disseminate among all relevant stakeholders information about current practices, the
benefits and challenges, and the end-user needs.

What is the Document Challenge II
The Document Challenge II was developed as a practical exercise simulating document inspection in
the first line of border control, organised by the Frontex Research and Development Unit (RDU) in
cooperation with the UK National Document Fraud Unit, the Forensic Science Institute of the German
Bundeskriminalamt (BKA), the Royal Netherlands Marechaussee, and the Portuguese Immigration and
Borders Service (SEF) and with the support of the German Federal Office for Information Security (BSI).
Two hundred and thirteen documents, seven document inspection systems and thirty-nine border
control officers deployed in the context of Frontex coordinated Joint Action Lusitania participated in
the exercise.
The main objective was to examine document inspection performance (by both humans and machines)
in the first line of border control, aiming to better understand the complexity of the task of detecting
false/falsified travel documents.

3 of 7

Results and Observations
The results and observations collected during the exercise highlighted a series of vulnerabilities in the
travel document inspection process. Participating experts put forward a set of recommendations
contributing to the effective implementation of the Schengen Borders Code (Articles 5, 7 and 13).1 In
particular, the following weaknesses should be considered:
-

The performance of technical equipment shows a degree of variability, indecision, and
inconsistency, with errors happening when optical authentication is performed, as well as
problems with electronic authentication resulting in a number of false documents being
incorrectly accepted as genuine (and ceteris paribus, genuine documents being rejected as
false). No automated document inspection system is capable of performing authentication
of all possible physical security features and printing techniques.

-

The performance of border control officers is also highly variable and subjective. Although
document ‘wizards’ with very high accuracy levels exist, time limitation in the first line of
control negatively affects the detection of false documents. Qualitative experience –personal
exposure to the practical detection of falsifications – rather than level of training or length of
service is positively correlated with performance.

-

When trained/experienced officers use automated document inspection systems,
effectiveness of document inspection tends to increase (in the cases when the operator rejects
machine results, thus somewhat compensating for machine errors). However, both
overreliance and unfounded mistrust in machine outputs cause false documents to be
erroneously accepted as genuine. Human factors, or the interaction between the human
operator and the machine, play an important role in the effective use of machine
authentication and should be studied in more detail.

-

Performance depends on the intrinsic characteristics of the document to inspect. Lack of
reference knowledge, as well as non-standard or unsuitable design and production of travel
documents in circulation (passports and also ID cards), significantly affect the effectiveness of
both technical and human capacities.

Based on the results of the analysis, the following general recommendations have been proposed in
order to mitigate the identified vulnerabilities.
In relation to the use of automated document inspection systems:
R-M.1. Develop and routinely update a set of EU-level minimum functionalities and
operational performance requirements (for instance in terms of False Acceptance
Rate/False Rejection Rate, Positive/Negative Effectiveness, etc) related to the use of
automated document inspection systems at the EU’s external borders (and also for
other law enforcement uses).

1

(Article 5 (entry conditions), Article7 (border checks on persons) and Article 13 (refusal of entry) of
Regulation (EC) No 562/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 March 2006
establishing a Community Code on the rules governing the movement of persons across borders (the
Schengen Borders Code), with subsequent amendments)
4 of 7

R-M.2.
R-M.3.
R-M.4.
R-M.5.

R-M.6.

Develop and routinely update an EU-level performance testing methodology (and
potentially a certification scheme).
Develop and routinely update a common vendor-independent European reference
document and template database.
Monitor transactions and routinely test deployed operational systems against the
minimum performance requirements (at the national level).
Develop and implement procedures in order to provide, continuously maintain and
update a set of trusted electronic certificates for Passive Authentication at the EUlevel.
Establish a quality assurance process (a feedback loop) at the national level.

In relation to human capabilities:
R-H.1. Introduce the subject of operations, strengths and weaknesses of document inspection
systems at the basic document training level.
R-H.2. Develop and/or encourage intra-European mobility programs for the exchange of
first line border control officers in order to facilitate the exposure of staff to different
operational realities (especially traffic and origin of documents).
R-H.3. Routinely challenge first line border control officers and set up an incentive
mechanism.
In relation to document design and document inspection systems manufacturers:
R-D.1. Encourage the inclusion of inspection-related needs (and challenges) in the
conceptualisation and design of travel documents.
R-D.2. Encourage the development of EU-wide mandatory minimum security standards for
ID cards similar to the ones already existing for passports and residency permits.
R-D.3. Support the development of certification for documents compliant with ICAO
standards.
R-D.4. Foster the creation, maintenance, and dissemination of a travel document
exception/defect list at the EU level.
R-D.5. Encourage document inspection systems manufacturers to develop and integrate
technology capable of authenticating printing techniques.
R-D.6. Encourage harmonisation and the development of recommended minimum industry
standards (or best practice guidelines addressing all components involved in machineassisted document inspection) for document inspection systems at the EU and/or ICAO
level.
In relation to further research:
R-R.1. Comparative analysis of all document inspection use-cases in order to better
understand the effect of the use of automated systems, strengths and weaknesses (with
comparable data-sets, with focus on origin of documents, with time measurement, etc).
R-R.2. Comparative usability analysis (including cognitive) of the use and perception of
current automated document inspection systems in order to understand the effect of
the human factor on the performance of the systems.
R-R.3. Analysis of current operational effectiveness of electronic checks (and identification
of vulnerabilities, for example: how often electronic checks are performed at the
border; how many and what type of errors are detected; etc).
R-R.4. Study of the operational effectiveness of other variables important for entry decisions
in general – such as passenger profiling (individual risk assessment) – and in particular
the effect of these variables on document inspection (positive and negative
5 of 7

biases/expectations). For example: does passenger profiling create assumptions
regarding document authenticity and thus influence the effectiveness of document
inspection?

It is expected that the outcomes of this analysis will expand existing knowledge and contribute to the
ongoing actions and initiatives undertaken at the European level by both Member States and the
European Union for strengthening capacities and mitigating the associated risks of travel document
fraud.

6 of 7

European Agency for the Management
of Operational Cooperation
at the External Borders of the Member
States of the European Union
Plac Europejski 6
00-844 Warsaw, Poland
T +48 22 205 95 00
F +48 22 205 95 01
www.frontex.europa.eu

Research and Development Unit
Warsaw, 21 October 2014
Ref. No. 17640a

