Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2010(ACI)

ACI - Interinstitutional agreement procedure

Procedure completed

Transparency register for organisations and self-employed individuals
engaged in EU policy-making and policy implementation.
Parliament/Commission agreement
Amending 2010/2291(ACI)
Subject
8.40.10 Interinstitutional relations, democratic deficit, subsidiarity, comitology
8.40.16 Relations with interest representatives

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFCO

Constitutional Affairs

Rapporteur

Appointed

S&D GUALTIERI Roberto

17/12/2013

Shadow rapporteur
PPE CASINI Carlo
ALDE JÄÄTTEENMÄKI Anneli
Verts/ALE HÄFNER Gerald
ECR FOX Ashley
GUE/NGL SCHOLZ Helmut
EFD MESSERSCHMIDT
Morten

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Commissioner

Secretariat-General

ŠEFČOVIČ Maroš

Key events
18/03/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

31/03/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

14/04/2014

Debate in Parliament

15/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

15/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/04/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

19/09/2014

Final act published in Official Journal

A7-0258/2014

Summary

T7-0376/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2010(ACI)

Procedure type

ACI - Interinstitutional agreement procedure

Procedure subtype

Interinstitutional agreement

Amending 2010/2291(ACI)
Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 227-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFCO/7/15071

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE528.034

31/01/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE529.859

28/02/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0258/2014

31/03/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0376/2014

15/04/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)470

25/09/2014

Final act
N8-0031/2014
OJ L 277 19.09.2014, p. 0011 Summary

2014/2010(ACI) - 31/03/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Constitutional Affairs unanimously adopted the report by Roberto GUALTIERI (S&D, IT) on the modification of the
interinstitutional agreement on the Transparency Register.
A new proposal to modify the Agreement: Members regretted that the proposal for a modification of the Agreement of 23 June 2011 will not
lead to the establishment of a mandatory transparency register. Therefore, they reiterated their call for mandatory registration in relation to the
conduct of lobbying activities at the EU institutions, as already stated in its resolution of 8 May 2008 and its decision of 11 May 2011.
Overall, Members considered the proposed modification of the Agreement of 23 June 2011 to be a partial step forward at the present stage.
They called on the Commission to submit, by the end of 2016, a legislative proposal for the establishment of a mandatory register on the basis
of Article 352 TFEU. They also called on the Commission to include, in the context of any forthcoming proposals for a comprehensive reform
of the Treaties, a proposal either for an amendment of Article 298 TFEU or for an appropriate specific legal basis allowing a mandatory register
to be set up in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure. Moreover, they insisted that the next review of the Transparency Register
should be accompanied by a public consultation.
They considered that in any event, a further evaluation of the Transparency Register should be completed before the end of 2017 at the latest.
Content of the proposed modification: Members welcomed the improved specification of the information to be provided pursuant to the
modified agreement, which should be implemented by insisting on disclosure of the identity of all clients represented by organisations and
self-employed individuals engaged in EU policy-making and policy implementation processes, and by clearly linking all covered activities to the
clients concerned.
Members also focused on the following issues:
- inappropriate behaviour: Members considered that, when interpreting inappropriate behaviour, within the meaning of the Code of Conduct
annexed to the modified agreement in addition to the generally accepted principles as:
interference in the private sphere or personal life of decision-makers, e.g. by sending gifts or via their relatives or friends;
performance, or any active promotion, of activities in the field of communication with the EU institutions and their Members or staff
which are liable to impair the functionality of the EU institutions communication systems, particularly in cases where such activities are
performed anonymously;
failing to declare the interests or clients being represented when contacting a Member of the European Parliament or officials or other
staff of the European Parliament with regard to the legislative process;
employing front groups, i.e. organisations which hide the interests and parties they serve;
offer or grant support, whether financial or in terms of staff or material to Members of the European Parliament or their assistants.
- code of conduct: Members believed that the Code of Conduct attached to the Agreement of 23 June 2011 and the Code of Conduct for
Members should be amended in order to ensure that Members do not enter into any kind of agreement or contractual relationship with an
external body to either fund or directly employ individuals within a Members staff;
- registered law firms: Members insisted that registered law firms should declare in the Transparency Register all the clients on whose behalf
they perform covered activities.

More ambitious register: Members encouraged the Commission to be equally ambitious, when it comes to introducing incentive measures for
registrants in order to enhance participation in the Transparency Register. In this regard, several incentives could be proposed such as
reducing the number of meetings with non-registered organisations or interest representatives or considering limitations on the participation of
non-registered organisations in Commission advisory bodies and expert groups.
They called on the Parliaments Bureau to consider a series of proposals for inclusion in the relevant Bureau decisions: (i) restrict access to
European Parliament premises for non-registered organisations or individuals; (ii) to withhold European Parliament's patronage of any event
organised by an organisation falling within the scope of the Transparency Register to cases where such an organisation is registered; (iii) to
increase its vigilance against granting Parliamentary privileges to front organisations of third countries which do not respect European Union
values.
Former Members: furthermore, Members asked former Members of the European Parliament to comply with the relevant provisions when
carrying on activities falling within the scope of the Transparency Register. They considered that in carrying on such activities, former
Members should not use their Members' badge to access the premises of the European Parliament.
Follow-up of the application of the Agreement: Members requested the Joint Transparency Register Secretariat to provide at regular intervals
a report on the functioning of the incentives system, with a view, ultimately, to the establishment of a mandatory register. They stressed that
non-registered organisations or individuals, even if their non-registration is only temporary, will not have access to the new incentives and
advantages linked to registration. They expected that the annual report on the operation of the Joint Transparency Register will include an
analysis of the progress made in terms of coverage and quality of entries and encouraged the Commission, in performing its function of
coordinating the Transparency Register, to closely monitor the proper implementation of the modified agreement.
In parallel, Members called on the European Parliament to approve the modified Agreement.
To recall, the modified Agreement consists of:
1) a revised Agreement including:
the main principles of the register;
the scope and structure of the register;
the rules applicable to the registrants;
measures in the event of non-compliance with the code of conduct and repeated inappropriate behaviour.
2) Several Annexes comprising:
a table of professional consultancies;
the type of information to be provided by registrants;
a code of conduct for all interest representatives interacting with the institutions;
a list of procedures for alerts and for the investigation and treatment of complaints.

2014/2010(ACI) - 15/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 646 votes to 7, with 14 abstentions, a decision on the modification of the interinstitutional agreement
(IIA) on the Transparency Register.
Mandatory registration of lobbyists: recalling that unregulated and non-transparent lobbying poses a significant threat to policy-making and to
the public interest, Parliament regretted that the proposal for a modification of the Agreement of 23 June 2011 will not lead to the
establishment of a mandatory transparency register. Therefore, it reiterated its call for mandatory registration in relation to the conduct of
lobbying activities at the EU institutions, as already stated in its a resolution of 8 May 2008 and its decision of 11 May 2011.
Overall, Parliament considered the proposed modification of the Agreement to be a partial step forward at the present stage. It called on the
Commission to submit, by the end of 2016, a legislative proposal for the establishment of a mandatory register on the basis of Article 352
TFEU. It also called on the Commission to include, in the context of any forthcoming proposals for a comprehensive reform of the Treaties, a
proposal either for an amendment of Article 298 TFEU or for an appropriate specific legal basis allowing a mandatory register to be set up in
accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure. Moreover, it insisted that the next review of the Transparency Register should be
accompanied by a public consultation.
It considered that in any event, a further evaluation of the Transparency Register should be completed before the end of 2017 at the latest.
Content of IIA modification: Parliament welcomed the improved specification of the information to be provided pursuant to the modified
agreement, which should be implemented by insisting on disclosure of the identity of all clients represented by organisations and
self-employed individuals engaged in EU policy-making and policy implementation processes, and by clearly linking all covered activities to the
clients concerned.
Parliament also focused on the following issues:
- inappropriate behaviour: Parliament considered that, when interpreting inappropriate behaviour, within the meaning of the Code of Conduct
annexed to the modified agreement in addition to the generally accepted principles as:
interference in the private sphere or personal life of decision-makers, e.g. by sending gifts or via their relatives or friends;
performance, or any active promotion, of activities in the field of communication with the EU institutions and their Members or staff
which are liable to impair the functionality of the EU institutions communication systems, particularly in cases where such activities are
performed anonymously;
failing to declare the interests or clients being represented when contacting a Member of the European Parliament or officials or other
staff of the European Parliament with regard to the legislative process;
employing front groups, i.e. organisations which hide the interests and parties they serve;
offer or grant support, whether financial or in terms of staff or material to Members of the European Parliament or their assistants.
- code of conduct: Parliament believed that the Code of Conduct attached to the Agreement of 23 June 2011 and the Code of Conduct for

Members should be amended in order to ensure that Members do not enter into any kind of agreement or contractual relationship with an
external body to either fund or directly employ individuals within a Members staff;
- registered law firms: Parliament insisted that registered law firms should declare in the Transparency Register all the clients on whose behalf
they perform covered activities.
- incentive measures: Parliament encouraged the Commission to be equally ambitious, when it comes to introducing incentive measures for
registrants in order to enhance participation in the Transparency Register; considers that such incentives could include:
reducing the number of meetings with non-registered organisations or interest representatives;
encourage European Parliament officials or other staff, when approached by a representative of an organisation or individuals
undertaking an activity falling within the scope of the Transparency Register, to check whether the organisation in question is
registered, and, if it is not, to encourage it to register before meeting its representative;
restrict access to European Parliament premises for non-registered organisations or individuals;
considering limitations on the participation of non-registered organisations in Commission advisory bodies and expert groups;
encouraging Commissioners and Commission officials and other staff to refuse invitations to events organised by non-registered
organisations;
allow representatives of organisations or individuals falling within the scope of the Transparency Register to participate as speakers on
the panel at committee hearings only if they are registered;
withhold European Parliament's patronage of any event organised by an organisation falling within the scope of the Transparency
Register to cases where such an organisation is registered;
increase its vigilance against granting Parliamentary privileges to front organisations of third countries which do not respect European
Union values.
Legislative footprint: in an amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament requested the Bureau to develop a standardised form for rapporteurs to
publish on a voluntary basis a 'legislative footprint' which is a form annexed to reports drafted by Members detailing all the lobbyists with whom
rapporteurs in charge of a particular file have met in the process of drawing up the report, where this has led to a substantial impact on the
report.
Former Members: furthermore, Parliament asked former Members of the European Parliament to comply with the relevant provisions when
carrying on activities falling within the scope of the Transparency Register. It considered that in carrying on such activities, former Members
should not use their Members' badge to access the premises of the European Parliament. Plenary requested the Bureau to present to the
Conference of Presidents a proposal for appropriate measures to prevent misuse of privileges to which former Members are entitled.
Follow-up of the application of the Agreement: Parliament requested the Joint Transparency Register Secretariat to provide at regular intervals
a report on the functioning of the incentives system, with a view, ultimately, to the establishment of a mandatory register. It stressed that
non-registered organisations or individuals, even if their non-registration is only temporary, will not have access to the new incentives and
advantages linked to registration. It expected that the annual report on the operation of the Joint Transparency Register will include an analysis
of the progress made in terms of coverage and quality of entries and encouraged the Commission, in performing its function of coordinating
the Transparency Register, to closely monitor the proper implementation of the modified agreement.
In parallel, Parliament approved the modified Agreement.
To recall, the modified Agreement consists of:
1) a revised Agreement including:
the main principles of the register;
the scope and structure of the register;
the rules applicable to the registrants;
measures in the event of non-compliance with the code of conduct and repeated inappropriate behaviour.
2) Several Annexes comprising:
a table of professional consultancies;
the type of information to be provided by registrants;
a code of conduct for all interest representatives interacting with the institutions;
a list of procedures for alerts and for the investigation and treatment of complaints.

2014/2010(ACI) - 16/04/2014 Final act
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Agreement between the European Parliament and the European Commission on the transparency register for
organisations and self-employed individuals engaged in EU policy-making and policy implementation
CONTENT: this Interinstitiutional Act aims to repeal and replace the Decision of 11 May 2011 on the conclusion of an interinstitutional
agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission on a common Transparency Register.
It provides for the rules and principles applicable to organisations and self-employed individuals engaged in EU policy-making and policy
implementation.
Principles: the Register shall respect the following principles:
·

the general principles of Union law, including the principles of proportionality and non-discrimination;

·

the rights of Members of the European Parliament to exercise their parliamentary mandate without restriction.

Structure of the register: the structure of the register shall be as follows:
·

provisions on the scope of the register, activities covered by the register, definitions, incentives and exemptions;

·

sections for registration (Annex I);

·

information required from registrants, including financial disclosure requirements (Annex II);

·

code of conduct (Annex III);

·

alert and complaint mechanisms and measures to be applied in the event of non-compliance with the code of conduct, including the
procedures for alerts and for the investigation and treatment of complaints (Annex IV);

·

implementation guidelines with practical information for registrants.

Scope: the register covers all activities carried out by an organisation as set out in Annex I, with the objective of directly or indirectly influencing
the formulation or implementation of policy and the decision-making processes of the EU institutions, and in particular:
·

contacting Members and their assistants, officials or other staff of the EU institutions;

·

preparing, circulating and communicating letters, information material or discussion papers and position papers;

·

organising events, meetings, promotional activities, conferences or social events, invitations to which have been sent to Members
and their assistants, officials or other staff of the EU institutions; and

·

voluntary contributions and participation in formal consultations or hearings on envisaged EU legislative or other legal acts and other
open consultations.

Activities not covered include the following: the provision of legal and professional advice in so far as they consist of :
·

advisory work and contacts with public bodies in order to better inform clients about a general legal situation or about their specific
legal position;

·

advice given to clients to help them ensure that their activities comply with the relevant law;

·

analyses and studies prepared for clients on the potential impact of any legislative or regulatory changes with regard to their legal
position or field of activity;

·

representation in the context of a conciliation or mediation procedure aimed at preventing a dispute from being brought before a
judicial or administrative body.

It should also be noted that activities of the social partners as participants in the social dialogue (trade unions, employers' associations, etc.)
are not covered by the register where those social partners perform the role assigned to them in the Treaties.
The register does not apply to churches and religious communities or to political parties.
Registration: all organisations and self-employed individuals, irrespective of their legal status, engaged in activities, whether on-going or under
preparation, covered by the register are expected to register.
Rules on registration: the Agreement contains provisions setting out registration rules. In particular, organisations and individuals concerned:
·

agree to act in compliance with the code of conduct set out in Annex III;

·

guarantee that the information provided for inclusion in the register is correct and updated;

·

accept that any alert or complaint concerning them will be handled on the basis of the rules in the code of conduct set out in Annex
III;

Joint Transparency Register Secretariat: in order to implement the system, the services of the European Parliament and the European
Commission maintain a joint operational structure, designated as the JTRS. The tasks of the JTRS include producing implementation
guidelines, within the limits of this agreement, to facilitate a consistent interpretation of the rules by registrants, and monitoring the quality of
the content of the register. The JTRS shall use the administrative resources available to perform quality checks of the content of the register,
on the understanding, however, that registrants are ultimately responsible for the information they have provided.
The Secretaries-General of the European Parliament and the European Commission shall submit an annual report on the operation of the
register.
Rights for organisations registered: access passes to the European Parliament's premises will only be issued to individuals representing,
organisations falling within the scope of the register where those organisations or individuals have registered. However, registration shall not
confer an automatic entitlement to such an access pass.
Incentives offered by the European Parliament to registrants may include: (i) further facilitation of access to its premises, its Members and their
assistants, its officials and other staff; (ii) authorisation to organise or co-host events on its premises; (iii) facilitated transmission of information;
(iv) participation as speakers in committee hearings; (v) patronage by the European Parliament.
There are also provisions on incentives offered by the Commission.
Meaures in the event of non-compliance with the code of conduct: the JTRS shall investigate the suspected non-compliance of the Code of
Conduct in the annex of the Agreement, where an alert has been lodged.
Intentional non-compliance with the code of conduct by registrants or by their representatives shall lead to the application of the measures laid
down in Annex IV.
Where non-cooperation, inappropriate behaviour, or serious non-compliance with the code of conduct, have been identified, the registrant
concerned shall be removed from the register for a time period of either one year or two years. The measure will be publicly mentioned in the
register.
NB: Currently, only the European Parliament and the Commission are involved with the register. The European Council and the Council are
invited to join the register. Other EU institutions, bodies and agencies are encouraged to use the framework created by the Agreement.

Repeal: the Agreement replaces the agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission of 23 June 2011.
Review: the register shall be subject to a review in 2017.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 09.10.2014.
APPLICATION: 01.01.2015. Entities already registered at the date of application of the agreement shall amend their registration to satisfy the
new requirements resulting from this agreement within a period of three months following that date.
Annexes: the Agreement contains four annexes setting out the following:
Annex I: organisations and self-employed individuals engaged in EU policy-making and policy implementation;
Annex II: information to be provided by registrants;
Annex III: code of conduct;
Annex IV: procedures for alerts and for the investigation and treatment of complaints.

