Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2949(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2014 progress report on Serbia

Subject
8.20.01 Candidate countries
Geographical area
Serbia, from 06/2006

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
22/09/2014

MCALLISTER David
Shadow rapporteur

FAJON Tanja

TANNOCK Charles

VAJGL Ivo

RANSDORF Miloslav

ŠOLTES Igor

CASTALDO Fabio
Massimo

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

HAHN Johannes

Key events
16/12/2014

Debate in Council

24/02/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

10/03/2015

Debate in Parliament

11/03/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

11/03/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/03/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2949(RSP)

T8-0065/2015

Summary

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/02009

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE546.668

29/01/2015

EP

Motion for a resolution

B8-0213/2015

04/03/2015

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0065/2015

11/03/2015

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2015)344

20/07/2015

Summary

2014/2949(RSP) - 11/03/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution tabled by its Committee on Foreign Affairs on the 2014 Progress Report on Serbia.
Parliament recalled that the European Council of 28 June 2013 decided to open accession negotiations with Serbia.
European integration of Serbia: Parliament welcomed the commitment shown by the new Serbian Government to the European integration
process. It called on Serbia to improve the planning, coordination and monitoring of implementation of new legislation and policies.
Bilateral relations: Members welcomed the First Agreement on the Principles of Normalisation of Relations reached between Serbia and
Kosovo. They called on the Serbian and Kosovo authorities to step up cooperation to clamp down and dismantle criminal networks.
Russia-Serbia relations: Parliament called on Serbia to make stronger efforts in aligning its foreign and security policy to that of the EU,
including policy on Russia. It regretted that Serbia did not align itself, when invited, with the Council decisions introducing restrictive measures
against Russia, keeping in mind, however, the traditionally strong economic, social and cultural ties that exist between the two countries.
ICTY and good neighbourly relations: Members encouraged Serbia to further cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia (ICTY), to strengthen domestic war crimes trials and continue to strengthen its efforts regarding regional cooperation to end
impunity and bring justice to the victims of war crimes and their families. They asked Serbia to intensify its cooperation with neighbouring
countries and to strengthen its efforts in the search for missing persons. They also encouraged Serbia to work even more closely with
neighbouring countries and to initiate further steps for trans-border cooperation, in order to improve, inter alia, the economic development of
border regions and areas populated by minorities.
Social reforms and the fight against discrimination: Parliament asked Serbia to strengthen the rights of workers and asked that new measures
be taken in order to strengthen social dialogue and consultative role of social partners in law-making.
Members reiterated the importance of promoting, protecting and implementing human rights and fundamental freedoms at all levels of Serbian
society, calling for respect for women, persons with disabilities, LGBT persons, and all minorities, national, ethnic or sexual.
Reform of the judiciary and fight against corruption: Parliament stressed the vital importance of an independent judiciary, and highlighted the
need for the reform of the judiciary to be completed so as to ensure the full independence and impartiality of judges and prosecutors.
It condemned the pressure exerted by media or political parties on independent anti-corruption bodies. It noted that corruption and organised
crime were widespread in the region and also represented an obstacle to Serbias democratic, social and economic development.
Freedom of expression: Members expressed concern about the pressure being put on and threats being made against journalists, which also
lead to increased self-censorship. They urged the Serbian authorities to take action in order to bring the perpetrators to justice.
Minorities: Parliament called on Serbia to ensure consistent implementation across the country of legislation on protection of minorities,
including in relation to education, use of languages, and access to the media and religious services in minority languages, and adequate
representation of national minorities in public administration, local and regional bodies, as well as in the national parliament. It encouraged the
Serbian authorities to take further measures to improve the situation of the Roma, particularly when it came to education, housing and
employment.
Reforms: Parliament welcomed the new public administration reform strategy, the creation of a dedicated Ministry of Public Administration and
Local Self-Government, and the increased focus on policy planning and coordination. It called for further measures with respect to reforms in
the business environment, the penal code and matters relating to abuse of responsibility.
Energy reforms: lastly, Parliament asked the Commission to support the Serbian Government in its efforts to reduce the countrys dependence
on energy imports.

