Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2239(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Follow up to the European citizens' initiative Right2Water

Subject
3.70.04 Water control and management, pollution of waterways, water
pollution

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ENVI

Rapporteur

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Appointed
24/09/2014

BOYLAN Lynn
Shadow rapporteur

HERRANZ GARCÍA
Esther

GARCÍA PÉREZ Iratxe

FARIA José Inácio

TURMES Claude

AFFRONTE Marco
Committee for opinion
DEVE

Rapporteur for opinion

Development

Appointed
11/12/2014

PREDA Cristian Dan
IMCO

PETI

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Petitions

05/02/2015
AUKEN Margrete

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Environment

VELLA Karmenu

Key events
19/03/2014

Non-legislative basic document published

15/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

25/06/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

15/07/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

07/09/2015

Debate in Parliament

08/09/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

COM(2014)0177

Summary

A8-0228/2015

Summary

08/09/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

08/09/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0294/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2239(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ENVI/8/01522

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document
Committee draft report

COM(2014)0177

19/03/2014

EC

PE539.669

10/03/2015

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

DEVE

PE551.789

12/05/2015

EP

Committee opinion

PETI

PE551.864

13/05/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE557.290

27/05/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE557.291

27/05/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0228/2015

15/07/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0294/2015

08/09/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)748

24/02/2016

2014/2239(INI) - 19/03/2014 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to examine the follow-up on the European Citizens' Initiative "Water and sanitation are a human right! Water is a public good, not a
commodity!"
BACKGROUND: "Right2Water" is the first European Citizens' Initiative to have met the requirements set out in the Regulation of the European
Parliament and Council on the Citizens' Initiative. It was officially submitted to the Commission by its organisers on 20 December 2013, after
having received the support of more than 1.6 million citizens.
The Right2Water initiative invites the Commission "to propose legislation implementing the human right to water and sanitation, as recognized
by the United Nations, and promoting the provision of water and sanitation as essential public services for all". The initiative urges that:
·

The EU institutions and Member States be obliged to ensure that all inhabitants enjoy the right to water and sanitation;

·

Water supply and management of water resources not be subject to internal market rules and that water services be excluded from
liberalization;

·

The EU increases its efforts to achieve universal access to water and sanitation.

In line with the provisions of the Regulation on the Citizens' Initiative, the Commission has three months to present its response to this initiative
in a Communication setting out its legal and political conclusions on the initiative.
CONTENT: the Communication first describes the work done by the EU in the field of water and sanitation.
The EU has also reaffirmed that "all States bear human rights obligations regarding access to safe drinking water, which must be available,
physically accessible, affordable and acceptable". The EU Water Framework Directive recognises that "water is not a commercial product like
any other but, rather, a heritage which must be protected, defended and treated as such".
The EU has in particular:

·

established ambitious water quality standards, guaranteeing a high level of protection for both public health and the environment.
The Water Framework Directive, the Drinking Water Directive and the Urban Wastewater Treatment Directive are the key pieces of
EU law in this field;

·

provided financial support to expand and improve water infrastructures in the Member States. Over the past seven years
(2007-2013), EU financial support for investments in drinking water supply and wastewater-related works and infrastructure reached
almost EUR 22 billion;

·

based its policy on the principle that affordability of water services is critical.

EU legislation has consistently acknowledged the specificity of water and sanitation services and their importance in satisfying the basic needs
of the population:
·

drinking water concessions, as well as certain concessions for waste water treatment and disposal are therefore excluded from the
scope of the new EU rules on the award of concession contracts;

·

water distribution and supply and wastewater services are expressly excluded from the application of the cross-border freedom to
provide services, as established in the Services Directive.

At the global level, the EU and its Member States currently provide close to 1.5 billion EUR every year for Water Supply, Sanitation and
Hygiene (WASH) programmes in developing countries, making the Union the largest single donor in the water sector.
Measures to be undertaken: in response to the citizens' call for action, the Commission is committed to take concrete steps and work on a
number of new actions in areas that are of direct relevance to the initiative and its goals:
·

to reinforce implementation of its water quality legislation, building on the commitments presented in the 7th Environment Action
Programme (EAP) and the Water Blueprint;

·

to launch an EU-wide public consultation on the Drinking Water Directive, notably in view of improving access to quality water in the
EU;

·

to continue to ensure EU neutrality as regards national, regional and local choices for the provision of water services, while taking
care that key Treaty principles such as transparency and equal treatment are observed;

·

to develop new initiatives to improve information to citizens so that the consumer enjoys greater transparency in relation to the quality
of drinking water;

·

to explore the idea of comparative evaluation of water quality;

·

to promote a more structured dialogue between stakeholders - bringing together public and private service operators - and to
cooperate with existing initiatives - to provide a wider set of indicators and benchmarks for water services;

·

to stimulate innovative approaches for development assistance (e.g. support to partnerships between water operators and to
public-public partnerships); promote sharing of best practices between Member States (e.g. on solidarity instruments) and identify
new opportunities for cooperation;

·

to advocate universal access to safe drinking water and sanitation as a priority area in the post-2015 development framework.

The Commission invites the Member States, acting within their competences, to take account of the concerns raised by citizens through this
initiative and encourages them to step up their own efforts to guarantee the provision of safe, clean and affordable drinking water and
sanitation to all.

2014/2239(INI) - 15/07/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted an own-initiative report by Lynn Boylan (GUE/NGL, IE) on the
follow-up to the European Citizens Initiative Right2Water.
Members recalled that Right2Water is the first European Citizens Initiative (ECI) to have met the requirements set out in Regulation (EU) No
211/2011 on the citizens initiative and to have been heard by Parliament after receiving the support of almost 1.9 million citizens. According to
Members, the full implementation of the human right to water and sanitation, as recognised by the UN and supported by the EU Member
States, is essential for life.
The ECI as an instrument of participatory democracy: Members stated that the ECI is a unique democratic mechanism which promotes
participatory democracy at the EU level. They stressed that that an admissible and appropriate ECI should in principle result in a new
Commission legislative proposal that meets the demands set out in the ECI, at least when the Commission has committed itself to presenting
such a proposal, as in the case of the Right2Water ECI. Members considered it regrettable that the communication lacks any real ambition,
does not meet the specific demands made in the ECI and limits itself to reiterating existing commitments. It should introduce all the measures
that might help to achieve the goals. The Commission is also asked to make a clear political commitment and come forward with legislative
proposals, and, if appropriate, a revision of the WFD, that would recognise universal access and the human right to water.
The right to water and sanitation: Members recalled that, according to the UN, the human right to water and sanitation entitles everyone to
water for personal and domestic uses which is of good quality, safe, physically accessible, affordable, sufficient and acceptable. In accordance
with a further UN recommendation, 3% of household income should be seen as a maximum for water payments where payments apply. In this
regard, Members deplored the fact that in the EU-28 more than 1 million people still lack access to a safe and clean drinking water supply and
nearly 2% of the population lacks access to sanitation.
Whilst calling on the Commission to recognise the importance of the human right to water and sanitation and of water as a public good,
Members rejected water cut-offs and the enforced switching-off of the water supply as a violation of human rights. They asked Member States
to put an immediate end to these situations when they are due to socioeconomic factors in low-income households .

Members also called on the Commission to identify areas in which water shortage is an existing or potential issue, and to help the Member
States, regions and areas concerned, in particular rural areas and deprived urban areas, to address this issue properly.
The report recalled that, as stated in the WFD, water is not a commodity but a public good that is vital to human life and dignity. Therefore, the
Commission should by no means promote the privatisation of water undertakings in the context of an economic adjustment programme or any
other EU procedure of economic policy coordination given that these are services of general interest and are thus mainly in the public interest.
In addition, Member States are called upon to ensure non-discrimination in access to water services, ensuring their provision to all, including
marginalised user groups.
As regards the quality of water, Member States are called upon to:
impose an obligation on water suppliers to indicate the physicochemical characteristics of the water on water bills;
draft urban plans according to the availability of water resources;
increase controls and monitoring of pollutants, and plan immediate actions aimed at the removal and sanitisation of toxic substances;
take action to reduce the considerable leakages from pipes in Europe and to renew the inadequate water supply networks.
They stressed that support for the Right2Water ECI and its objectives has been further demonstrated by the large numbers of citizens in
countries such as Germany, Austria, Belgium, Slovakia, Slovenia, Greece, Finland, Spain, Luxembourg, Italy and Ireland who have spoken out
on the issue of water and its ownership and provision.
Water services and the internal market: Members noted that countries across the EU, including Spain, Portugal, Greece, Ireland, Germany
and Italy, have seen the potential or actual loss of public ownership of water services become a major issue of concern to citizens. They
recalled that water supply and sewerage enterprises are services of general interest and have the general mission of ensuring that the entire
population is provided with high quality water at socially acceptable prices and minimising the negative environmental impacts of waste water.
In line with the principle of subsidiarity, the Commission should remain neutral regarding Member States decisions relating to the ownership of
water services and should not promote the privatisation of water services either through legislation or in any other way.
Members stressed that the special character of water and sanitation services, such as production, distribution and treatment, makes it
imperative that they be excluded from any trade agreements the EU is negotiating or considering . Therefore, the Commission is urged to grant
a legally binding exclusion for water services, sanitation services and wastewater disposal services in the ongoing negotiations for the
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) and the Trade in Services Agreement.
According to Members, the production, distribution and treatment of water and sanitation services must remain excluded from the Concessions
Directive also in any future revision thereof. They recalled that Directive 2006/123/EC on services in the internal market attracted strong
opposition from civil society in many respects, including matters relating to services of general economic interest such as water distribution and
supply services and wastewater management.
Members urged the Member States and regional and local authorities to move towards a genuine Social Agreement for Water, with the aim of
guaranteeing the availability, stability and safe management of the resource, in particular by enacting policies such as the establishment of
water solidarity funds and other mechanisms for social action to support people who are unable to afford access to water and sanitation
services. Social action mechanisms should be put in place such as those that already exist in some EU countries to safeguard the provision of
drinking water for citizens in genuine hardship.
Members also condemned the fact that denial of the provision of water and sanitation to disadvantaged and vulnerable communities is being
used in a coercive manner in some Member States. In this regard, they called on each Member State to appoint a water services Ombudsman
in order to ensure that water-related issues such as complaints and suggestions on water service quality and access can be processed by an
independent body.
Water companies are encouraged to reinvest economic revenues generated from the water management cycle in maintaining and improving
water services and protecting water resources. Members recommended putting an end to practices where economic resources are diverted
from the water sector to finance other policies.
The Commission was also called upon to monitor carefully the use of direct and indirect EU funding for water management projects and to
ensure that such funding is used only for the projects for which it was intended.
Internalisation of the cost of pollution: the report recalled that, through water bills, EU citizens are bearing the cost of purification of water and
water treatment. More than 40 % of rivers and coastal waters are affected by diffuse pollution caused by agriculture, while between 20 % and
25 % are subjected to pollution deriving from point sources such as industrial structures, sewage systems and wastewater management
networks. It stressed the importance of effective implementation of the WFD and the Drinking Water Directive, better coordination as regards
their implementation, more coherence when drafting legislation and more proactive measures for saving water resources and substantially
increasing water use efficiency across all sectors (industries, households, agriculture, distribution networks).
EU external policy and development policy in the water sector: Members stressed that EU development policies should fully integrate universal
access to water and sanitation via the promotion of public-public partnerships based on not-for-profit principles. They reaffirmed that access to
drinking water in a sufficient quantity and of a sufficient quality is a basic human right.
They called on the Commission to ensure adequate financial support to capacity-development actions in the water domain, relying on and
cooperating with existing international platforms and initiatives.
The report underlined that assistance in providing safe drinking water and sanitation should be given high priority in the allocation of EU funds
and in assistance programming. The water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) sector in developing countries should be given high priority in both
official development aid (ODA) and national budgets.
It stressed that although progress towards the Millennium Development Goal on safe drinking water is on track, 748 million people worldwide
lack access to an improved water supply and it is estimated that at least 1.8 billion people drink water that is faecally contaminated, and the
sanitation target is far from being met. Therefore, it is necessary to ensure adequate financial support to capacity-development actions in the
water domain.
They called for the creation of a global monitoring mechanism to track progress in achieving universal access to safe drinking water , the
sustainable use and development of water resources and the strengthening of equitable, participatory and accountable water governance in all

countries.
They recalled that the World Health Organisation has stated that between 100 and 200 litres of water per day per person is optimal, while
noting that 50 to 100 litres is required to ensure that basic needs are met and few health concerns arise. They called on governments,
international aid agencies, non-governmental organisations and local communities to work to provide all humans with a basic water
requirement and to guarantee that water is a human right. Members States are called upon to introduce a pricing policy that respects peoples
right to a minimum quantity of water for living and cracks down on waste. In this regard, Members called on the Commission to make renewal
of ageing drinking water networks a priority in the Investment Plan for Europe, as well as measures to better inform the consumers about water
and to contribute to more economical management of water resources.
Lastly, Members supported the Global Water Solidarity Platform launched by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in order to
engage local authorities in finding solutions to water challenges as well as the 1% solidarity for water and sanitation and other initiatives taken
by citizens and authorities in some Member States in order to support projects in developing countries.

2014/2239(INI) - 08/09/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 363 votes to 96, with 231 abstentions, a resolution on the follow-up to the European Citizens Initiative
Right2Water.
Parliament recalled that Right2Water is the first European Citizens Initiative (ECI) to have met the requirements set out in Regulation (EU) No
211/2011 on the citizens initiative and to have been heard by Parliament after receiving the support of almost 1.9 million citizens. According to
Parliament, the full implementation of the human right to water and sanitation, as recognised by the UN and supported by the EU Member
States, is essential for life.
The ECI as an instrument of participatory democracy: Parliament stated that the ECI is a unique democratic mechanism which promotes
participatory democracy at the EU level. It stressed that the Commission should ensure the utmost transparency during the two-month analysis
phase, that a successful ECI should receive proper legal support and advice from the Commission and should be properly publicised, and that
promoters and supporters should be kept fully informed and updated throughout the ECI process. It considered it regrettable that the
communication lacks ambition, does not meet the specific demands made in the ECI. It reiterated the commitment already taken. According to
plenary, the response given by the Commission to the Right2Water ECI is insufficient, as it does not make any fresh contribution and does not
introduce all the measures that might help to achieve the goals. It asked the Commission, with regard to this particular ECI, to lead a
comprehensive information campaign on the measures that have already been taken in the field of water and how these measures could
contribute to the achievements of the objectives of the Right2Water ECI.
It called on the Commission to come forward with legislative proposals, and, if appropriate, a revision of the WFD, that would recognise
universal access and the human right to water. It advocated, moreover, that universal access to safe drinking water and sanitation be
recognised in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
The right to water and sanitation: Parliament recalled that, according to the UN, the human right to water and sanitation entitles everyone to
water for personal and domestic uses which is of good quality, safe, physically accessible, affordable, sufficient and acceptable. In accordance
with a further UN recommendation, 3% of household income should be seen as a maximum for water payments where payments apply. In this
regard, it deplored the fact that in the EU-28 more than 1 million people still lack access to a safe and clean drinking water supply and nearly
2% of the population lacks access to sanitation.
Whilst calling on the Commission to recognise the importance of the human right to water and sanitation and of water as a public good,
Parliament rejected water cut-offs and the enforced switching-off of the water supply as a violation of human rights. It asked Member States to
put an immediate end to these situations when they are due to socioeconomic factors in low-income households . Parliament also called on the
Commission to identify areas in which water shortage is an existing or potential issue, and to help the Member States, regions and areas
concerned, in particular rural areas and deprived urban areas, to address this issue properly.
Parliament called on the Commission, given the effects of the recent economic crisis, to collaborate with the Member States and regional and
local authorities to conduct a study on water poverty issues.
The resolution recalled that, as stated in the WFD, water is not a commodity but a public good that is vital to human life and dignity. Therefore,
the Commission should by no means promote the privatisation of water undertakings in the context of an economic adjustment programme or
any other EU procedure of economic policy coordination given that these are services of general interest and are thus mainly in the public
interest.
Moreover, with regard to regulation and control, Parliament considered that the public ownership of water needs to be protected by
encouraging public, transparent and participatory management models.
In addition, Member States are called upon to ensure non-discrimination in access to water services, ensuring their provision to all, including
marginalised user groups.
As regards the quality of water, Member States are called upon to:
impose an obligation on water suppliers to indicate the physicochemical characteristics of the water on water bills;
draft urban plans according to the availability of water resources;
increase controls and monitoring of pollutants, and plan immediate actions aimed at the removal and sanitisation of toxic substances;
take action to reduce the considerable leakages from pipes in Europe and to renew the inadequate water supply networks.
Parliament stressed that support for the Right2Water ECI and its objectives has been further demonstrated by the large numbers of citizens in
countries such as Germany, Austria, Belgium, Slovakia, Slovenia, Greece, Finland, Spain, Luxembourg, Italy and Ireland who have spoken out
on the issue of water and its ownership and provision.
Water services and the internal market: Parliament noted that countries across the EU, including Spain, Portugal, Greece, Ireland, Germany
and Italy, have seen the potential or actual loss of public ownership of water services become a major issue of concern to citizens. It recalled
that water supply and sewerage enterprises are services of general interest and have the general mission of ensuring that the entire

population is provided with high quality water at socially acceptable prices and minimising the negative environmental impacts of waste water.
In line with the principle of subsidiarity, the Commission should remain neutral regarding Member States decisions relating to the ownership of
water services and should not promote the privatisation of water services either through legislation or in any other way.
Members stressed that the special character of water and sanitation services, such as production, distribution and treatment, makes it
imperative that they be excluded from any trade agreements the EU is negotiating or considering . Therefore, the Commission is urged to grant
a legally binding exclusion for water services, sanitation services and wastewater disposal services in the ongoing negotiations for the
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) and the Trade in Services Agreement.
According to Parliament, the production, distribution and treatment of water and sanitation services must remain excluded from the
Concessions Directive also in any future revision thereof. It recalled that Directive 2006/123/EC on services in the internal market attracted
strong opposition from civil society in many respects, including matters relating to services of general economic interest such as water
distribution and supply services and wastewater management.
Re-municipalising water services: Parliament recalled that the option of re-municipalising water services should continue to be ensured in the
future without any restriction, and may be kept under local management if so chosen by the competent public authorities. It urged the Member
States and regional and local authorities to move towards a genuine Social Agreement for Water, with the aim of guaranteeing the availability,
stability and safe management of the resource, in particular by enacting policies such as the establishment of water solidarity funds and other
mechanisms for social action to support people who are unable to afford access to water and sanitation services. Social action mechanisms
should be put in place such as those that already exist in some EU countries to safeguard the provision of drinking water for citizens in
genuine hardship.
Parliament also condemned the fact that denial of the provision of water and sanitation to disadvantaged and vulnerable communities is being
used in a coercive manner in some Member States. In this regard, it called on each Member State to appoint a water services Ombudsman in
order to ensure that water-related issues such as complaints and suggestions on water service quality and access can be processed by an
independent body.
Water companies are encouraged to reinvest economic revenues generated from the water management cycle in maintaining and improving
water services and protecting water resources. Members recommended putting an end to practices where economic resources are diverted
from the water sector to finance other policies.
The Commission was also called upon to monitor carefully the use of direct and indirect EU funding for water management projects and to
ensure that such funding is used only for the projects for which it was intended.
The Commission is encouraged to draw up a European legislative framework for the reuse of treated effluent in order, in particular, to protect
sensitive activities and areas.
Internalisation of the cost of pollution: Parliament recalled that, through water bills, EU citizens are bearing the cost of purification of water and
water treatment. More than 40 % of rivers and coastal waters are affected by diffuse pollution caused by agriculture, while between 20% and
25% are subjected to pollution deriving from point sources such as industrial structures, sewage systems and wastewater management
networks. It stressed the importance of effective implementation of the WFD and the Drinking Water Directive, better coordination as regards
their implementation, more coherence when drafting legislation and more proactive measures for saving water resources and substantially
increasing water use efficiency across all sectors (industries, households, agriculture, distribution networks).
EU external policy and development policy in the water sector: Parliament stressed that EU development policies should fully integrate
universal access to water and sanitation via the promotion of public-public partnerships based on not-for-profit principles. It reaffirmed that
access to drinking water in a sufficient quantity and of a sufficient quality is a basic human right. Member called on governments, international
aid agencies, non-governmental organisations and local communities to work to provide all humans with a basic water requirement and to
guarantee that water is a human right.
They called on the Commission to ensure adequate financial support to capacity-development actions in the water domain, relying on and
cooperating with existing international platforms and initiatives.
The resolution underlined that assistance in providing safe drinking water and sanitation should be given high priority in the allocation of EU
funds and in assistance programming. The water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) sector in developing countries should be given high priority
in both official development aid (ODA) and national budgets.
Parliament stressed that although progress towards the Millennium Development Goal on safe drinking water is on track, 748 million people
worldwide lack access to an improved water supply and it is estimated that at least 1.8 billion people drink water that is faecally contaminated,
and the sanitation target is far from being met. Therefore, it is necessary to ensure adequate financial support to capacity-development actions
in the water domain.
It also called for the creation of a global monitoring mechanism to track progress in achieving universal access to safe drinking water , the
sustainable use and development of water resources and the strengthening of equitable, participatory and accountable water governance in all
countries.
It recalled that the World Health Organisation has stated that between 100 and 200 litres of water per day per person is optimal, while noting
that 50 to 100 litres is required to ensure that basic needs are met and few health concerns arise. Members States are called upon to
introduce a pricing policy that respects peoples right to a minimum quantity of water for living and cracks down on waste. In this regard,
Parliament called on the Commission to make renewal of ageing drinking water networks a priority in the Investment Plan for Europe, as well
as measures to better inform the consumers about water and to contribute to more economical management of water resources.
Lastly, Parliament supported the Global Water Solidarity Platform launched by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) in order
to engage local authorities in finding solutions to water challenges as well as the 1% solidarity for water and sanitation and other initiatives
taken by citizens and authorities in some Member States in order to support projects in developing countries.
It should be noted that an alternative motion for a resolution, tabled by the EPP-ECR groups, was rejected in plenary.

