Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2950(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the European integration process of Kosovo

Subject
8.20 Enlargement of the Union
Geographical area
Kosovo under UNSCR 1244/1999

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
22/09/2014

LUNACEK Ulrike
Shadow rapporteur

ADAKTUSSON Lars

PANZERI Pier Antonio

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

COUSO PERMUY
Javier

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

HAHN Johannes

Key events
24/02/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

10/03/2015

Debate in Parliament

11/03/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

11/03/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/03/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

T8-0066/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2950(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Summary

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/02010

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE546.669

28/01/2015

EP

Motion for a resolution

B8-0214/2015

04/03/2015

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0066/2015

11/03/2015

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2015)344

20/07/2015

Summary

2014/2950(RSP) - 11/03/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on the European integration process of Kosovo, prepared by the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
It recalled that negotiations for the EU-Kosovo Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) were completed in May 2014 and the SAA was
initialled in July 2014.
Political situation in Kosovo: Parliament was concerned about the appointment of non-consensual persons whose background might be
questioned. It stressed that the performance of the leadership of Kosovo could best be measured by the concrete results delivered to Kosovo
citizens and to European and international partners. It stressed that the establishment and functioning of the Special Court, and cooperation
with it, should be a priority, and would help Kosovo to resolve and overcome problems rooted in its past.
Fight against organised crime: Parliament stressed the need to step up measures to combat criminal organisations that were making irregular
migration possible. It also emphasised the need to find a solution to the threats and attacks against activists trying to strengthen the rights of
LGBTI people. Reforms to the judicial system: Parliament observed that strong concerns remained regarding the independence,
accountability, impartiality and efficiency of judges and prosecutors and the functioning of the Kosovo Judicial Council. It called on the political
authorities to clearly demonstrate their full support for the independence of judges and prosecutors. Further steps were needed to prevent any
possible link between organised crime and people within the public administration.
Fight against terrorism: Members noted with concern reports on growing radicalisation among young people in Kosovo, with some of them
joining terrorist fighters in Syria and Iraq. They asked for the EU to help address the social issues that were part of the reason why radical
groups were able to recruit young people in Kosovo.
Reforms: Parliament noted the lack of progress in the implementation of the strategic framework for public administration reform and the action
plan. It called on Kosovo to complete the legislative framework for the civil service, ensuring depoliticisation of the service and including
performance appraisals.
The issue of minorities: Members underscored the continuing need for serious efforts with regard to the full implementation of the law which
included provisions on the rights of ethnic minorities, with a view to preventing direct and indirect discrimination. The Roma, Egyptian and
Ashkali communities, in particular, continued to face challenges in the socioeconomic, education and healthcare fields. Parliament looked
forward to the new governments new framework for improving their situation.
Recognition of Kosovo: Parliament encouraged the remaining five Member States to proceed with the recognition of Kosovo. This would
further facilitate the normalisation of relations between Belgrade and Pristina.
EULEX: Members were seriously concerned about the recent allegations of corruption within EULEX. They called for full transparency in the
investigation and underlined EULEXs importance in reaching out to local authorities and encouraging them to meet their commitments
regarding rule of law reforms.
Fight against criminal networks: Parliament called on the Pristina authorities to take effective action against the criminal networks involved in
the trafficking of human beings and, explain clearly to the general public that there was little chance of asylum applications being accepted. It
called on the Serbian and Kosovo authorities to set up cooperation arrangements in order to clamp down on and dismantle the criminal
networks that are controlling irregular migrants from Kosovo to some EU Member States.
Fight against unemployment and poverty: Members noted with concern that the implementation of the Law on Labour remains unsatisfactory,
as does that of the Law on Strikes. They also noted that the unemployment rate in Kosovo was around 30% and especially affects womens
participation in labour.
Fight against terrorism: Parliament asked the Kosovo law enforcement agencies and police forces to work actively and to cooperate with their
European counterparts to achieve better coordination on counterterrorism and in combating drug trafficking and trafficking in human beings.
Lastly, it called on the Serbian authorities to provide full assistance in repatriating the bodies of Kosovar missing persons found in Serbia.

