Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2151(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Towards a renewed consensus on the enforcement of intellectual property
rights: an EU action plan

Subject
3.50.15 Intellectual property, copyright
3.50.16 Industrial property, European patent, Community patent, design and
pattern
4.60.02 Consumer information, advertising, labelling
7.30.30.10 Action against counterfeiting

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
11/11/2014

SVOBODA Pavel
Shadow rapporteur

KÖSTER Dietmar

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

CAVADA Jean-Marie

ANDERSSON Max
Committee for opinion
ITRE

IMCO

Industry, Research and Energy

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

24/09/2014
STIHLER Catherine

CULT

Culture and Education

26/02/2015
COSTA Silvia

LIBE

European Commission

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

BIEŃKOWSKA Elżbieta

Key events
01/07/2014

Non-legislative basic document published

24/11/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

04/12/2014

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

07/05/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

COM(2014)0392

Summary

Summary

19/05/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

08/06/2015

Debate in Parliament

09/06/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

09/06/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

09/06/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0169/2015

Summary

T8-0220/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2151(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/01745

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document
Committee draft report

COM(2014)0392

01/07/2014

EC

PE549.140

05/02/2015

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

CULT

PE544.344

05/03/2015

EP

Committee opinion

IMCO

PE546.649

25/03/2015

EP

PE552.123

27/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0169/2015

19/05/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0220/2015

09/06/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)529

05/11/2015

Amendments tabled in committee

2014/2151(INI) - 01/07/2014 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to propose an EU Action Plan on the protection of Intellectual Property Rights (IPR).
BACKGROUND: the EU needs innovation and creativity to stay competitive relative to countries with lower labour, energy and raw materials
costs. A recent study has estimated that IPR-intensive sectors account for around 39% of EU GDP (worth some EUR 4.7 trillion annually) and,
taking indirect jobs into account, up to 35% of all jobs.
The March 2014 European Council reaffirmed the importance of intellectual property as a key driver for growth and innovation and highlighted
the need to fight against counterfeiting to enhance the EUs industrial competitiveness globally.
At EU level, statistics on customs detentions for suspected violations of IPR at its external border recorded more than 90 000 cases in 2012.
Around 70% of these cases related to postal and courier traffic, a reflection of the growth of e-commerce. In total, almost 40 million articles
were detained, with an estimated value - in terms of equivalent genuine products - of just below EUR 1 billion.
One Member State has estimated that 81% of IPinfringing products are associated with organised crime. It calculates that while the illicit
revenue generated by organised crime in these activities was over EUR 100 million, the cost to its economy as a whole - in terms of direct lost
revenue to legitimate businesses, lost revenue to the exchequer, lost jobs and high enforcement costs - came to almost five times that amount
(EUR 470 million).
In order to dissuade commercial scale infringements, the Commission must apply a holistic, balanced and flexible system that can react rapidly
to the evolving challenges that face the EU knowledge economy.

CONTENT: this Communication sets down a ten point action plan which constitutes a decisive first step in building an effective IP enforcement
policy targeted at commercial scale infringements at EU and national levels. The objective should be to arrive at a renewed consensus on how
Intellectual Property Rights are exercised, and in a manner which fully involves all relevant stakeholders.
A number of the actions will be implemented by the Commission where appropriate in partnership with the Office for Harmonization in the
Internal Market (OHIM), which since June 2012 houses the European Observatory on Infringements of Intellectual Property Rights.
The Action Plan focuses on the following issues:
Raising awareness of consumers, employees and clients: in 2014, the Observatory shall assist Member States to launch targeted
communication campaigns aiming to raise awareness amongst citizens, especially young people on the economic harm caused by
commercial scale IP infringements, as well as campaigns to highlight the benefits for consumers from choosing IP respecting products and to
facilitate access to such products.
Ensuring the integrity of supply chains: the diffusion of Information and Communications Technology (ICT) has facilitated the development of
ever longer - and frequently global - supply chains. While these developments are positive, they have also been applied by IP-infringing
commercial operators. The Commission will launch a series of consultation actions on applying due diligence throughout supply chains as a
means to prevent commercial scale IP infringements. On the basis of the collected information it intends to develop an EU due-diligence
scheme for this purpose. It will, in the first instance, seek to encourage the voluntary take-up of the scheme.
Infringing products on the internet: follow the money: the Commission will facilitate the development of further voluntary Memoranda of
Understanding to reduce the profits of commercial scale IP infringements in the online environment, following Stakeholder Dialogues involving
advertising service providers, payment services and shippers. Any such memorandum should have well-embedded mechanisms for the
protection of fundamental rights and a competitive environment, focusing in particular on preventing potential abuses.
Assisting SMEs to enforce their IP rights: the Commission intends to:
analyse and report on existing national initiatives seeking to improve IP civil enforcement procedures for SMEs, in particular in respect
of low value claims and consider possible action in this field;
issue a Green Paper to consult stakeholders on the need for future EU action based on the best practice found in nationally financed
schemes assisting SMEs to enforce their IP rights.
Chargeback systems: a tool for consumers: certain credit and debit card providers offer chargeback schemes where, up to a certain value,
consumers can contest and not pay for a service or product that they would not have wished to purchase had they already known it was not
genuine. In certain Member States these schemes are required by law.
The Commission will issue a Green paper to consult stakeholders on the impact of chargeback and related schemes to tackle commercial
scale IP infringements.
Cooperation between national authorities: the Commission will establish a Member State Expert Group on IP Enforcement, where Member
States could share best practice on the work within the EU of all their concerned authorities and be informed on the delivery of this Action
Plan.
Training for national authorities in the Single Market: the Commission will support the Observatory in the development of a comprehensive set
of sectoral IP enforcement related training programmes for Member State authorities in the context of the Single Market.
Screening public procurement for IP-infringing products: the Commission intends to develop, promote and publish a guide on best practice for
public authorities to avoid purchasing counterfeit products.
Analysing trends in IP and in IP-infringing activities: starting in 2014, the Commission intends to provide economic reports. These will serve as
the monitoring tool for the Commissions policies against commercial scale IP infringement activities.

2014/2151(INI) - 04/12/2014 Resolution/conclusions adopted by Council
The Council adopted conclusions on infringements of intellectual property rights (IPR) enforcement.
Recognising that tackling IPR infringement effectively is complex, particularly in the online environment, the Council stressed its commitment in
the fight against intellectual property rights infringements while safeguarding the fundamental rights of all parties concerned by IPR
enforcement. It shared the Commission's view that improved collaboration between Member States and the Commission and sharing good
practices will increase the efficiency of IPR enforcement in the EU.
The conclusions focused, in particular, on the following issues:
the setting up of an expert group on the enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights;
the importance of accessibility and cost-efficiency of judicial systems, in particular for SMEs;
the development of new competitive business models;
preventing and combating piracy.
Lastly, the Commission is encouraged, in close cooperation with the Member States and all stakeholders, including right holders,
intermediaries and civil society, to deliver the actions contained within the EU Action Plan, giving emphasis to the "Follow the money"
approach, due diligence, enhanced cooperation and assistance to SMEs in enforcing their IPR.

2014/2151(INI) - 19/05/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Pavel SVOBODA (EPP, CZ) on the Commission communication entitled:
Towards a renewed consensus on the enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights: An EU Action Plan.

The report welcomed the Commission action plan. Its key objective should be to ensure the effective, evidence-based enforcement of IPR,
which plays a key role in stimulating innovation, creativity, competitiveness, growth and cultural diversity. Ensuring fair remuneration for
creators should be a crucial element of the EU action plan.
According to members, the enforcement of IPR is not merely a driver for jobs and growth across the Union but is essential for the proper
functioning of the single market. Moreover, IPR are not just copyrights but also trademarks and patents, among others, and that each of these
is vital to the value of Europes goods and services. The Commission is urged to continue the work of taking IPR into account as a factor in the
competitiveness of the European economy.
Involving all actors in the supply chain, both on- and offline: the report stated that all actors in the supply chain have a role to play in the fight
against IPR infringement and should be involved in this process. Members stressed:
the importance of ensuring the application of due diligence throughout the supply chain, including the digital supply chain and all the
key actors and operators therein, such as creators, artists and rights holders, producers, intermediaries, internet service providers,
online sales platforms, end users and public authorities;
the importance of sector-based agreements and good practice guides to combat IPR infringements; members welcomed the approach
of depriving IPR infringers of their revenues by means of agreements between right-holders and their partners;
the involvement of organised crime in international IPR-infringing activities and the high importance of delivering a European
coordinated solution, strengthening the audit measures in place while implementing the follow the money principle, to safeguard
consumer interests.
Consumer awareness and information: welcoming the approach taken by the Commission to develop targeted awareness campaigns,
members recommended a broader information campaign regarding the Intellectual Property Right Holders and Enforcement Authorities
Platform so that right holders have a more active role in defending their rights across the European Union.
They considered that at the same time that consumers should be better able to identify infringing offers so that they can decide not to proceed
with a given purchase. They called on the Commission and the Member States to reflect further on the development of specific tools and
guidelines, and to have an evidence-based examination and possible development of a harmonised system of procedures for
notification/withdrawal of infringing goods and content, so that consumers and undertakings can take action when they are misled, in the same
way as they can act to draw attention to undesirable content.
Developing new business models: Members reiterated their demand that the Commission and the Member States put more pressure on the
industry to develop, in all Member States, licit offers that are both diversified and attractive so that consumers genuinely have every
opportunity to purchase licit goods or to use licit content.
The report stressed the need for a more holistic approach focussing on how to meet consumer demand by increasing the availability and
consumption of innovative and affordable legal offers, based on business models that are adapted to the internet and that allow for the
removal of barriers, creating a truly European digital single market, while maintaining a balance between the rights of consumers and the
protection of innovators and creators.
Moreover, the report:
emphasised the importance of improving civil enforcement procedures for SMEs and individual creators as regards IP, as they play a
key role in the creative and cultural sectors and often do not have the capacity to have their rights enforced, given the complexity, cost
and length of such procedures;
called on the Commission to make full use of the data collected by the European Observatory on Infringements of Intellectual Property
Rights, to draw conclusions with regard to, and propose solutions for improving, IPR enforcement that can be used by policy-makers;
welcomed the establishment by the Commission of an expert group on IPR enforcement, and calls on it to ensure that Parliament is
involved more closely;
invited the Commission to come up with a detailed assessment of the limitations of the current legal framework as regards online
activities and, if appropriate, with proposals for adapting the EU legislative framework to the internet environment;
reiterated its call for an IPR strategy, including a comprehensive legal framework to combat IPR infringement adapted to the online
environment, with full regard for fundamental rights and freedoms, fair trials, proportionality and data protection;
insisted on the need to support and facilitate the work performed by customs services in mutual cooperation which plays an important
role in the fight against IPR infringement in cross-border trade, by clarifying operational rules.
Lastly, the report stressed the need for precise detection systems that lead to the swift interruption of commercial-scale IPR-infringing
activities.

2014/2151(INI) - 09/06/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 529 votes to 143, with 28 abstentions, a resolution on the Commission communication entitled: Towards
a renewed consensus on the enforcement of Intellectual Property Rights: An EU Action Plan.
General remarks: the EU faces a high number of intellectual property rights infringements. The volume and financial value of these
infringements are alarming and illustrate the added value which IPR represent for the European economy in global competition. IPR
infringements, including counterfeiting, discourages growth, job creation, innovation and creativity. They cause both non-material and
economic damage to European undertakings and bring about heavy economic and fiscal losses to states.
In this regard, Parliament welcomed the Commission action plan. Its key objective should be to ensure the effective, evidence-based
enforcement of IPR, which plays a key role in stimulating innovation, creativity, competitiveness, growth and cultural diversity. Ensuring fair
remuneration for creators should be a crucial element of the EU action plan.
According to members, the enforcement of IPR is not merely a driver for jobs and growth across the Union but is essential for the proper
functioning of the single market. Moreover, IPR are not just copyrights but also trademarks and patents, among others, and that each of these
is vital to the value of Europes goods and services. The Commission is urged to continue the work of taking IPR into account as a factor in the
competitiveness of the European economy.

Involving all actors in the supply chain, both on- and offline: Parliament stated that all actors in the supply chain have a role to play in the fight
against IPR infringement and should be involved in this process. It stressed:
the importance of ensuring the application of due diligence throughout the supply chain, including the digital supply chain and all the
key actors and operators therein, such as creators, artists and rights holders, producers, intermediaries, internet service providers,
online sales platforms, end users and public authorities;
the need for operators in the industry to exchange information about platforms which provide access to content that infringes IPR, and
to take coordinated and proportionate measures, such as notice and takedown, to reduce the income generated from such content
and platforms; such measures should not include the non-judicial blocking of websites;
the importance of sector-based agreements and good practice guides to combat IPR infringements; members welcomed the approach
of depriving IPR infringers of their revenues by means of agreements between right-holders and their partners;
the involvement of organised crime in international IPR-infringing activities and the high importance of delivering a European
coordinated solution, strengthening the audit measures in place while implementing the follow the money principle, to safeguard
consumer interests.
Consumer awareness and information: welcoming the approach taken by the Commission to develop targeted awareness campaigns,
Parliament recommended a broader information campaign regarding the Intellectual Property Right Holders and Enforcement Authorities
Platform so that right holders have a more active role in defending their rights across the European Union.
It considered that at the same time that consumers should be better able to identify infringing offers so that they can decide not to proceed with
a given purchase. They called on the Commission and the Member States to reflect further on the possible development of a harmonised
system of procedures for notification/withdrawal of infringing goods and content, so that consumers and undertakings can take action when
they are misled, in the same way as they can act to draw attention to undesirable content.
Developing new business models: Members reiterated their demand that the Commission and the Member States put more pressure on the
industry to develop, in all Member States, licit offers that are both diversified and attractive so that consumers genuinely have every
opportunity to purchase licit goods or to use licit content.
The resolution stressed the need for a more holistic approach increasing the availability and consumption of innovative and affordable legal
offers, based on business models that are adapted to the internet and that allow for the removal of barriers, creating a truly European digital
single market, while maintaining a balance between the rights of consumers and the protection of innovators and creators.
Moreover, the resolution:
emphasised the importance of improving civil enforcement procedures for SMEs and individual creators as regards IP, as they play a
key role in the creative and cultural sectors and often do not have the capacity to have their rights enforced, given the complexity, cost
and length of such procedures;
called on the Commission to make full use of the data collected by the European Observatory on Infringements of Intellectual Property
Rights, to draw conclusions with regard to, and propose solutions for improving, IPR enforcement that can be used by policy-makers;
welcomed the establishment by the Commission of an expert group on IPR enforcement, and calls on it to ensure that Parliament is
involved more closely;
invited the Commission to come up with a detailed assessment of the limitations of the current legal framework as regards online
activities and, if appropriate, with proposals for adapting the EU legislative framework to the internet environment;
reiterated its call for an IPR strategy, including a comprehensive legal framework to combat IPR infringement adapted to the online
environment, with full regard for fundamental rights and freedoms, fair trials, proportionality and data protection;
reiterated that a modern pro-competitive and consumer-friendly copyright framework is needed;
insisted on the need to support and facilitate the work performed by customs services in mutual cooperation which plays an important
role in the fight against IPR infringement in cross-border trade, by clarifying operational rules.
Lastly, the report stressed the need for precise detection systems that lead to the swift interruption of commercial-scale IPR-infringing
activities.

