Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2014/0257(COD)

Awaiting Parliament 1st reading / single reading / budget 1st
stage

Veterinary medicinal products
Repealing Directive 2001/82/EC 1999/0180(COD)
Subject
3.10.08 Animal health requirements, veterinary legislation and pharmacy
4.20 Public health
4.60.04.04 Food safety

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ENVI

Rapporteur

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Appointed
13/11/2014

GROSSETÊTE
Françoise
Shadow rapporteur

TĂNĂSESCU Claudiu
Ciprian

PIECHA Bolesław G.

FEDERLEY Fredrick

KYLLÖNEN Merja

HÄUSLING Martin

PEDICINI Piernicola
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

ITRE

Appointed

07/11/2014
MÜLLER Ulrike

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Health and Food Safety

Commissioner
ANDRIUKAITIS Vytenis Povilas

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the
Regions

Key events
10/09/2014

Legislative proposal published

COM(2014)0558

Summary

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

08/12/2015

Debate in Council

17/02/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

29/02/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

09/03/2016

Debate in Parliament

10/03/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

10/03/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

10/03/2016

Matter referred back to the committee
responsible

12/06/2017

Debate in Council

A8-0046/2016

Summary

T8-0087/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0257(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Repealing Directive 2001/82/EC 1999/0180(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114; Rules of Procedure of the
European Parliament EP 059-p4; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU
168-p4

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Awaiting Parliament 1st reading / single reading / budget 1st stage

Committee dossier

ENVI/8/01652

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2014)0558

10/09/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0273

10/09/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0274

10/09/2014

EC

CES5960/2014

21/01/2015

ESC

Committee draft report

PE551.951

14/04/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE551.949

17/06/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE560.753

17/06/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE560.760

17/06/2015

EP

PE552.056

23/07/2015

EP

Economic and Social Committee: opinion,
report

Committee opinion

AGRI

Summary

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0046/2016

29/02/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at
1st reading/single reading

T8-0087/2016

10/03/2016

EP

Summary

Additional information
European Commission

EUR-Lex

2014/0257(COD) - 10/09/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to ensure a high level of public health protection, high standards of quality and safety of veterinary medicinal products and the
optimal functioning of the internal market.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the Council and the European Parliament.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: in 2001, all the rules on production, marketing, distribution and use were consolidated in a veterinary medicines code
(Directive 2001/82/EC); this was followed by Regulation (EC) No 726/2004.
The current EU legislation on veterinary medicinal products provides the legal environment on authorisation, production, marketing, distribution
and use of veterinary medicinal products. It brought some harmonisation to the procedures and rules required to place veterinary medicinal
products on the EU market.
However, the Commission considers that there is evidence that the existing provisions do not deliver a functioning internal market:
diverging or incomplete transposition of the rules and the existence of numerous national requirements imply that companies are
confronted with different rules and interpretation in countries and have also led to different levels of public and animal health
protection;
that needs of the veterinary sector differ substantially from those of the human sector in relation to medicines: in the veterinary sector
there are many different animal species, which creates both a fragmented market and the need for major investments in order to
extend the authorisation of medicines existing for one animal species to another;
the price-setting mechanisms in the veterinary sector follow a completely different logic. Consequently, prices for veterinary medicines
are typically substantially lower than for medicinal products for human use;
the size of the animal pharmaceutical industry is only a small fraction of the size of the pharmaceutical industry for human medicines.
The Commission considers that it is critically important to have a single market for veterinary medicinal products. The current confined and
fragmented markets do not allow the pharmaceutical sector to have a positive return on investments for developing new products for certain
animal species.
The ambition to improve the availability of medicines in the Union and the functioning of the internal market and market competition can only
be carried out at EU level.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the consultation and a study, An assessment of the impact of the revision of veterinary pharmaceutical legislation,
formed the basis of an impact assessment carried out for the Commission between November 2009 and June 2011. The Commissions Impact
Assessment Board (IAB) released its final opinion in September 2013.
CONTENT: the revision of Directive 2001/82/EC and other legislation on veterinary medicinal products seek to put in place, while safeguarding
public health, animal health, food safety and the environment, an up-to-date, proportionate body of legislation tailored to the specificities of the
veterinary sector.
Specific objectives aim to:
expand the market beyond the top four animal species,
simplify procedures for obtaining a marketing authorisation in multiple national markets,
review data requirements in marketing authorisation procedures,
simplify post authorisation requirements,
review incentives for breakthrough medicines.
The proposal also tackles the issue of antimicrobial resistance and introduces provisions to minimise risks to public health arising from the use
of antimicrobials in veterinary medicine.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the costs for the EMA for implementing and applying the new rules are entirely covered by fees charged to
industry. Therefore, the proposal is not expected to have any financial impact on the budget of the EU.
The additional resource needs for EMA are approximately 8 staff plus expenditure for meetings, translation, IT, etc. The level of fees, their
structure and modalities and exceptions will be set at a later stage by the Commission by way of implementing acts.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2014/0257(COD) - 29/02/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading

The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted the report by Françoise GROSSETÊTE (EPP, FR) on the
proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on veterinary medicinal products.
The committee recommended that Parliament make the following amendments to the Commission proposal:
Antibacterial resistance for humans only: the Committee agreed with the Commission that in order to preserve as long as possible the efficacy
of certain antimicrobials in the treatment of infections in humans, those antimicrobials should be reserved for humans only. By means of
implementing acts and taking into consideration the scientific advice of the Agency as well as the work already carried out by the WHO, the
Commission will designate antimicrobials or groups of antimicrobials reserved for treatment of certain infections in humans.
Prophylactic use of medicines: Members considered that the routine prophylactic and metaphylactic use of antimicrobials on groups of
food-producing animals should be brought to an end. Disease should be prevented not by routine recourse to antimicrobials but by good
hygiene, husbandry and housing and sound management practices. Routine prophylactic use of antimicrobials is therefore prohibited.
Prophylactic use of antimicrobial veterinary medicines will only be permitted on single animals and when fully justified by a veterinarian in
exceptional indications, of which a list shall be drafted by the Agency.
Metaphylactic use of antimicrobial veterinary medicines will be restricted to use in clinically-ill animals and to those single animals that are
identified as being at a high risk of contamination, to prevent further spread of the disease in the group.
Innovation: to encourage research into new antimicrobials, Members advocate incentives, including:
longer periods of protection for technical documentation on new medicines;
commercial protection of innovative active substances, and
protection for significant investments in data generated to improve an existing antimicrobial product or to keep it on the market.
A new article on data protection for redevelopment of veterinary medicinal products states that where the data protection period has elapsed,
any applicant may apply for a data protection period for additional innovations to existing veterinary medicinal products, which shall amount to
two years for an additional species and one year for an additional indication, additional pharmaceutical form or new withdrawal period.
Any new studies and trials, submitted by the applicant for a marketing authorisation for an existing antimicrobial veterinary medicinal product
no longer covered by any protection period shall benefit from a stand-alone period of protection of four years, provided that they fulfil certain
conditions.
Animals under the care of veterinary professionals: the committee narrowed the definition of persons entitled to retail veterinary medicines and
states that persons qualified to prescribe veterinary medicinal products in accordance with applicable national law shall retail antimicrobial
products only for animals which are under their immediate care, subject to an appropriate veterinary diagnosis and examination of the animals
concerned, and only in the amount required for the treatment concerned. In the case of food-producing animals, the continuation of the
treatment with antimicrobial products shall be decided based on a renewed clinical examination by a veterinarian.
On-line sales: Members tightened the rules on sales online. Antimicrobials, psychotropic and biological or immunological veterinary medicinal
products may not be offered on the internet. Other products may be sold online under strict criteria e.g that the veterinary medicinal products
and the prescriptions comply with the law of the destination Member State.
Environmental protection: no later than six months before the date of application of the Regulation, the Commission must present a report on a
feasibility study of a substance-based review system ('monographs') and other potential alternatives for the environmental risk assessment of
veterinary medicinal products, to be accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal.

2014/0257(COD) - 10/03/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st reading/single
reading
The European Parliament adopted amendments to the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on veterinary
medicinal products.
The matter has been referred back to the committee. The vote on the legislative resolution has been postponed to a subsequent sitting .
The main elements adopted in plenary are as follows:
Aim: this Regulation aims at ensuring a high level of protection of both animal and human health while securing the protection of the
environment. Therefore, the precautionary principle should be applied.
Member States may impose stricter conditions, justified on grounds of public health, animal health and environmental protection, for the use
and retail of veterinary medicinal products on their territory, provided that these conditions are proportionate to the risk and do not unduly
restrict the functioning of the internal market
Antibacterial resistance: in order to preserve as long as possible the efficacy of certain antimicrobials in the treatment of infections in humans,
Members considered it necessary to reserve those antimicrobials for humans only. The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts and
taking into consideration the scientific advice of the Agency as well as the work already carried out by the WHO, designate antimicrobials or
groups of antimicrobials reserved for treatment of certain infections in humans.
Therefore, the Union should be active in advocating the creation of an international strategy to combat antimicrobial resistance, in line with the
recent Global Action Plan adopted by the WHO.
Use of prophylactic and metaphylactic medicines: Members considered that the routine prophylactic (preventive) and metaphylactic (mass
medication of a group of animals to eliminate or minimize an expected outbreak of disease) use of antimicrobials on groups of food-producing
animals should be brought to an end. Disease should be prevented not by routine recourse to antimicrobials but by good hygiene, husbandry
and housing and sound management practices.
Routine prophylactic use of antimicrobials is therefore prohibited. Prophylactic use of antimicrobial veterinary medicines will only be permitted

on single animals and when fully justified by a veterinarian in exceptional indications, of which a list shall be drafted by the Agency.
Metaphylactic use of antimicrobial veterinary medicines will be restricted to use in clinically-ill animals and to those single animals that are
identified as being at a high risk of contamination, to prevent further spread of the disease in the group.
According to the amended text, antimicrobial veterinary medicines shall not under any circumstances serve to improve performance or
compensate for poor animal husbandry.
Research and innovation: to encourage research into new antimicrobials, Parliament advocated the following incentives:
longer periods of protection for technical documentation on new medicines;
commercial protection of innovative active substances, and
protection for significant investments in data generated to improve an existing antimicrobial product or to keep it on the market.
A new article on the period of protection of new data packages related to existing veterinary medicinal products stipulated that any new studies
and trials, submitted by the applicant for a marketing authorisation to the competent authorities for an existing veterinary medicinal product no
longer covered by any protection period shall benefit from a stand-alone period of protection of four years under certain conditions.
Animals under the care of veterinary professionals: Parliament narrowed the definition of persons entitled to retail veterinary medicines and
states that persons qualified to prescribe veterinary medicinal products in accordance with applicable national law shall retail antimicrobial
products only for animals which are under their immediate care, subject to an appropriate veterinary diagnosis and examination of the animals
concerned, and only in the amount required for the treatment concerned. In the case of food-producing animals, the continuation of the
treatment with antimicrobial products shall be decided based on a renewed clinical examination by a veterinarian
On-line sales: antimicrobials, psychotropic and biological or immunological veterinary medicinal products may not be offered on the internet.
Other products may be sold online under strict criteria e.g that the veterinary medicinal products and the prescriptions comply with the law of
the destination Member State.
The Commission shall adopt guidelines supporting the Member States in the development of a harmonised system of digital prescription
across the Union, including measures for controlling cross-border veterinary prescriptions.
Environmental protection: no later than six months before the date of application of the Regulation, the Commission must present a report on a
feasibility study of a substance-based review system ('monographs') and other potential alternatives for the environmental risk assessment of
veterinary medicinal products, to be accompanied, if appropriate, by a legislative proposal.

