Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2221(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

European semester for economic policy coordination: annual growth survey
2015

Subject
5.05 Economic growth
5.10.01 Convergence of economic policies, public deficit, interest rates

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON Economic and Monetary Affairs
(Associated committee)

Rapporteur

Appointed
21/10/2014

ROSATI Dariusz
Shadow rapporteur

SANT Alfred

TERHO Sampo

TORVALDS Nils

VIEGAS Miguel

URTASUN Ernest

VALLI Marco
Committee for opinion
BUDG Budgets
(Associated committee)
ENVI

Rapporteur for opinion

11/12/2014
ARTHUIS Jean

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

19/11/2014
GRAMMATIKAKIS
Giorgos

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Economic and Financial Affairs

MOSCOVICI Pierre

Key events
09/12/2014

Debate in Council

16/12/2014

Debate in Council

17/12/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

17/12/2014

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

17/02/2015

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

Appointed

24/02/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/03/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

11/03/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

11/03/2015

Debate in Parliament

11/03/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/03/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0037/2015

Summary

T8-0067/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2221(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/01999

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE544.392

15/12/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE546.670

19/01/2015

EP

Committee opinion

ENVI

PE544.125

30/01/2015

EP

Committee opinion

BUDG

PE546.556

23/02/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0037/2015

02/03/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0067/2015

11/03/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)344

20/07/2015

2014/2221(INI) - 02/03/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Dariusz ROSATI (EPP, PL) on the European Semester
for economic policy coordination: Annual Growth Survey 2015.
The Committee on Budgets, exercising its prerogatives as an associated committee under Parliaments Rule 54 of the Rules of Procedure was
consulted to give an opinion on the report.
Recalling that economic recovery in the EU slowed down considerably in the course of 2014, Members continued to support the three main
pillars approach as the right way to achieve higher growth levels and to strengthen the recovery process:
1.

boosting investment,

2.

accelerating structural reforms,

3.

pursuing responsible growth-friendly fiscal consolidation

This approach should be fully incorporated into the upcoming country-specific recommendations (CSRs).
Members supported the Commissions suggestions for improving the European Semester by streamlining existing procedures, including its
timetable, and increasing the involvement of national parliaments, with a view to strengthening national ownership of structural reforms.
Boosting competitiveness: Members expressed concern that most Member States are still losing market shares globally. Therefore, they
stated that the EU economy as a whole needs to boost its competitiveness further in the global economy , particularly by increasing competition
in the product and services markets in order to enhance innovation-driven efficiency.

Investment and cutting back on expenditure: the report stressed that Member States, when having to manage their expenditure according to
the requirements of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), should cut back on current expenditure rather than reducing investment
commitments. Member called for reforms facilitating a new entrepreneurial climate.
As regards the Investment Plan for Europe, Members stated that it should focus in the first place on projects with a European added value
which are not yet eligible for banking finance.
Concerned about the lack of progress in reducing excessive private debt levels, Members pointed out that this is not only a concern for
financial stability, as it also limits the EUs growth potential and makes the ECBs monetary policy less effective. Further proposals are called for
on the preparation of effective procedures for private sector deleveraging, including bankruptcy and insolvency procedures.
Structural reforms: Members emphasised that a more relaxed ECB monetary policy should be complemented by ambitious and socially
sustainable structural reforms by the Member States. They also called on the Member States to safeguard and enhance the inclusiveness,
sustainability and fairness of social protection and to improve and streamline the legal and administrative environment for business investment.
Urgent action should be taken by the Commission to fight tax fraud and tax evasion.
Members reiterated their call on the Commission to improve the governance of the single market. On the other hand, they considered it
deplorable that the Single Market Integration report has been omitted for 2015.
Fiscal responsibility: Members welcomed the strong decrease in the number of countries under the excessive deficit procedure down to 11 in
2014 from 24 in 2011. The fiscal stance in the EU is now expected to remain broadly neutral in 2015. They stressed the need to continue to
pursue growth-friendly fiscal consolidation and invited Member States with sufficient fiscal space to consider reducing taxes and social security
contributions with a view to stimulating private investment and job creation.
Democratic accountability: Members called on the Commission to make the necessary proposals to address the lack of proper democratic
accountability in EU economic governance. They considered it vital that the European Parliament and the national parliaments collaborate
more closely in the context of the European Semester on economic and budgetary governance. In this context, they deplored the fact that the
amount of unpaid bills in the EU budget undermines the credibility of the EU.

2014/2221(INI) - 11/03/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 437 votes to 249, with 11 abstentions, a resolution on the European Semester for economic policy
coordination: Annual Growth Survey 2015.
Recalling that economic recovery in the EU slowed down considerably in the course of 2014, Parliament continued to support the three main
pillars approach as the right way to achieve higher growth levels and to strengthen the recovery process:
1.

boosting investment,

2.

accelerating structural reforms,

3.

pursuing responsible growth-friendly fiscal consolidation

This approach should be fully incorporated into the upcoming country-specific recommendations (CSRs).
Parliament supported the Commissions suggestions for improving the European Semester by streamlining existing procedures, including its
timetable, and increasing the involvement of national parliaments, with a view to strengthening national ownership of structural reforms.
Boosting competitiveness: Parliament expressed concern that most Member States are still losing market shares globally. Therefore, the
resolution stated that the EU economy as a whole needs to boost its competitiveness further in the global economy , particularly by increasing
competition in the product and services markets in order to enhance innovation-driven efficiency.
Investment and cutting back on expenditure: Parliament stated that the lack of investment is caused by low confidence, subdued expectations
of demand aggravated by austerity measures seeking to correct overspending, lack of appropriate financing capacity and the fact that in many
cases the Member States and the EU fail to take proper action to cope with these factors. It stressed that the investment gap can be bridged
by targeted public investments and significantly higher levels of investments in private companies and in European businesses. Members
stressed that Member States should cut back on current expenditure rather than reducing investment commitments and they called for reforms
facilitating a new entrepreneurial climate.
As regards the Investment Plan for Europe, Parliament stated that it should focus in the first place on projects with a European added value
which are not yet eligible for banking finance. Concerned about the lack of progress in reducing excessive private debt levels, it pointed out
that this is not only a concern for financial stability, as it also limits the EUs growth potential and makes the ECBs monetary policy less
effective. Further proposals are called for on the preparation of effective procedures for private sector deleveraging, including bankruptcy and
insolvency procedures.
Structural reforms: the resolution emphasised that a more relaxed ECB monetary policy should be complemented by ambitious and socially
sustainable structural reforms by the Member States. It also called on the Member States to safeguard and enhance the inclusiveness,
sustainability and fairness of social protection and to improve and streamline the legal and administrative environment for business investment.
Urgent action should be taken by the Commission to fight tax fraud and tax evasion.
Parliament stressed that reducing the EUs dependence on external energy sources must form part of its growth strategy. It reiterated,
therefore, the need to diversify external energy supplies, to upgrade the EUs energy infrastructure and to complete the EU internal energy
market as key priorities of the EU energy security strategy.
Fiscal responsibility: Parliament welcomed the strong decrease in the number of countries under the excessive deficit procedure down to 11
in 2014 from 24 in 2011. The fiscal stance in the EU is now expected to remain broadly neutral in 2015. It stressed the need to continue to
pursue growth-friendly fiscal consolidation and invited Member States with sufficient fiscal space to consider reducing taxes and social security
contributions with a view to stimulating private investment and job creation.
Democratic accountability: Parliament called on the Commission to make the necessary proposals to address the lack of proper democratic

accountability in EU economic governance. It considered it vital that the European Parliament and the national parliaments collaborate more
closely in the context of the European Semester on economic and budgetary governance. In this context, it deplored the fact that the amount
of unpaid bills in the EU budget undermines the credibility of the EU. The resolution also highlighted the urgent need to effectively tackle the
tax fraud which is potentially depriving the EU budget of substantial resources and called on the Commission to submit an analysis of the
possible impact of redeploying funds from EU programmes such as the Connecting Europe Facility and Horizon 2020.

