Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2817(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Conclusion of an EU/Moldova association agreement
See also 2014/0083(NLE)
Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.40.15 European neighbourhood policy
Geographical area
Moldova

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
09/07/2014

AUŠTREVIČIUS Petras
Shadow rapporteur

GAHLER Michael

FAJON Tanja

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

ŠOLTES Igor

GRIGULE-PĒTERSE
Iveta
Committee for opinion
INTA

Rapporteur for opinion

International Trade

Appointed
03/09/2014

MOISĂ Sorin
ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Key events
16/10/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

21/10/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

13/11/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

13/11/2014

Debate in Parliament

13/11/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

13/11/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0022/2014

Summary

T8-0049/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2817(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure
See also 2014/0083(NLE)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 099-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/01046

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE537.389

09/09/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE539.500

02/10/2014

EP

PE537.395

08/10/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0022/2014

21/10/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0049/2014

13/11/2014

EP

Summary

SP(2015)42

20/02/2015

Committee opinion

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

INTA

2014/2817(INI) - 21/10/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted, in accordance with Rule 99 of the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament, the report by
Petras AUTREVI?IUS (ADLE, LT) containing a motion for a non-legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the conclusion, on
behalf of the European Union, of the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and
their Member States, of the one part, and Moldova, of the other part.
Members recalled that the conclusion of the Association Agreement is not an end in itself, but is part of a broader process of enhancing the
European perspective of Moldova. This is why they reaffirm that the country may apply to become a member of the European Union provided
it adheres to the principles of democracy, respects fundamental freedoms and minority rights, and ensures the rule of law.
Objectives of the Agreement: Members recalled that the Agreement is for the benefit of the whole population. They stressed, therefore, the
need to address in a timely and proper manner the social consequences of the associated reforms. They also stressed that both Moldova and
the EU should be involved in the implementation of the Association Agenda, and that the priorities set out therein should receive appropriate
technical and financial support so that the benefits of association are visible to Moldovan citizens as soon as possible whilst ensuring the
monitoring of the absorption capacity and the use of EU funds.
Electoral process: Members recalled the importance of strengthening the stability, independence and effectiveness of the institutions
responsible for guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law and good governance, and of consolidating the system of protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms in Moldova. In parallel, they called on the Moldovan authorities to ensure that the upcoming electoral process takes
place according to the highest European and international standards and to adopt the necessary measures in order to facilitate the
participation of Moldovans living abroad. They also noted the need to amend Article 78 of the Moldovan Constitution, on the election of the
President, to avoid a resurgence of institutional deadlock which would be detrimental to the pace of reforms.
Reforms: Members noted the progress made by the Republic of Moldovas authorities in implementing the European reform agenda, but called
for further improvements as regards:
the need to intensify the fight against corruption at all levels;
the need to enhance transparency and accountability in the management of public finances;
the need to tackle impunity and effectively prosecute perpetrators of ill-treatment and torture;
the need to ensure equality and protection for all minorities, in particular for ethnic, religious and LGBT minorities;
the importance for the government to conduct a dialogue with representatives of all ethnic minorities and provide technical and
financial support for infrastructure improvements in the autonomous territorial unit of Gagauzia and the Taraklia district;
the need to strengthen media freedom and plurality.
Members fully supported the visa-free regime for Moldovan citizens and called on the Moldovan authorities to continue to disseminate
information regarding rights and duties in relation to visa liberalisation.
They took note of the improvement in the capacities of the customs and border guard services and the continued demarcation of the border
with Ukraine (including in the context of the work of the EU Border Assistance Mission (EUBAM)).
Political and economic enhancement of Moldova: Members highlighted the need to continue the work of professionalising and depoliticising
central and local public administration, as this too will contribute greatly to the full implementation of the Association Agreement. They called

on Moldova to carry out the decentralisation strategy in an inclusive manner. Members also pointed out the importance of effective local
municipal authorities and adequate infrastructure in developing rural areas which is a pre-condition for reducing the rate of rural depopulation.
They expect that the implementation of the Association Agreement/DCFTA will contribute to sustainable development and the smooth
integration of the Moldovan economy into the world markets, stimulating its process of modernisation and creating better working conditions. In
this regard, they urged the Commission to provide assistance and to advise Moldova on how to effectively deal with adaptation challenges in
the short term, inter alia through cooperation with trade unions and the local business community.
Members reiterated the need for a transparent business and investment environment, appropriate regulatory reform and the continuation of the
privatisation process, in order to boost the competitiveness of the economy of Moldova.
Parliamentary scrutiny: Members believe that parliamentary scrutiny is a fundamental condition for democratic support for EU policies. They
called, therefore, on the Commission to facilitate in a timely manner the regular and detailed monitoring of the implementation of the DCFTA by
Parliament. They noted that the DCFTA has been provisionally applied since 1 September 2014.
Pressure from Russia: Members strongly deplored the continued use of trade by Russia as a means to destabilise the region by introducing
several import bans on products from Moldova, in violation of Russias WTO commitments. They called on the Russian Federation to respect
fully the territorial integrity of Moldova and its European choice. They fully supported the Commissions initiatives aimed at countering the
effects of the Russian embargo on Moldovan products, including by providing financial support and extending and deepening the autonomous
trade preferences afforded to Moldova.
Members are concerned over Russias actions aimed at undermining the association process of the EUs Eastern neighbours . They reiterated
their conviction that the association process of the EUs Eastern partners is not a threat to Russias political and economic interests, and
regretted that Russian leadership regards it as such.
Transnistria: Members called on Chisinau and Tiraspol to continue to engage constructively in order to find an effective solution for the
settlement of the Transnistria issue and to take concrete steps to improve the livelihoods of the population. They expressed disappointment
that so far the 5+2 framework has failed to offer a solution and demands a greater role for the EU, in particular by upgrading its status to that of
a negotiating partner.
According to Members, it is essential to ensure that Transnistria, as an integral part of Moldova, is covered by the reach and effects of the
Association Agreement. Overall, they stressed the importance, in this respect, of enhancing people-to-people contacts at all levels in order to
create the conditions for a sustained dialogue and further promote confidence-building with a view to stepping up the peace process and
achieving reconciliation between the parties.
Energy issue: lastly, Members took note of the recent revision of the energy strategy and called on the Government of Moldova to review and
strengthen the 2013-2015 national action plan for energy efficiency, develop a credible and effective plan on renewable energy with a view to
diversifying energy sources and align climate-change policies and targets with those of the EU. They welcomed the opening of the
IaMi-Ungheni gas interconnector and called on the Commission to intensify efforts in the construction of the Ungheni-Chisinau pipeline by
strengthening financial support in order to finalise the project as soon as possible.

2014/2817(INI) - 13/11/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 529 votes to 96, with 46 abstentions, a non-legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy
Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Moldova, of the other part.
Parliament recalled that the conclusion of the Association Agreement is not an end in itself, but is part of a broader process of enhancing the
European perspective of Moldova. It stated that in the last few years, thanks to the political determination of its government, Moldova has
made significant progress in reforms and in strengthening relations with the EU. This is why it reaffirmed that the country may apply to become
a member of the European Union provided it adheres to the principles of democracy, respects fundamental freedoms and minority rights, and
ensures the rule of law.
Objectives of the Agreement: Parliament recalled that the Agreement is for the benefit of the whole population. It stressed, therefore, the need
to address in a timely and proper manner the social consequences of the associated reforms. It also stressed that both Moldova and the EU
should be involved in the implementation of the Association Agenda, and that the priorities set out therein should receive appropriate technical
and financial support so that the benefits of association are visible to Moldovan citizens as soon as possible whilst ensuring the monitoring of
the absorption capacity and the use of EU funds.
Electoral process: Parliament recalled the importance of strengthening the stability, independence and effectiveness of the institutions
responsible for guaranteeing democracy, the rule of law and good governance, and of consolidating the system of protection of human rights
and fundamental freedoms in Moldova. In an oral amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament called on the Moldovan authorities to ensure that
the upcoming electoral process takes place according to the highest European and international standards and to adopt the necessary
measures in order to facilitate the participation of Moldovans living abroad. It urged the authorities to work closely with the OSCE/ODIHR, the
Venice Commission of the Council of Europe and to address their recommendations and highlighted the important role that political actors and
parties play and the need to adopt an effective legislation that ensures transparency in party financing . Parliament is committed to ensuring the
presence of election observers and will send its own election observation mission to observe the parliamentary elections of 30 November
2014.
Parliament also noted the need to amend Article 78 of the Moldovan Constitution, on the election of the President, to avoid a resurgence of
institutional deadlock which would be detrimental to the pace of reforms.
Reforms: Parliament noted the progress made by the Republic of Moldovas authorities in implementing the European reform agenda, but
called for further improvements as regards:
the need to intensify the fight against corruption at all levels;
the need to enhance transparency and accountability in the management of public finances;
the need to tackle impunity and effectively prosecute perpetrators of ill-treatment and torture;
the need to ensure equality and protection for all minorities, in particular for ethnic, religious and LGBT minorities;

the importance for the government to conduct a dialogue with representatives of all ethnic minorities and provide technical and
financial support for infrastructure improvements in the autonomous territorial unit of Gagauzia and the Taraklia district;
the need to strengthen media freedom and plurality.
It fully supported the visa-free regime for Moldovan citizens and called on the Moldovan authorities to continue to disseminate information
regarding rights and duties in relation to visa liberalisation. It also took note of the improvement in the capacities of the customs and border
guard services and the continued demarcation of the border with Ukraine (including in the context of the work of the EU Border Assistance
Mission (EUBAM)).
Political and economic enhancement of Moldova: Parliament highlighted the need to continue the work of professionalising and depoliticising
central and local public administration, as this too will contribute greatly to the full implementation of the Association Agreement. It called on
Moldova to carry out the decentralisation strategy in an inclusive manner. Members also pointed out the importance of effective local municipal
authorities and adequate infrastructure in developing rural areas which is a pre-condition for reducing the rate of rural depopulation. They
expect that the implementation of the Association Agreement/DCFTA will contribute to sustainable development and the smooth integration of
the Moldovan economy into the world markets, stimulating its process of modernisation and creating better working conditions. In this regard,
Parliament urged the Commission to provide assistance and to advise Moldova on how to effectively deal with adaptation challenges in the
short term, inter alia through cooperation with trade unions and the local business community.
It reiterated the need for a transparent business and investment environment, appropriate regulatory reform and the continuation of the
privatisation process, in order to boost the competitiveness of the economy of Moldova.
Parliamentary scrutiny: Parliament believes that parliamentary scrutiny is a fundamental condition for democratic support for EU policies. It
called, therefore, on the Commission to facilitate in a timely manner the regular and detailed monitoring of the implementation of the DCFTA by
Parliament. It noted that the DCFTA has been provisionally applied since 1 September 2014.
Pressure from Russia: Parliament strongly deplored the continued use of trade by Russia as a means to destabilise the region by introducing
several import bans on products from Moldova, in violation of Russias WTO commitments. It called on the Russian Federation to respect fully
the territorial integrity of Moldova and its European choice. It fully supported the Commissions initiatives aimed at countering the effects of the
Russian embargo on Moldovan products, including by providing financial support and extending and deepening the autonomous trade
preferences afforded to Moldova.
Parliament is concerned over Russias actions aimed at undermining the association process of the EUs Eastern neighbours . It reiterated its
conviction that the association process of the EUs Eastern partners is not a threat to Russias political and economic interests , and regretted
that Russian leadership regards it as such. It recalled that each country has every right to make its own political choices.
Transnistria: plenary recalled that earlier this year Russia staged military exercises in Moldovas breakaway Transnistria region and that the
parliament of Transnistria reiterated its appeal to Moscow to be allowed to join Russian. In this regard, Parliament called on Chisinau and
Tiraspol to continue to engage constructively in order to find an effective solution for the settlement of the Transnistria issue and to take
concrete steps to improve the livelihoods of the population. It expressed disappointment that so far the 5+2 framework has failed to offer a
solution and demands a greater role for the EU, in particular by upgrading its status to that of a negotiating partner.
According to the Parliament, it is essential to ensure that Transnistria, as an integral part of Moldova, is covered by the reach and effects of the
Association Agreement. Overall, it stressed the importance, in this respect, of enhancing people-to-people contacts at all levels in order to
create the conditions for a sustained dialogue and further promote confidence-building with a view to stepping up the peace process and
achieving reconciliation between the parties.
Energy issue: lastly, Parliament took note of the recent revision of the energy strategy and called on the Government of Moldova to review and
strengthen the 2013-2015 national action plan for energy efficiency, develop a credible and effective plan on renewable energy with a view to
diversifying energy sources and align climate-change policies and targets with those of the EU. It welcomed the opening of the IaMi-Ungheni
gas interconnector and called on the Commission to intensify efforts in the construction of the Ungheni-Chisinau pipeline by strengthening
financial support in order to finalise the project as soon as possible.

