Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2243(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Safe use of remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), commonly known as
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), in the field of civil aviation

Subject
1.20.09 Protection of privacy and data protection
3.20.01 Air transport and air freight
3.20.01.01 Air safety
3.40.05 Aeronautical industry, aerospace industry

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
TRAN

Rapporteur

Transport and Tourism

Appointed
15/12/2014

FOSTER Jacqueline
Shadow rapporteur

MUSELIER Renaud

ZEMKE Janusz

VAN MILTENBURG
Matthijs

KONEČNÁ Kateřina

ŠKRLEC Davor

PAKSAS Rolandas
Committee for opinion
ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
05/02/2015
POST Soraya

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Mobility and Transport

BULC Violeta

Key events
08/04/2014

Non-legislative basic document published

15/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

15/09/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

25/09/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading
Results of vote in Parliament

COM(2014)0207

Summary

A8-0261/2015

Summary

29/10/2015

29/10/2015

Debate in Parliament

29/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

29/10/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0390/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2243(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

TRAN/8/02303

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2014)0207

08/04/2014

EC

Committee draft report

PE554.997

19/06/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE565.046

24/07/2015

EP

PE549.364

03/09/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0261/2015

25/09/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0390/2015

29/10/2015

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

LIBE

Summary

2014/2243(INI) - 08/04/2014 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to open the aviation market to the civil use of remotely piloted aircraft systems.
BACKGROUND: the Commission considers that opening the European market for remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS) - or the civilian
use of drones - is an important step towards the aviation market of the future. The European Summit of 19 December 2013 called for action to
enable the progressive integration of RPAS into civil airspace from 2016 onwards.
RPAS technology has matured rapidly in past years and is ready to make the shift from being purely military equipment to becoming a reliable
new technology for civil use.
Member States are beginning to authorise RPAS operations in non-segregated airspace to respond to market demand. In the short term, the
most promising market lies in areas such as infrastructure monitoring or photography; in a longer term future, it may be the transport of goods
and eventually people.
According to an industry source, the global budget forecast in terms of research and development (R&D) and procurement, including military
and governmental, is expected to grow from currently $5.2 bn to about $11.6 bn per year in 2023 . The number of jobs created through new
RPAS activities in the US is estimated to exceed 100,000 by 2025. For Europe, about 150,000 jobs by 2050 are forecast.
Currently, the US and Israel dominate the global RPAS manufacturing sector. Other non-EU countries, such as Brazil, China, India and
Russia, also show potential to become strong competitors. A strong common EU market should offer a solid basis to compete at the global
level.
CONTENT: the Communication responds to the call of the European manufacturing and service industry to remove barriers to the introduction
of RPAS in the European single market. It sets out the Commission's views on how to address RPAS operations in a European level policy
framework which will enable the progressive development of the commercial RPAS market while safeguarding the public interest.
The European strategy aims at establishing a single RPAS market to reap the societal benefits of this innovative technology and at dealing
with citizens' concerns through public debate and protective action wherever needed.
The Commission recalls that RPAS applications can only develop if the aircraft can fly in non-segregated airspace without affecting the safety

and the operation of the wider civil aviation system. To this end, the EU should:
·

put in place an enabling regulatory structure to which the major players at the European and national levels can contribute. The
European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) is best placed to develop common rules, using the proven EASA consultation process;

·

increase and coordinate R&D efforts in order to keep lead times for promising technologies as short as possible (e.g. command and
control; detect and avoid technologies; security protection against attacks; contingency procedures; human factor issues such as
piloting). The SESAR Joint Undertaking (SJU) (CE SESAR) is the R&D platform building the future air traffic management system of
the Single European Sky. So it is uniquely placed to coordinate this R&D);

·

ensure that RPAS operations do not lead to fundamental rights being infringed: the progressive integration of RPAS into the airspace
from 2016 onwards must be accompanied by adequate public debate on the development of measures which address societal
concerns including safety, privacy and data protection, third-party liability and insurance or security;

·

support market development and European industries by recourse to existing EU instruments such as the Horizon 2020 and COSME
programmes.

This strategy should provide adequate legal certainty and offer a reliable timing, so that industry can take investment decisions and create
employment. As the RPAS market is global by its very nature, the EU will also coordinate with international partners.
The European Commission also intends to bring forward, where appropriate, legislative proposals to remove legal uncertainties that hinder the
development of the European market.

2014/2243(INI) - 25/09/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Transport and Tourism adopted an own-initiative report by Jacqueline FOSTER (ECR, UK) on the safe use of remotely
piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), commonly known as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), in the field of civil aviation.
Stressing the global dimension of piloted aircraft systems and that all the Member States have some RPAS activities, either in manufacturing
and/or operationally, Members considered that the RPAS sector urgently requires European and global rules in order to ensure cross-border
RPAS development.
A clear European legal framework is needed to ensure investment and development of a competitive European RPAS sector. Moreover,
Members believed that this framework might assist the discussions on global rule making for the use of drones.
Key issues: recalling the economic importance of this sector, Members stressed that all EU policies should take account of the following
aspects:
the need to put in place suitable policies to protect privacy and ensure data protection, safety and security, which are proportionate to their aim
while not imposing an unnecessary burden on SMEs;
the establishment of a clear distinction between professional and recreational use of remotely piloted aircraft;
the fact that safety and security are paramount for any RPAS operations and rules and that they must be commensurate with the risks.
In this regard, the report supports the five essential principles for future RPAS development set out in the Riga Declaration:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

RPAS need to be treated as new types of aircraft with proportionate rules based on the risk of each operation;
EU rules for the safe provision of RPAS services need to be developed to enable the industry to invest;
technology and standards need to be developed to enable the full integration of RPAS into European airspace;
public acceptance is key to the growth of RPAS services;
the operator of an RPAS is responsible for its use.

Stressing the importance of out-of-sight flights for the development of the sector, Members considered that European legislation should favour
this modus operandi.
In the long term, technical and regulatory solutions should preferably enable RPAS to use the airspace alongside any other airspace user
without imposing on the latter new equipment requirements.
Future solutions: Members considered that future European and global rules on RPAS should address issues relating to:
airworthiness;
certification specifications;
commercial and recreational use;
the identity of the drone and the owner/operator;
the approval of training organisations for pilots;
training and licensing of pilots;
operations;
liability and insurance;
data protection and privacy; geo-fencing;
no-fly (exclusion) zones.
Furthermore, the report concentrated on the following points:
training provided to professional users and owners of RPAS, it includes specific training on data protection and privacy;
RPAS flying beyond visual line of sight (BVLOS) must be equipped with detect-and-avoid technology in order to detect aircraft using
the same airspace, ensuring that RPAS do not put at risk the safety of manned aircraft, and in addition, take into account
densely-populated areas, no-fly zones, such as airports;
Taking into account the expected economic spin-offs from this sector, the EU should favour the development of European
technologies, for example through Horizon 2020;

RPAS in line with a risk-based approach should be equipped with an ID chip and registered to ensure traceability, accountability and a
proper implementation of civil liability rules;
the use of RPAS by law enforcement and intelligence services must respect the fundamental right to privacy, data protection, freedom
of movement and freedom of expression;
the data protection authorities of the Member States should share existing specific data protection guidance for commercial RPAS.
In addition, the Joint Authorities for Rulemaking on Unmanned Systems (JARUS) which is an international voluntary membership body
comprising national civil aviation authorities from 22 EU and non-EU countries and regulatory agencies/bodies could ensure that any future EU
rules will be coordinated with international arrangements in other countries, through a process of mutual recognition.
Members took the view that the Parliament must establish its position prior to the Commissions adoption of its aviation package, thereby
responding to the industry call for clear guidance. They called on the TRAN and LIBE committees to arrange a joint hearing with
representatives of industry, national privacy protection organisations, the European Data Protection Supervisor, the Commission, and NGOs
working in the area of fundamental rights.

2014/2243(INI) - 29/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 581 votes to 31, with 21 abstentions, a resolution on safe use of remotely piloted aircraft systems
(RPAS), commonly known as unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), in the field of civil aviation.
Stressing the global dimension of piloted aircraft systems and that all the Member States have some RPAS activities, either in manufacturing
and/or operationally, Members considered that the RPAS sector urgently requires European and global rules in order to ensure cross-border
RPAS development.
The absence of harmonised rules at EU level might impede the development of a European drone market, given that national authorisations
are generally not mutually recognised among the Member States. According to Parliament, a clear European legal framework is needed to
ensure investment and development of a competitive European RPAS sector. Moreover, this framework might assist the discussions on global
rule making for the use of drones.
Key issues: recalling the economic importance of this sector, Parliament stressed that all EU policies should take account of the following
aspects:
the need to put in place suitable policies to protect privacy and ensure data protection, safety and security, which are proportionate to
their aim while not imposing an unnecessary burden on SMEs;
the establishment of a clear distinction between professional and recreational use of remotely piloted aircraft;
the fact that safety and security are paramount for any RPAS operations and rules and that they must be commensurate with the risks
In this regard, the resolution supports the five essential principles for future RPAS development set out in the Riga Declaration, that is:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

RPAS need to be treated as new types of aircraft with proportionate rules based on the risk of each operation;
EU rules for the safe provision of RPAS services need to be developed to enable the industry to invest;
technology and standards need to be developed to enable the full integration of RPAS into European airspace;
public acceptance is key to the growth of RPAS services;
the operator of an RPAS is responsible for its use.

Stressing the importance of out-of-sight flights for the development of the sector, Members considered that European legislation should favour
this modus operandi. The question of identifying drones, of whatever size, being crucial, Members underlined that solutions should be found
which take into account the recreational or commercial use to which drones are put.
Future solutions: Parliament supported the development of a clear, harmonised and proportionate European and global regulatory framework
on a risk-assessed basis, which avoids disproportionate regulations for businesses that would deter investment and innovation in the RPAS
industry, whilst adequately protecting citizens and creating sustainable and innovative jobs.
Thorough risk assessment should be based on the concept of operations established by the EASA and should take into account
characteristics of the RPAS (weight, scope of operation, speed) and the nature of their use (recreational or professional).
Concerned over potential illegal and unsafe uses of RPAS, Members called on the Commission to support the development of the necessary
technology to ensure safety, security and privacy in the operation of RPAS.
Parliament considered that future European and global rules on RPAS should address the following points:
rules at EU and national level should clearly indicate the provisions applicable to RPAS in relation to the internal market and
international commerce (production, sale, purchase, trade, and use of RPAS) and the fundamental rights of privacy and data
protection;
any person operating an RPAS should be made aware of the basic rules applicable to the use of RPAS, and that those rules should
be specified in a notice for purchaser;
training provided to professional users and owners of RPAS should include specific training on data protection and privacy;
RPAS flying beyond visual line of sight (BVLOS) must be equipped with detect-and-avoid technology in order to detect aircraft using
the same airspace, ensuring that RPAS do not put at risk the safety of manned aircraft, and in addition, take into account
densely-populated areas, no-fly zones, such as airports or nuclear plants;
RPAS should be equipped with an ID chip and registered to ensure traceability, accountability and a proper implementation of civil
liability rules;
the use of RPAS by law enforcement and intelligence services must respect the fundamental right to privacy, data protection, freedom
of movement and freedom of expression.
Taking into account the expected economic spin-offs from this sector, the EU should favour the development of European technologies, for
example through Horizon 2020.

In addition, the Joint Authorities for Rulemaking on Unmanned Systems (JARUS) which is an international voluntary membership body
comprising national civil aviation authorities from 22 states (EU and non-EU countries) and regulatory agencies/bodies could ensure that any
future EU rules will be coordinated with international arrangements in other countries, through a process of mutual recognition
Members called on the TRAN and LIBE committees to arrange a joint hearing with representatives of industry, national privacy protection
organisations, the European Data Protection Supervisor, the Commission, and NGOs working in the area of fundamental rights.

