Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2129(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2013 discharge: European Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development
of Fusion Energy (Fusion for Energy)

Subject
8.70.03.03 2013 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

CONT

Appointed
26/09/2014

VISTISEN Anders
Primdahl
Shadow rapporteur

MARINESCU
Marian-Jean

BALČYTIS Zigmantas

DLABAJOVÁ Martina

ŠOLTES Igor

VALLI Marco
Committee for opinion
ITRE

European Commission

Industry, Research and Energy

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
30/07/2014

Non-legislative basic document published

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

23/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

31/03/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

28/04/2015

Debate in Parliament

29/04/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

29/04/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

COM(2014)0510

Summary

A8-0108/2015

Summary

T8-0168/2015

Summary

29/04/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

30/09/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2129(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/01572

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2014)0510

30/07/2014

EC

Summary

N8-0006/2015
OJ C 452 16.12.2014, p. 0044

21/10/2014

CofA

Summary

Committee draft report

PE541.304

23/01/2015

EP

Document attached to the procedure

05306/2015

30/01/2015

CSL

Amendments tabled in committee

PE549.351

05/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0108/2015

31/03/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0168/2015

29/04/2015

EP

Summary

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

Summary

Final act
Budget 2015/1701
OJ L 255 30.09.2015, p. 0393 Summary

2014/2129(DEC) - 30/07/2014 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2013, as part of
the 2013 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the Fusion for Energy Joint Undertaking ITER project.
CONTENT: this Commission document sets out the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2013 as
prepared on the basis of the information presented by the institutions, organisations and bodies of the EU, in accordance with Article 129 (2) of
the Financial Regulation applicable to the EU's General Budget, including the F4E Joint Undertaking for the ITER project.
The document contains the figures on which the discharge procedure is based.
Discharge procedure of the EU Joint Undertakings: the EU Budget finances a wide range of policies and programmes throughout the EU. In
accordance with the priorities set by the European Parliament and the Council in the multi-annual financial framework (MFF), the European
Commission carries out specific programmes, activities and projects in the field with the technical support of some specialised agencies.
The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide information on the activities of the institutions, agencies and other bodies of the EU from
a budgetary and accrual accounting perspective.
The consolidated reports on the implementation of the general budget of the EU include the budget implementation of all Institutions. Agencies
and Joint Undertakings (JUs) do not have a separate budget inside the EU budget ; and they are partially financed by a Commission budget
subsidy.
Each JU is subject to its own discharge procedure.
F4E: in 2013, the tasks and budget of the Joint Undertaking were as follows:
F4E and ITER: the F4E Joint Undertaking, located in Barcelona (ES), is the technical and organisational structure to provide Euratoms
contribution to the ITER international project (whose main facilities are located in Cadarache - FR). The JU was set up under Council
Decision 2007/198/Euratom for a period of 35 years. ITER involves the EU and China, India, Russia, South Korea, Japan and USA. It
was created to manage the ITER facilities, to encourage the exploitation of the ITER facilities, to promote public understanding and
acceptance of fusion energy, and to undertake any other activities that are necessary to achieve its purpose;

accounts of the JU: the EU (Euratom) contribution to ITER International is given through the Fusion for Energy Agency, including also
the contributions from Member States and from Switzerland. The total contribution is legally considered as a Euratom contribution to
ITER since the Member States and Switzerland do not have ownership interests in ITER. As the EU legally holds the participation in
the joint venture ITER International, the Commission must recognise the participation in its accounts. At 31 December 2013, the
Commission held 43.33% of the ownership participation in ITER. The total (indicative) Euratom contribution foreseen for ITER (from
2007 to 2014) is EUR 8 949 million. The accounts of the JU for the year 2013 as presented by the Commission in its document on the
consolidated annual accounts of the European Union are as follows:
§

Commitment appropriations :
- committed : EUR 1.297 billion;
- paid : EUR 1.297 billion;
- carried-over : 0.

§

Payment appropriations :
- committed : EUR 439 million;
- paid : EUR 393 million;
- carried-over : EUR 23 million.

N.B.: the Fusion for Energy Agency recorded an important amout of RAL over the term of the contract (EUR 2.035 billion in the context of the
ITER project).
Please also consult the final accounts of the Fusion4Energy Joint Undertaking.

2014/2129(DEC) - 21/10/2014 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Court of Auditors report on the annual accounts of the European Joint Undertaking for ITER and the
Development of Fusion Energy for the financial year 2013, together with the replies of the Joint Undertaking.
CONTENT: in accordance with the tasks conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the Court
presents to the European Parliament and to the Council, in the context of the discharge procedure, a Statement of Assurance as to the
reliability of the annual accounts of each institution, body or agency of the EU, and the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying
them, on the basis of an independent external audit.
This audit concerned, amongst others, the annual accounts of the European Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion
Energy (F4E).
Statement of assurance: pursuant to the provisions of Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the Court
has audited:
the annual accounts of the Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy, which comprise the financial
statements and the reports on the implementation of the budget for the financial year ended 31 December 2013;
the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying those accounts.
Opinion on the reliability of the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the Joint Undertakings annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects,
its financial position as at 31 December 2013 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with
the provisions of its financial rules and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer.
Opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the transactions underlying the annual
accounts of the Joint Undertaking for the year ended 31 December 2013 are, in all material respects, legal and regular.
The Court drew attention to the fact that in its conclusions adopted on 7 July 2010, the Council approved EUR 6.6 billion (in 2008 values) for
the Joint Undertaking contribution to the ITER construction phase of the project. This figure, which doubled the initial budgeted costs for this
phase of the project, did not include an amount of EUR 663 million proposed by the European Commission in 2010 to cover potential
contingencies.
According to the Court, the amount of the Joint Undertaking contribution to the construction phase of the ITER project is exposed to significant
risks of increase, mainly resulting from changes in the scope of the project deliverables and due to the current schedule which is considered
unrealistic. In November 2013, the Joint Undertaking estimated the shortfall (negative contingency) until the finalisation of the construction
phase of the project to be EUR 290 million. The slippage for the construction phase of the project was estimated by the Joint Undertaking at
the time of the audit (April 2014) to be at least 30 months.
In relation to these risks, the Court noted that the Joint Undertaking has not yet implemented a system at contract level to regularly monitor the
cost deviations, and has not updated the valuation of the Joint Undertaking contribution to the ITER project beyond the finalisation of the
construction phase.
The audit approach taken by the Court comprises analytical audit procedures, testing of transactions at the level of the Joint Undertaking and
an assessment of key controls of the supervisory and control systems. This is supplemented by evidence provided by the work of other
auditors and an analysis of management representations and of annual activity reports.
The 2013 audit placed special emphasis on ex post audits.
At the end of this audit, the Court concluded the following:
presentation of the accounts: in the notes to the financial statements, ITER Procurement Arrangement (ITER IO), reflect the
Procurement Arrangements signed and the Procurement Arrangements credited so far. However, the table does not show the degree

of advancement of the works in progress and it only contains a limited estimate of the advancement of the work in progress;
internal controls: the Court of Auditors has previously reported that the Joint Undertakings internal control systems had not been fully
established. Although significant progress was achieved during 2013, a number of actions still need to be implemented. The Joint
Undertaking needs to increase the competitiveness of procurement procedures and reduce the use of negotiated procedures.
Regarding grants, the average number of proposals received was only one per call.
Cross-cutting remarks for all the Joint undertakings: the prevention of conflicts of interest is addressed by most Joint Undertakings by the
adoption of specific rules and by the development of tools to document all related information. An Interim Evaluation was performed over 2013
assessing all Joint Undertakings in terms of relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and research quality. The reports, while positive, also
highlighted areas for further improvement. In general, all Joint Undertakings have produced reliable accounts but there is room for
improvement, in particular the implementation of the ex post audit strategy and, in the case of F4E, cost control mechanisms.
Joint Undertakings replies: the Joint Undertaking replied point by point to all of the technical elements highlighted by the Court of Auditors.
Significant progress has been made during 2013 in the internal control system and further actions are being taken in order to strengthen the
F4E Control environment.
As regards the activities of the Joint Undertaking in 2013, the report refers to the Annual Activity Report 2013 which can be found at
http://www.fusionforenergy.europa.eu/
It should be noted that the budget for the Joint Undertaking for 2013 amounted to EUR 431.6 million in payment appropriations of which 69%
funded by Community contribution.

2014/2129(DEC) - 31/03/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Anders Primdahl VISTISEN (ECR, DK) on discharge in respect of the
implementation of the budget of the Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy for the financial year 2013.
It called on the European Parliament to postpone its decision on granting the Director of the Joint Undertaking discharge in respect of the
implementation of the joint undertakings budget for the financial year 2013.
The committee called on Parliament to postpone the closure of the accounts of the Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013 .
It made a number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is granted, in addition to the general
recommendations that appear in the draft resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies.
Budgetary and financial management: Members were concerned that there was a significant risk of increase to which the amount of the Joint
Undertaking's contribution to the construction phase of the ITER project was exposed. They wanted to see a realistic approach for an effective
budget and financial management, with an overall realistic schedule for the whole project. They recalled that EUR 6.6 billion was approved in
2008 values, in order for the Joint Undertaking to contribute to the ITER construction phase of the project, but this amount was double
compared to the initial budgeted costs and did not include an amount of EUR 663 000 000 proposed by the Commission and intended to cover
potential contingencies. Members considered that the significant increase of the project might put into danger other programmes that were
also financed by the Unions budget and might be contradictory to the ''value for money'' principle. They pointed out with concern that the Joint
Undertaking had not detailed in its financial statements the degree of advancement of the work in-progress. However, this information was
essential in reflecting the status of the activities carried out so far. The report noted in regard to the Joint Undertaking's commitment
appropriations that, out of EUR 1 254 000 000 which were available for operational activities, 61.7 % were implemented through direct
individual commitments while the remaining 38.3 % were implemented through global commitments. Members were concerned that seven
members had paid their 2013 annual membership contribution late, which might have had an impact on the way the project was run. They
awaited a report to the discharge authority concerning the contributions of all members other than the Commission, including the application of
the evaluation rules for in-kind contributions, together with an assessment by the Commission.
Members also made a series of observations on conflicts of interests at the JU as well as on public procurement and the legal framework of
the Undertaking. They called on the Joint Undertaking to submit in a due term a report to the discharge authority concerning the actual level of
project implementation, potential risks and future development of the project, together with an assessment by the Commission.
Other observations: lastly, Members noted that the Joint Undertaking had not yet adopted and implemented certain measures aimed at
mitigating specific risks related to the protection of the intellectual property rights and the dissemination of research results. They
acknowledged the Joint Undertaking's opinion that the costs of implementation of such measures did not appear proportionate to the size of
the residual risk and would be difficult to implement in practice.

2014/2129(DEC) - 29/04/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the ITER Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
NON LEGISLATIVE ACT : Decision (EU, EURATOM) 2015/1701 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of
the budget of the Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy for the financial year 2013.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the Director of the Joint Undertaking for ITER and the
Development of Fusion Energy for the implementation of the latters budget for the financial year 2013.
This decision is in line with the European Parliament's resolution adopted on 29 April 2015 and comprises a series of observations that form
an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 29 April 2015).
Amongst Parliaments main observations, the latter noted with concern a significant risk of increase to which the amount of the Joint
Undertaking's contribution to the construction phase of the ITER project is exposed. It called on the Joint Undertaking to adopt a realistic
approach for an effective budget and financial management of ITER.

2014/2129(DEC) - 29/04/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament decided by 227 votes to 459, with 9 abstentions, to defer the decision to postpone the discharge to the Director of
the Joint Undertaking for ITER and the Development of Fusion Energy for the financial year 2013. With the rejection of the decision to
postpone, discharge shall be granted and the accounts shall be deemed closed (see Annex V, Article 5(1) of the Rules of Procedure).
Parliament also adopted by 634 votes to 31, with 9 abstentions, a resolution containing a number of recommendations that form an integral
part of the discharge decision and as well as the general recommendations that appear in the resolution on performance, financial
management and control of EU agencies:
Budgetary management and additional cost of the ITER project: Parliament was concerned that there was a significant risk of increase to
which the amount of the Joint Undertaking's contribution to the construction phase of the ITER project was exposed. It wanted to see a
realistic approach for an effective budget and financial management, with an overall realistic schedule for the whole project. It recalled that
EUR 6.6 billion was approved in 2008 values, in order for the Joint Undertaking to contribute to the ITER construction phase of the project, but
this amount was double compared to the initial budgeted costs and did not include an amount of EUR 663 000 000 proposed by the
Commission and intended to cover potential contingencies.
Parliament is deeply concerned that in November 2013 the Joint Undertaking estimated the budget shortfall until the finalisation of the
construction phase of the project to be EUR 290 000 000, representing a deviation of 4.39% over the figure approved by the Council in 2010
and representing an increase of 10.7% compared to the initial budget of the project. In relation to these risks, the Joint Undertaking has not yet
implemented a system at contract level to regularly monitor the cost deviations and has not updated the valuation of the Joint Undertaking to
the ITER project beyond the finalisation of the construction phase.
Parliament considered that the significant increase of the project might put into danger other programmes that were also financed by the
Unions budget and might be contradictory to the ''value for money'' principle. It pointed out with concern that the Joint Undertaking had not
detailed in its financial statements the degree of advancement of the work in-progress. However, this information was essential in reflecting the
status of the activities carried out so far. The resolution noted in regard to the Joint Undertaking's commitment appropriations that, out of EUR
1 254 000 000 which were available for operational activities, 61.7% were implemented through direct individual commitments while the
remaining 38.3% were implemented through global commitments. Members were concerned that seven members had paid their 2013 annual
membership contribution late, which might have had an impact on the way the project was run. Parliament awaited a report to the discharge
authority concerning the contributions of all members other than the Commission, including the application of the evaluation rules for in-kind
contributions, together with an assessment by the Commission.
Other observations: Parliament also made a series of observations on conflicts of interests at the JU as well as on public procurement and the
legal framework of the Undertaking. It called on the Joint Undertaking to submit in a due term a report to the discharge authority concerning
the actual level of project implementation, potential risks and future development of the project, together with an assessment by the
Commission.
Parliament noted that the Joint Undertaking had not yet adopted and implemented certain measures aimed at mitigating specific risks related
to the protection of the intellectual property rights and the dissemination of research results. It acknowledged the Joint Undertaking's opinion
that the costs of implementation of such measures did not appear proportionate to the size of the residual risk and would be difficult to
implement in practice. Moreover, it noted that the Joint Undertakings contractors are offered exclusive exploitation rights over intellectual
property produced in fields outside fusion, while in the field of fusion the contractors have non-exclusive rights.

