Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2014/0194(COD)

Procedure completed

Statistics concerning balance of payments, international trade in services
and foreign direct investment
Amending Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 2003/0200(COD)
Subject
5.10.01 Convergence of economic policies, public deficit, interest rates
6.20.04 Union Customs Code, tariffs, preferential arrangements, rules of
origin
6.20.06 Foreign direct investment (FDI)
8.60 European statistical legislation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
22/07/2014

GIEGOLD Sven
Shadow rapporteur

GÁLL-PELCZ Ildikó

MOSCA Alessia Maria

TORVALDS Nils

VIEGAS Miguel
Committee for opinion
JURI

Legal Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Eurostat

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
THYSSEN Marianne

Key events
26/06/2014

Legislative proposal published

COM(2014)0379

Summary

14/07/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

25/06/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

25/06/2015

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

09/07/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0227/2015

Summary

07/04/2016

Approval in committee of the text agreed

PE604.746

at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations
10/05/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

10/05/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

30/05/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

08/06/2016

Final act signed

08/06/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

29/06/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

T8-0212/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0194(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 2003/0200(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 338-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/00660

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2014)0379

26/06/2014

EC

Summary

CON/2014/0084
OJ C 031 30.01.2015, p. 0003

05/12/2014

ECB

Summary

Committee draft report

PE554.881

21/04/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE557.198

20/05/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0227/2015

09/07/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0212/2016

10/05/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)411

15/06/2016

European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report

Additional information
European Commission

Final act
Regulation 2016/1013
OJ L 171 29.06.2016, p. 0144 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

EUR-Lex

2014/0194(COD) - 26/06/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to amend Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 on Community statistics concerning balance of payments, international trade in services
and foreign direct investment as regards conferring of delegated and implementing powers upon the Commission for the adoption of certain
measures.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU) makes a distinction between:
powers which may be delegated to the Commission to adopt non-legislative acts of general application to supplement or amend
certain non-essential elements of a particular legislative act, as laid down in Article 290(1) of the TFEU ( delegated acts),
and the implementing powers which shall be conferred upon the Commission where uniform conditions for implementing legally
binding Union acts are needed, as laid down in Article 291(2) of the TFEU ( implementing acts).
In the context of the alignment of Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council, implementing powers currently
conferred upon the Commission by that Regulation should be provided for by conferring powers on the Commission to adopt delegated and/or
implementing acts.
CONTENT: the objective of this proposal is to amend Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 so as to align it to the new institutional context . In
particular, the aim is to identify the powers conferred upon the Commission and put in place the appropriate procedure for adopting measures
on the basis of these powers.
It is proposed to:
empower the Commission to adopt delegated acts when, for reasons of economic and technical changes, data requirements need to
be updated, including submission deadlines and revisions, extensions and eliminations of data flows set out in Annex I, and when the
definitions set out in Annex II need to be updated;
confer implementing powers upon the Commission, in accordance with the examination procedure laid down in Article 5 of Regulation
(EU) No 182/2011, with a view to adopting common quality standards and harmonising the content and periodicity of the quality
reports.
The European Statistical System Committee (ESSC) shall assist the Commission in exercising its implementing powers in certain statistical
domains. These exclude the balance of payments, international trade in services and foreign direct investment. In these domains, according to
Regulation (EC) No 184/2005, the Balance of Payments Committee (BOP Committee) assists the Commission.
The Commission is proposing a new ESS structure to improve coordination and partnership in a clear pyramid structure within the ESS, with
the European Statistical System Committee (ESSC) as the highest strategic body. One aspect of this streamlining is to concentrate comitology
powers in the hands of the ESSC established by Regulation (EC) No 223/2009, which is regarded as the umbrella committee within the ESS.
Therefore, it is also proposed to amend Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 by replacing the references to the BOP committee by a reference to the
ESSC.

2014/0194(COD) - 05/12/2014 European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report
Opinion of the European Central Bank (ECB) on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending
Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 on Community statistics concerning balance of payments, international trade in services and foreign direct
investment as regards conferring of delegated and implementing powers upon the Commission for the adoption of certain measures.
Consulted on the proposed Regulation by the Council of the European Union, the European Central Bank (ECB) gave the following opinion:
Implementation of a new system of adopting delegated and implementing acts in the area of balance of payments (BOP) and international
investment position statistics (IIP): the ECB considers that data requirements, submission deadlines and quality assurance standards are
essential elements of Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 and have a direct impact on the reporting burden of data compilers and reporting agents.
Hence, the ECB does not support the proposal in Article 1(1) of the proposed regulation to delegate powers to the Commission to amend the
data requirements for BOP and IIP, including those relating to submission deadlines, revisions, extensions and eliminations of data flows. The
corresponding measures should be deleted accordingly.
The role of the Committee on Monetary, Financial and Balance of Payments Statistics: the proposed regulation abolishes the BOP Committee
and transfers all comitology powers to the European Statistical System Committee, on which members of the ESCB are not represented.
In order to ensure continued close cooperation in this field, the Committee on Monetary, Financial and Balance of Payments Statistics (CMFB)
should be at the centre of mutual cooperation on BOP and related statistics (e.g. international trade in goods, international trade in services,
foreign direct investment, foreign affiliates statistics) and would need to be consulted on proposals for new legal acts, including amending legal
acts, on BOP and related statistics.
Therefore, appropriate wording should be inserted obliging the Commission to request the opinion of the CMFB before proposing amendments
to essential elements of Regulation (EC) No 184/2005.
Consultation of the ECB: the ECB considers that it needs to be consulted, separately from the CMFB, on any draft implementing acts that fall
within its fields of competence.

2014/0194(COD) - 09/07/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the report by Sven GIEGOLD (Greens/EFA, DE) on the proposal for a regulation
of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 on Community statistics concerning balance of
payments, international trade in services and foreign direct investment as regards conferring of delegated and implementing powers upon the
Commission for the adoption of certain measures.
The committee recommended that the position of the European Parliament in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should
amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Strengthening obligations regarding reporting and dissemination: in order to strengthen transparency and the level of detail of statistics, the
committee recommended strengthening obligations on publication to take advantage of recent innovations, such as:
the global legal entity identifier (GLEI), which formed part of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
framework for improving reporting on financial account information;
the recently created registries of ultimate beneficial ownership established in the framework of the anti-money laundering Directive;
the European Group Registry or the global legal entity identifier;
the databases established in the framework of the Coordinated Direct Investment Survey (CDIS) initiative for the International
monetary Funds (IMF)
Data flows: Members considered that the statistics produced in the framework of Regulation (EC) 184/2005 should make it possible to
distinguish greenfield foreign direct investment (FDI) from FDI resulting in takeovers which for a given period do not increase the gross capital
formation in the Member State concerned or do not increase the working capital of the economic unit concerned by the change in ownership.
The Commission, shall, after consulting the CMFB, initiate pilot studies related to FDI statistics on the ultimate beneficiary ownership concept
and for distinguishing greenfield FDI from takeovers.
Cooperation with other international organisations: the Commission (Eurostat) should strengthen its cooperation with other international
organisations such as the OECD and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), in order to promote the use of international concepts,
classifications, methods and other standards, in particular with a view to ensuring consistency and better comparability at global level of the
statistics produced in the context of this Regulation.
Publication of evaluations on the quality of national statistics: the Commission (Eurostat) was encouraged to make use of the provision
allowing it to publicly disclose its opinion on the quality of national statistics, specifically where it had doubts concerning the accuracy of
information across all types of statistics as laid out in Regulation 99/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European
statistical programme 2013-17.
Public reporting on foreign direct investment: Eurostat should publish on its website, on a dedicated and user friendly page, foreign direct
investment statistics for all jurisdictions covered by level Geo 6 of Annex I. It should make public disclosure of its statistics and the precise
methodology used for the calculations.
Alignment of Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 with the Treaty of Lisbon (delegated acts and implementing acts): Members considered that
revisions, extensions and eliminations of data flows set out in Annex I could be considered as non-essential elements to be supplemented and
amended by the Commission, but were features that touched core elements of the subject matter. These elements should be therefore being
revised, as appropriate, by means of legislative proposals to be adopted by the co-legislators.
Members also considered that quality review reports represented non-essential elements of the legislative act in question. Powers should
therefore be conferred upon the Commission for adopting delegated acts specifying the content of such reports instead of leaving such reports
to be adopted by means of implementing acts as originally proposed by the Commission.
By 28 February 2018, the Commission should adopt a delegated for specifying the methodological requirements necessary to
ensure statistical quality and comparability on FDI statistics on the ultimate beneficiary ownership concept and to distinguish greenfield FDI
from takeovers, taking international cooperation into account during this process.
With regard to conditions for exercising the power of delegation, Members stated that the length of time for Parliament or Council to express
objection should be extended from two months to three months (which might be extended for another three months).
Furthermore, public holidays and other interruptions of parliamentary and Council working periods shall be taken into account appropriately,
extending the respective deadlines accordingly so as to ensure a proper scrutiny process within the European Parliament and the Council.
Implementation reports: by 28 February 2018 and every five years thereafter, or whenever it deems it necessary before 28 February 2018, the
Commission should submit a report on the implementation of this Regulation.

2014/0194(COD) - 10/05/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 563 votes to 39, with 82 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 on Community statistics concerning balance of payments,
international trade in services and foreign direct investment as regards conferring of delegated and implementing powers upon the
Commission for the adoption of certain measures.
Parliaments position, adopted at first reading under the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Quality of statistics: the amended text stressed that balance of payments, international trade in services and FDI are of vital importance in
ensuring informed economic policy-making and accurate economic forecasting. Statistics of high quality and comparability are essential for
those responsible for public policy in the Union, researchers and all European citizens.
Strengthening obligations regarding reporting and dissemination: inn order to collect the appropriate information, Member States should use all
relevant and appropriate sources, including administrative data sources such as business registers or the EuroGroups Register.

Transparency could also be enhanced by:
taking advantage of recent innovations, such as the global legal entity identifier,
taking advantage of the registries of beneficial ownership established in the framework of Directive (EU) 2015/849 of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purposes of money laundering or terrorist
financing.
Data flows: the statistics to be produced shall be grouped for transmission to the Commission (Eurostat) in accordance with the following data
flows:
balance of payments monthly statistics;
balance of payments quarterly statistics;
international trade in services;
FDI flows;
FDI positions.
The Commission (Eurostat) and Member States, in cooperation with the relevant international partners, shall develop the appropriate
methodology for compiling FDI statistics based on the ultimate ownership concept in addition to the immediate counterpart principle and FDI
statistics distinguishing greenfield FDI transactions from takeovers, which for a given period, generally, do not lead to an increase in the gross
capital formation in the Member States, the appropriate methodology for those domains should be developed and enhanced.
This should be done in collaboration with relevant stakeholders such as the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, the
International Monetary Fund and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.
By 2 years after the entry into force of this amending Regulation, the Commission (Eurostat) shall institute pilot studies to be carried out by
Member States relating to annual FDI statistics based on the ultimate ownership concept and FDI statistics distinguishing greenfield FDI
transactions from takeovers.
A report on the findings of the studies shall be prepared by the Commission (Eurostat). It shall be forwarded to the European Parliament and to
the Council. No later than 12 months after the date of issuing the report, the Commission shall, where appropriate, and depending in particular
on the assessment by the Commission of the result of the pilot studies, make a proposal for amendments to this Regulation.
Quality criteria and reports: the quality criteria set out in Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 shall apply to the data to be transmitted in accordance
with the present Regulation. Member States shall provide the Commission (Eurostat) with a report on the quality of the data transmitted. The
modalities, structure and periodicity of the quality reports shall be defined by the Commission by means of implementing acts.
Dissemination: the Commission shall disseminate the European statistics produced pursuant to this Regulation, with a similar periodicity to
that specified in Annex I. Those statistics shall be made available on the Commission (Eurostat) website.
Exercise of the delegation: the power adopt delegated acts is conferred on the Commission :
when, as a result of economic or technical changes, the geographical breakdown levels, institutional sector breakdown levels and
economic activity breakdown levels set out in Tables 6, 7 and 8 of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 need to be updated,
provided that such updates neither affect the reporting burden nor modify the applicable underlying conceptual framework;
whenever certain requirements of data flows in Annex I to that Regulation need to be eliminated or reduced, provided that such
elimination or reduction does not reduce the quality of the statistics produced in accordance with this Regulation.
The power to adopt delegated acts shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from the date of entry into force of this
amending Regulation. The delegation of power shall be tacitly extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or
the Council opposes such extension not later than three months before the end of each period.
The delegated act adopted shall enter into force only if no objection has been expressed either by the European Parliament or by the Council
within a period of three months.
Implementation reports: by 28 February 2018 and every five years thereafter, the Commission should submit a report on the implementation of
this Regulation.

2014/0194(COD) - 08/06/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to amend Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 of the European Parliament and of the Council on Community statistics concerning
balance of payments, international trade in services and foreign direct investment and align that Regulation with rules in the Treaty on the
Functioning of the EU which empower the Commission adopt delegated and/or implementing acts.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/1013 of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 on
Community statistics concerning balance of payments, international trade in services and foreign direct investment.
CONTENT: European statistics on balance of payments, international trade in services and foreign direct investment (FDI) statistics are of vital
importance in ensuring informed economic policymaking and accurate economic forecasting.
The Regulation stresses that it is essential for those responsible for public policy in the Union, researchers and all European citizens, to have
access to statistics that are of high quality and comparability.
The main amendments to Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 are as follows:
Quality criteria and reports: the quality criteria set out in Regulation (EC) No 223/2009 shall apply to the data to be transmitted in accordance
with this Regulation. Member States shall provide the Commission (Eurostat) with a report on the quality of the data transmitted. In applying
the quality criteria referred to the data covered by this Regulation, the modalities, structure and periodicity of the quality reports shall be
defined by the Commission by means of implementing acts.

The Commission (Eurostat) shall assess the quality of the data transmitted on the basis of an appropriate analysis of the quality reports, with
the assistance of the European Statistical System Committee, and shall publish a report on the quality of European statistics covered by the
Regulation. That report shall be submitted to the European Parliament and to the Council for information purposes.
Data Flows: the statistics to be produced shall be grouped for transmission to the Commission (Eurostat) in accordance with the following data
flows:
·

balance of payments monthly statistics;

·

balance of payments quarterly statistics;

·

international trade in services;

·

FDI flows;

·

FDI positions.

The Commission (Eurostat) and Member States, in cooperation with the relevant international partners, shall develop the appropriate
methodology for compiling FDI statistics based on the ultimate ownership concept in addition to the immediate counterpart principle and FDI
statistics distinguishing greenfield FDI transactions from takeovers.
Pilot studies: by 20 July 2018, the Commission (Eurostat) shall institute pilot studies to be carried out by Member States relating to annual FDI
statistics based on the ultimate ownership concept and FDI statistics distinguishing greenfield FDI transactions from takeovers.
By 20 July 2019, the Commission (Eurostat) shall prepare a report on the findings of these studies. That report shall be forwarded to the
European Parliament and to the Council and, if appropriate, shall identify the remaining conditions that need to be fulfilled in order to develop
the methodology for compiling FDI statistics.
Dissemination: the Commission (Eurostat) shall disseminate the European statistics produced pursuant to the Regulation, with a similar
periodicity to that specified in Annex I. Those statistics shall be made available on the Commission (Eurostat) website.
Alignment of Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 with the provisions of the Lisbon Treaty: the Regulation replaces provisions referring to the
regulatory procedure with scrutiny by provisions enabling the Commission to adopt delegated acts and/or implementing acts
Thus, the Commission may adopt delegated acts:
·

when, as a result of economic or technical changes, the geographical breakdown levels, institutional sector breakdown levels and
economic activity breakdown levels set out in Tables 6, 7 and 8 of Annex I to Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 need to be updated,
provided that such updates neither affect the reporting burden nor modify the applicable underlying conceptual framework;

·

whenever certain requirements of data flows in Annex I to that Regulation need to be eliminated or reduced, provided that such
elimination or reduction does not reduce the quality of the statistics produced in accordance with this Regulation.

The power to adopt delegated acts shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of five years from 19 July 2016, which shall be tacitly
extended for periods of an identical duration, unless the European Parliament or the Council opposes such extension not later than three
months before the end of each period.
In order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of Regulation (EC) No 184/2005, implementing powers are conferred on the
Commission with a view to harmonising the modalities, structure and periodicity of the quality reports.
Reports on implementation: by 28 February 2018, then every five years, the Commission shall present a report on the implementation of the
Regulation.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 19.7.2016.

