Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2014/0017(COD)

Procedure completed

Transparency of securities financing transactions and of reuse
Amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 2010/0250(COD)
Amended by 2016/0365(COD)
Subject
2.50.03 Securities and financial markets, stock exchange, CIUTS,
investments
2.50.08 Financial services, financial reporting and auditing
2.50.10 Financial supervision
2.80 Cooperation between administrations

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
22/07/2014

SORU Renato
Shadow rapporteur

HÜBNER Danuta Maria

SWINBURNE Kay

DE BACKER Philippe

KARI Rina Ronja

JOLY Eva

VALLI Marco
Former committee responsible
ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Committee for opinion
JURI

Legal Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Former committee for opinion
JURI

Legal Affairs

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

Commissioner
HILL Jonathan

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
Legislative proposal published

Summary

29/01/2014

COM(2014)0040

25/02/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

24/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

24/03/2015

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

09/04/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0120/2015

16/07/2015

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE604.741

28/10/2015

Debate in Parliament

29/10/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

29/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

16/11/2015

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

25/11/2015

Final act signed

25/11/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

23/12/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

Summary

T8-0387/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0017(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 2010/0250(COD)
Amended by 2016/0365(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/00344

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2014)0040

29/01/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0030

29/01/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0031

29/01/2014

EC

Summary

European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report

CON/2014/0049
OJ C 336 26.09.2014, p. 0005

24/06/2014

ECB

Committee of the Regions: opinion

CDR1321/2014

26/06/2014

CofR

Economic and Social Committee: opinion, report

CES1466/2014

09/07/2014

ESC

Committee draft report

PE544.170

22/12/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE549.104

04/02/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0120/2015

09/04/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0387/2015

29/10/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2015)750

10/12/2015

COM(2017)0604

19/10/2017

Follow-up document

Summary

EC

Additional information
European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2015/2365
OJ L 337 23.12.2015, p. 0001 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2014/0017(COD) - 29/01/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to improve transparency in securities financing transactions (SFT) and therefore in the financial system.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the 2008 global financial crisis revealed important regulatory gaps in the financial system. It also highlighted the need to
improve transparency and monitoring not only in the traditional banking sector but also in areas where non-bank credit activities took place,
called shadow banking.
Confronted with new legislative developments in the banking sector, including structural measures, it is possible that banks will shift parts of
their activity into less regulated areas as shadow banking. At the end of 2012 global shadow banking assets accounted for EUR 53 trillion,
representing about half the size of the regulated banking system and mainly concentrated in Europe (around EUR 23 trillion) and in the United
States (around EUR 19.3 trillion).
On 19 March 2012, the Commission published a Green Paper on shadow banking, and on 4 September 2013, it published a Communication
on the subject. It stressed that the complex and opaque nature of securities financing transactions (SFTs) makes it difficult to identify
counterparties and monitor risk concentration. This also leads to the built-up of excessive leverage in the financial system. A High-Level Expert
Group chaired by Erkki Liikanen adopted a report on reforming the structure of the Union banking sector in October 2012. The report
recognised the risks of shadow banking activities such as high leverage and pro- cyclicality, and it called for a reduction of the
interconnectedness between banks and the shadow banking system, which had been a source of contagion in a system-wide banking crisis.
Actions regarding these matters have been international and coordinated through the G20 and the Financial Stability Board (FSB) which, in
August 2013, adopted a policy framework consisting of eleven Recommendations addressing shadow banking risks in securities lending and
repos. These Recommendations were subsequently endorsed in September 2013 by the G20 Leaders.
In order to closely follow market trends regarding entities whose activities qualify as shadow banking, in particular in the area of securities
financing transactions, the Commission feels it necessary to implement transparency requirements.
The proposal regarding structural reforms of the EU banking sector, which is presented in a package with this proposal, is the final piece of the
new regulatory framework, ensuring that even the largest banks in the EU become less complex and can be effectively resolved, with
minimum implications for tax payers.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the impact assessment concludes that a combination of different measures is necessary including reporting of SFTs
to trade repositories, disclosure on the use of SFTs to fund investors, and the need for prior consent to rehypothecation of the financial
instruments. The latter must be transferred to an account opened in the name of the receiving counterparty before rehypothecation can take

place.
This will ensure that the shadow banking activity of using SFTs is properly supervised and regulated. The use of SFTs as such will not be
prohibited nor limited by specific restrictions but be more transparent.
CONTENT: the Regulation aims at enhancing financial stability in the EU by means of increasing transparency of certain market activities,
such as SFTs, rehypothecation and other financing structures having equivalent economic effect as SFTs.
The Regulation introduces measures to improve the transparency in three main areas: (1) the monitoring of the build-up of systemic risks
related to SFT transactions in the financial system; (2) the disclosure of the information on such transactions to the investors whose assets are
employed in these or equivalent transactions; and (3) the contractual transparency of rehypothecation activities.
In practice, the proposed measures will cover the FSB recommendations, these being:
The obligation for competent authorities to collect additional data on the use of SFTs: the draft Regulation creates a Union framework under
which financial or non-financial counterparties of a SFT will efficiently report the details of the transaction to trade repositories.
This information will be centrally stored and easily and directly accessible to the relevant authorities, such as ESMA, ESRB, the ESCB, for the
purpose of identification and monitoring of financial stability risks entailed by shadow banking activities of regulated and non-regulated entities.
The requirement that requires fund managers be transparent towards their investors: in order to enable investors to become aware of the risks
associated with the use of SFTs and other financing structures, fund managers should include detailed information on any recourse they have
to these techniques in regular reporting intervals. The existing periodical reports that UCITS management or investment companies and AIF
managers have to produce will be supplemented by this additional information on the use of SFTs and other financing structures.
The requirement for financial intermediaries to provide sufficient disclosure to their clients in relation to re-hypothecation of assets: any
rehypothecation should therefore take place only with the express knowledge of inherent risks and prior consent of the providing counterparty
in a contractual agreement and should be appropriately reflected in the securities accounts.
The counterparty receiving financial instruments as collateral will be allowed to rehypothecate them only with the express consent of the
providing counterparty and only after having them transferred to its own account.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the proposal involves the hiring of two new temporary agents at EBA from January 2016. The new tasks will be
carried out with the human resources available within the annual budgetary allocation procedure, and in line with the financial programming for
agencies.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2014/0017(COD) - 24/06/2014 European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report
OPINION OF THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK (ECB) on a proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on
reporting and transparency of securities financing transactions (SFTs).
The ECB broadly welcomes the proposed regulation, which is aimed at increasing the safety and transparency of the financial market, in line
with recommendations issued by the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and endorsed in September 2013 by the G20 leaders. The ECB considers
that the new uniform rules on reporting and transparency of SFTs, as well as the provisions on rehypothecation, may play an important role in
enhancing financial stability in the Union.
The ECB makes the following recommendations:
Exemption for central bank transactions from reporting and transparency obligations: the ECB notes that proposed reporting and transparency
framework does not provide an exemption with regard to transactions to which an ESCB central bank is a counterparty. The ECB would
strongly recommend including a transaction-based exemption in the proposed regulation. Failure to include such an exemption would have the
same effect as imposing such reporting and transparency obligations on the ESCB itself.
Clarification of the Commissions power to amend the list of exemptions: the ECB suggests clarifying Article 2(3) of the proposed regulation,
which gives the Commission power to amend the list of exemptions under Article 2(2) by means of a delegated act. The ECB considers that
Article 2(3) should contain a direct reference to the possibility of extending the list of exemptions to include central banks of third countries.
Rehypothecation: with regard to contractual transparency requirements, the proposed regulation does not make a distinction between financial
collateral transferred under a title transfer financial collateral arrangement and provided under a security financial collateral arrangement within
the meaning of Directive 2002/47/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council.
The ECB notes that a collateral taker should not be restricted from enjoying full ownership or full entitlement to the financial collateral, once a
title transfer financial collateral arrangement has been entered into. It should be clarified that entering into a title transfer financial collateral
arrangement already implies a consent to reuse and that any breach of requirements under Article 15 will not affect the validity or
enforceability of the SFT, and the receiving counterparty could only be subject to administrative sanctions under the proposed regulation.
The ECB notes that the proposed regulation focuses only on introducing reporting and transparency requirements. However, the recent
financial crisis has shown that significant financial stability risks may arise from the practices of reuse and rehypothecation of client assets.
Therefore, the ECB considers that it is important for the Commission to assess the need for further regulatory measures, which go beyond the
proposed reporting and transparency requirements, including quantitative limits on reuse and on rehypothecation of client assets , which could
be implemented in a future legal act.
Modalities for the reporting of data on securities financing transaction (SFTs): the ECB recommends that the SFT details should be reported,
compiled and made accessible to the ESCB with the maximum degree of granularity and in a fully standardised form.
With regard to the data items to be reported, the ECB recommends that the technical standards prepared under the proposed regulation
require details of the individual assets being used as collateral and the principal amount, currency, type, quality and value of each asset to be

reported. The technical standards should also allow reporting of individual assets subject to securities or commodities lending or borrowing.
In addition, the ECB suggests that the technical standards should require counterparties to report additional items to facilitate more
comprehensive monitoring for financial stability purposes and for the fulfilment of the ESCB tasks.
Lastly, the ECB recommends that technical standards under the proposed regulation require the reported data to include appropriate
identifiers by using current and forthcoming internationally agreed standards. ESMA should make the use of such identifiers obligatory for all
counterparties which fall within the scope of the proposed regulation, in particular, the international securities identification number (ISIN), the
global legal entity identifier (LEI) and a unique trade identifier.

2014/0017(COD) - 09/04/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the report by Renato SORU (S&D, IT) on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on reporting and transparency of securities financing transactions.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should
amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Securities financing transactions (SFTs): the Regulation should cover repurchase transactions, securities or commodities lending, securities or
commodities borrowing, buy-sell back or sell-buy back transactions, liquidity swaps and collateral swap transactions as laid down in Regulation
(EU) No 575/2013 or total return swaps as defined in Commission Regulation (EU) No 231/2013.
Reporting obligation: counterparties to securities financing transactions (SFTs) shall report the details of such transactions to a trade repository
registered or recognised in accordance with this Regulation. The details shall be reported no later than the third working day following the
conclusion, modification or termination of the transaction but as soon as the reporting is possible.
The central banks of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) are exempt from the obligation to report their SFTs to trade repositories
but must cooperate with competent authorities, including by providing them directly with a description of their SFTs, upon request.
Transparency obligation towards investors: the amended text stipulated that securities financing transactions are also used by other financial
counterparties, such as credit institutions, and by non-financial counterparties, thereby creating specific risks for those who hold shares or who
are clients of those counterparties.
Members proposed that credit institutions should therefore disclose their activities in SFTs. Likewise, listed companies are required to disclose
any activities in SFTs to their shareholders, who should be able to make informed choices about the risk profile of the companies in which they
invest.
Consequently, those credit institutions and listed companies should also inform the public of their activities in SFTs as part of their regular
public report.
Transparency and re-use: this Regulation shall apply to a counterparty engaging in re-use that is established in the Union, including all its
branches irrespective of where they are located or in third country, under specific conditions.
The term "re-use" is defined as the use by a receiving counterparty, in its own name and for its own account or for the account of another
counterparty, including any natural person.
Members specified the conditions to be met for the counterparties to be able to re-use the financial instruments received as collateral.
Report and review: by 15 months following the entry into force of the Regulation, the Commission shall submit a report on the effectiveness
and efficiency of this Regulation and on further international efforts to enhance the transparency of securities financing transaction markets as
well as to further mitigate the risks associated with these transactions. The Commission shall submit that report together with any appropriate
legislative proposals.

2014/0017(COD) - 29/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 546 votes to 89, with 7 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on reporting and transparency of securities financing transactions.
The European Parliaments position at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Subject matter and definitions: this Regulation lays down rules on the transparency of securities financing transactions (SFTs) and of reuse.
Under this proposal, "reuse" shall mean the use by a receiving counterparty, in its own name and on its own account or on the account of
another counterparty, including any natural person, of financial instruments received under a collateral arrangement.
The Regulation seeks to create a Union framework under which details of SFTs can be efficiently reported to trade repositories and
information on SFTs and total return swaps is disclosed to investors in collective investment undertakings.
The definition of "securities or commodities lending" or "securities or commodities borrowing" has been defined as well as "buy-sell back
transaction" or "sell-buy back transaction" and "repurchase transaction" and "margin lending transaction".
Reporting obligation and safeguarding in respect of SFTs: counterparties to SFTs shall report the details of any SFT they have concluded, as
well as any modification or termination thereof, to a trade repository registered. Those details shall be reported no later than the working day
following the conclusion, modification or termination of the transaction.
Transactions with members of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) should be exempted from the obligation to report SFTs to trade
repositories.
Counterparties shall keep a record of any SFT that they have concluded, modified or terminated for at least five years following the termination

of the transaction.
In order to ensure consistent application of this Regulation, the ESMA shall:
develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the details of the reports;
develop draft implementing technical standards specifying the format and frequency of the reports. The format shall include, in
particular: (a) global legal entity identifiers (LEIs), or pre-LEIs until the Global Legal Entity Identifier System is fully implemented; (b)
international securities identification numbers (ISINs); and (c) unique trade identifiers.
Transparency: information on the risks inherent in securities financing markets should be centrally stored, and easily and directly accessible
by, inter alia, ESMA, the European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority) ("EBA"), the European Supervisory Authority
(European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority) ("EIOPA"), the relevant competent authorities, the ESRB and the relevant central
banks of the ESCB, including the European Central Bank (ECB).
Parliament also enhanced measures as regards the transparency of collective investment undertakings in pre-contractual documents and in
periodical reports.
Reuse of financial instruments received under a collateral arrangement: in order to increase transparency of reuse, minimum information
requirements should be imposed. Reuse should take place only with the express knowledge and consent of the providing counterparty.
This measure is without prejudice to stricter sectoral legislation and to national law that aims to ensure a higher level of protection for providing
counterparties.
Cooperation between the competent authorities: the amended Regulation introduces provisions on the exchange of information between
competent authorities and to strengthen the duties of assistance and cooperation which they owe each other.
Due to increasing cross-border activity, competent authorities should provide each other with the relevant information for the exercise of their
functions in order to ensure the effective enforcement of this Regulation, including in situations where infringements or suspected
infringements may be of concern to authorities in two or more Member States. In the exchange of information, strict professional secrecy is
needed to ensure the smooth transmission of that information and the protection of particular rights.
Equivalence of reporting: the Commission may adopt implementing acts determining that the legal, supervisory and enforcement
arrangements of a third country: (a) are equivalent to the requirements regarding the reporting obligation and safeguarding laid down in the
Regulation; (b) ensure protection of professional secrecy equivalent to that laid down in this Regulation; (c) are being effectively applied and
enforced in an equitable and non-distortive manner in order to ensure effective supervision and enforcement in that third country.
Sanctions: competent authorities may have the power to apply at least the following administrative sanctions and other administrative
measures in the event of the infringements. In respect of legal persons, maximum administrative pecuniary sanctions of at least:
EUR 5 000 000 or up to 10 % of the total annual turnover of the legal person according to the last available accounts approved by the
management body for infringements regarding the reporting obligation and safeguarding;
EUR 15 000 000 or up to 10 % of the total annual turnover of the legal person according to the last available accounts approved by
the management body for infringements regarding the reuse of financial instruments received under a collateral arrangement.
The powers to impose sanctions conferred on competent authorities should be without prejudice to the exclusive competence of the ECB,
pursuant to Regulation (EU) No 1024/2013, to withdraw authorisations of credit institutions for prudential supervisory purposes.
Reports: with the assistance of ESMA, the Commission should monitor and prepare reports to the European Parliament and to the Council on
the international application of the reporting obligation laid down in this Regulation. The time provided for submission of the Commission
reports should allow for the prior effective application of this Regulation.
Following the outcome of the work carried out by relevant international fora, and with the assistance of ESMA, EBA and the ESRB, the
Commission should submit a report to the European Parliament and to the Council on progress in international efforts to mitigate the risks
associated with SFTs, including the FSB recommendations for haircuts on non-centrally cleared SFTs, and on the appropriateness of those
recommendations for Union markets.

2014/0017(COD) - 25/11/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to enhance the transparency of certain activities in financial markets such as the use of SFTs and reuse of collateral in order to
enable the monitoring and identification of the corresponding risks.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2015/2365 of the European Parliament and of the Council on transparency of securities financing
transactions and of reuse and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012.
CONTENT: a lack of transparency in the use of SFTs has prevented regulators and supervisors as well as investors from correctly assessing
and monitoring the respective bank-like risks and level of interconnectedness in the financial system in the period preceding and during the
financial crisis.
This Regulation lays down rules on the transparency of securities financing transactions (SFTs) and of reuse . It creates a Union framework
under which details of SFTs can be efficiently reported to trade repositories and information on SFTs and total return swaps is disclosed to
investors in collective investment undertakings. It is intended to counter the risk of trading activities developing outside the regulated banking
system, or otherwise without proper oversight.
The definition of securities financing transaction or SFT shall cover a repurchase transaction; securities or commodities lending and
securities or commodities borrowing; a buy-sell back transaction or sell-buy back transaction and a margin lending transaction.
Reuse shall mean the use by a receiving counterparty, in its own name and on its own account or on the account of another
counterparty, including any natural person, of financial instruments received under a collateral arrangement.
Reporting obligation and safeguarding: counterparties to SFTs shall report the details of any SFT they have concluded, as well as any

modification or termination thereof, to a trade repository registered with European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) or recognised in
accordance with this Regulation. Those details shall be reported no later than the working day following the conclusion, modification or
termination of the transaction.
Counterparties shall keep a record of any SFT that they have concluded, modified or terminated for at least five years following the termination
of the transaction.
In order to ensure consistent application of this Regulation, ESMA shall, in close cooperation with, and taking into account the needs of, the
European System of Central Banks (ESCB): (i) develop draft regulatory technical standards specifying the details of the reports for the
different types of SFTs; (b) develop draft implementing technical standards specifying the format and frequency of the reports for the different
types of SFTs.
Transparency towards investors: in order to enable investors to become aware of the risks associated with the use of SFTs and total return
swaps, managers of collective investment undertakings should include detailed information on any recourse they have to those techniques in
periodical reports.
A collective investment undertakings investment policy with respect to SFTs and total return swaps should be clearly disclosed in the
pre-contractual documents, such as the prospectus for undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS) and the
pre-contractual disclosure to investors for alternative investment funds (AIFs).
Transparency of reuse: reuse of collateral provides liquidity and enables counterparties to reduce funding costs. However, it tends to create
complex collateral chains between traditional banking and shadow banking, giving rise to financial stability risks. The lack of transparency on
the extent to which financial instruments provided as collateral have been reused and the respective risks in the case of bankruptcy can
undermine confidence in counterparties and magnify risks to financial stability.
In order to increase transparency of reuse, minimum information requirements should be imposed. Reuse should take place only with the
express knowledge and consent of the providing counterparty.
Cooperation between competent authorities: the Regulation provides that the competent authorities referred to in the Regulation and ESMA
shall cooperate closely with each other and exchange information for the purpose of carrying out their duties pursuant to this Regulation, in
particular in order to identify and remedy infringements of this Regulation.
A competent authority may refuse to act on a request to cooperate and exchange information in exceptional circumstances.
Any confidential information received, exchanged or transmitted shall be subject to the conditions of professional secrecy.
Relationship with third countries: in order to ensure uniform conditions for the implementation of this Regulation, implementing powers should
be conferred on the Commission to take decisions on the assessment of the rules of third countries for the purposes of recognising
third-country trade repositories, and in order to avoid potentially duplicate or conflicting requirements.
Where appropriate, the Commission should cooperate with third-country authorities in order to explore mutually supportive solutions to ensure
consistency between this Regulation and the requirements established by those third countries and thus avoid any possible duplication in this
respect.
ESMA shall publish on its website a list of the trade repositories recognised in accordance with this Regulation.
Sanctions: Member States shall ensure that competent authorities have the power to impose administrative sanctions and other administrative
measures which are effective, proportionate and dissuasive. These sanctions shall satisfy certain essential requirements in relation to
addressees, criteria to be taken into account when applying a sanction or measure, publication of sanctions or measures, key powers to
impose sanctions and levels of administrative pecuniary sanctions.
Reports: with the assistance of ESMA, the Commission shall monitor and prepare reports to the European Parliament and to the Council on
the international application of the reporting obligation laid down in this Regulation. The time provided for submission of the Commission
reports shall allow for the prior effective application of this Regulation.
By 13 October 2017, the Commission shall submit a report on progress in international efforts to mitigate the risks associated with SFTs.
ENTRY INTO FORCE AND APPLICATION: from 12.01.2016 (with the exception of certain provisions which shall apply at the end of a delay
following the adoption of the delegated acts by the Commission).
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission should be empowered to adopt regulatory technical standards in the following areas: the details to be
reported for different types of SFTs; the details of the application for registration or extension of the registration of a trade repository, etc. The
power to adopt delegated acts shall be conferred on the Commission for an indeterminate period of time from 12 January 2016. The European
Parliament or the Council may formulate objections with regard to the delegated act within a period of two months of its notification (this period
may be extended by two months). If the European Parliament and the Council object, the delegated act may not enter into force.

