Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2229(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Security challenges in the MENA region and prospects for political stability

Subject
6.10.05 Peace preservation, humanitarian and rescue tasks, crisis
management
6.40.05.06 Relations with the countries of the Middle East

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
07/10/2014

PEILLON Vincent
Shadow rapporteur

MĂNESCU Ramona
Nicole
Committee for opinion
FEMM

Rapporteur for opinion

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

Appointed
10/02/2015

ARENA Maria

Key events
15/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

11/06/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

18/06/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

08/07/2015

Debate in Parliament

09/07/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

09/07/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

09/07/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0193/2015

Summary

T8-0271/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2229(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/02276

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE549.275

12/03/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE554.819

17/04/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE554.847

17/04/2015

EP

PE551.923

11/05/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0193/2015

18/06/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0271/2015

09/07/2015

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

FEMM

2014/2229(INI) - 18/06/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Vincent PEILLON (S&D, FR) on the security challenges in the Middle
East and North Africa (MENA) region and the prospects for political stability. It noted that the conflicts in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Libya and the
increase in tensions in the MENA region were major sources of destabilisation of that region and that the risks for European security, citizens
and interests were serious. However, stabilisation in the region was not a security issue alone, but also had economic, political and social
implications, requiring the Union and its Member States to develop strategic global and multifaceted policies.
Members felt that, having been forced to take emergency measures in response to successive crises that the EU had failed to anticipate in the
MENA region despite some signals, the EU had been unable to analyse the key elements or deal with the complexity of the situation ,
expectations and prospects created by the Arab uprisings of 2011. Above all, the EU had failed to respond to the need for a very long-term
strategy to sustain and assist genuine democratic transition, economic development and political stability.
Addressing the threats and the security situation: the committee called on the EU and its Member States to address the root causes of the
rapidly deteriorating situation across the MENA region through a holistic and ambitious approach. Whilst welcoming the action taken by the EU
Member States participating in the international coalition against ISIS, it emphasised the need for better-articulated actions, which could be
coordinated as part of a Common Security and Defence (CSDP) operation, and to this end, Members called on the EU to develop sufficient
operational capacity and to put in place a true common European defence.
At the same time, they called on the EU to take on the role of main facilitator of a regional dialogue involving all regional stakeholders, in
particular the League of Arab States (LAS), Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Turkey and Iran, and address the legitimate demands of local populations,
notably as expressed during the Arab uprisings of 2011. Members asked the VP/HR to ensure a constant high-level dialogue with the
countries of the region. They went on to stress the following:
the EU and the Arab world must assess the root causes of radicalisation and adopt a global approach, whereby inclusivity should be a
guiding principle. Unless a practical, sustainable solution is found, any action to neutralise the threat posed by ISIL/Daesh and other
terrorist groups would encounter increased and persistent difficulties;
the attempts to tailor EU humanitarian assistance to gender- and age-specific needs was welcome; Members noted the allocation of
EUR 1 billion under the EU strategy entitled 'Elements of an EU Regional Strategy for Syria and Iraq as well as the ISIL/Da'esh threat',
under which EUR 400 million had been earmarked for humanitarian aid;
all EU Member States must increase their commitments in relation to the refugee crisis in terms of financial resources and
resettlement of the most vulnerable refugees in the region, and special attention must be given to Jordan and Lebanon, which were
absorbing the biggest share of refugees in proportion to their population;
Member States should step up their efforts in hosting asylum seekers and in swiftly addressing the build-up of pending cases;
the EU must actively engage in promoting confidence-building measures between Iran and Saudi Arabia, and step up the
counter-terrorism cooperation with Turkey, which could play a major role in the fight against ISIL/Daesh and in stabilising Iraq and
Syria, as a member of NATO;
conditions for a resumption of peace talks between Israel and the Palestinian Authority should be put in place for a definitive
settlement of the conflict based on a solution enabling both countries to live side by side in peace and security, based on the 1967
borders and with Jerusalem as capital of both states.
Stepping up the global strategy for democracy and human rights: Members were convinced that the lack of democracy was one of the
fundamental causes of political instability in the region. They stressed the need to enhance long-term stability in the MENA region through
continuing EU support to civil society, notably though the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR) and the ENI Civil
Society Facility, as well as through new pro-democracy tools such as the European Endowment for Democracy (EED). Member States were
called on to provide the Endowment's budget with sufficient funding.
Whilst welcoming the broad consultation on ENP revision, the report stressed the importance of preserving the current balance of distribution
of funds for the allocation of ENP funding. Countries making progress in implementing reforms should be granted decisive additional support,
with particular attention to Tunisia.
Members called for a special programme for the support and rehabilitation of women and girls who were victims of sexual violence and slavery
in conflict areas in the MENA region, especially Syria and Iraq.
They went on to stress the need to develop an effective common European response by all Member States to jihadist propaganda and to
home-grown radicalisation. This counter-narrative should be based on the promotion of common values founded on the universality of human
rights and should discredit the idea of a conflict between religions or civilisations. Members wanted EEAS to appoint staff speaking the
languages of the MENA region to increase the effectiveness of communication.

The report also highlighted the central role of the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM), and reiterated the importance of revitalising the
Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly and reviving its political ambition.
Strengthening cooperation for economic development: Members took the view that strategic dialogue between the EU and the MENA
countries should help to iron out inequalities and creating job and education opportunities, mainly for young people. They stressed the need to
facilitate access to the EU single market for the MENA countries, while providing all necessary protection, as well as to encourage European
investments.
Noting that the upheavals could jeopardise the EU's energy security, Members suggested that the EU engage more strongly in energy
diplomacy in the MENA region, as outlined in the Energy Union. Supplying energy to countries in the EU?s southern neighbourhood was
important both strategically and in economic terms.
Lastly, the committee regretted that a minimum one-year period was necessary for the release of macro-financial assistance to countries in a
very precarious financial situation and urged the deployment of a new procedural dimension for EU aid, both in regard to aid through EU
external action financial instruments and at macro-financial assistance level. In addition, the EU must adequately assess the socio-economic
and human rights impact of the measures requested from beneficiary countries in order to ensure that such assistance does not constitute a
factor of instability, for example by undermining welfare services.

2014/2229(INI) - 09/07/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 400 votes to 98 with 86 abstentions a resolution on the security challenges in the Middle East and North
Africa (MENA) region and the prospects for political stability. It noted that the conflicts in Syria, Iraq, Yemen and Libya and the increase in
tensions in the MENA region were major sources of destabilisation of that region and that the risks for European security, citizens and interests
were serious. However, stabilisation in the region was not a security issue alone, but also had economic, political and social implications,
requiring the Union and its Member States to develop strategic global and multifaceted policies. However, there were persistent difficulties in
discerning a coherent conflict resolution strategy and establishing a legitimate and reliable basis for inclusive dialogue with the parties
concerned.
Addressing the threats and the security situation: Parliament called on the EU and its Member States to address the root causes of the rapidly
deteriorating situation across the MENA region through a holistic and ambitious approach. It welcomed the action taken by the EU Member
States participating in the international coalition against ISIS, whether in the form of military strikes or through logistical, financial and
humanitarian participation. However, it called for increased mobilisation in all spheres, with better-articulated actions, which could be
coordinated as part of a Common Security and Defence (CSDP) operation. To this end, Parliament called on the EU to develop sufficient
operational capacity and to put in place a true common European defence. Parliament deplored the fact that CSDP operations deployed
(EUBAM Libya, EUPOL COPPS and EUBAM Rafah) were too small and out of step with the security challenges in the region, and called for a
strategic reassessment of these deployments.
At the same time, Parliament stressed that a tailored response must be found, based on political and cross-regional differences, to the issue of
combating ISIL/Daesh, and the al-Nusra Front. It called on the EU to take on the role of main facilitator of a regional dialogue involving all
regional stakeholders, in particular the League of Arab States (LAS), Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Turkey and Iran, and address the legitimate
demands of local populations, notably as expressed during the Arab uprisings of 2011. The EU must put in place a genuine common foreign
policy. The VP/HR must work with EU foreign ministers to ensure a constant high-level dialogue with the countries of the region.
Parliament stressed the importance of regional dialogues with Turkey and Iran. Welcoming the recent agreement reached by the EU3+3 and
Iran on the latter's nuclear programme, it called on the VP/HR and the Member States, in the event of a final agreement on the nuclear issue,
to engage in promoting confidence-building measures between Iran and Saudi Arabia. Turkey could play a major role, as a member of NATO,
in the fight against ISIL/Daesh and in stabilising Iraq and Syria. Parliament called on Turkey to clear away certain ambiguities and take a more
active part in combating Daesh/ISIL in cooperation with the EU.
Members went on to stress the following:
the EU and the Arab world must assess the root causes of radicalisation and adopt a global approach, whereby inclusivity should be a
guiding principle. Unless a practical, sustainable solution is found, any action to neutralise the threat posed by ISIL/Daesh and other
terrorist groups would encounter increased and persistent difficulties;
the attempts to tailor EU humanitarian assistance to gender- and age-specific needs was welcomed. Members noted the allocation of
EUR 1 billion under the EU strategy entitled 'Elements of an EU Regional Strategy for Syria and Iraq as well as the ISIL/Da'esh threat',
under which EUR 400 million had been earmarked for humanitarian aid;
all EU Member States must increase their commitments in relation to the refugee crisis in terms of financial resources and
resettlement of the most vulnerable refugees in the region, and special attention must be given to Jordan and Lebanon, which were
absorbing the biggest share of refugees in proportion to their population;
Member States should step up their efforts in hosting asylum seekers from Syria and Iraq and in swiftly addressing the build-up of
pending cases;
Member States should pool their resources, enhance the existing mechanisms (Frontex, Eurosur) and establish a European PNR in
order to improve controls at the EUs external borders;
conditions for a resumption of peace talks between Israel and the Palestinian Authority should be put in place for a definitive
settlement of the conflict based on a solution enabling both countries to live side by side in peace and security, based on the 1967
borders and with Jerusalem as capital of both states.
Stepping up the global strategy for democracy and human rights: Parliament convinced that the lack of democracy was one of the fundamental
causes of political instability in the region. It stressed the need to enhance long-term stability in the MENA region through continuing EU
support to civil society, notably though the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR) and the ENI Civil Society Facility,
as well as through new pro-democracy tools such as the European Endowment for Democracy (EED). Member States were called on to
provide the Endowment's budget with sufficient funding.
Whilst welcoming the broad consultation on ENP revision, Parliament stressed the importance of preserving the current balance of distribution
of funds for the allocation of ENP funding. Countries making progress in implementing reforms should be granted decisive additional support,

with particular attention to Tunisia.
Members called for a special programme for the support and rehabilitation of women and girls who were victims of sexual violence and slavery
in conflict areas in the MENA region, especially Syria and Iraq.
They went on to stress the need to develop an effective common European response by all Member States to jihadist propaganda and to
home-grown radicalisation. This counter-narrative should be based on the promotion of common values founded on the universality of human
rights and should discredit the idea of a conflict between religions or civilisations. Parliament wanted EEAS to appoint staff speaking the
languages of the MENA region to increase the effectiveness of communication.
It also highlighted the central role of the Union for the Mediterranean (UfM), and reiterated the importance of revitalising the
Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly and reviving its political ambition.
Strengthening cooperation for economic development: Parliament took the view that strategic dialogue between the EU and the MENA
countries should help to iron out inequalities and creating job and education opportunities, mainly for young people. It stressed the need to
facilitate access to the EU single market for the MENA countries, while providing all necessary protection, as well as to encourage European
investments.
Noting that the upheavals could jeopardise the EU's energy security, Parliament suggested that the EU engage more strongly in energy
diplomacy in the MENA region, as outlined in the Energy Union. Supplying energy to countries in the EU?s southern neighbourhood was
important both strategically and in economic terms.
Parliament regretted that a minimum one-year period was necessary for the release of macro-financial assistance to countries in a very
precarious financial situation and urged the deployment of a new procedural dimension for EU aid, both in regard to aid through EU external
action financial instruments and at macro-financial assistance level. In addition, the EU must adequately assess the socio-economic and
human rights impact of the measures requested from beneficiary countries in order to ensure that such assistance does not constitute a factor
of instability, for example by undermining welfare services.
Lastly, Parliament called on the MENA countries to diversify their economies and imports, noting that the great majority of the MENA countries
trade was with non-MENA countries. It regretted the deadlock faced by the EU with regard to the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), and called for
the regional integration of the Maghreb countries.

