Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2128(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2013 discharge: European Agency for the operational management of
large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice (eu-LISA)

Subject
8.70.03.03 2013 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

CONT

Appointed
09/10/2014

CZARNECKI Ryszard
Shadow rapporteur

ZDECHOVSKÝ Tomáš

VAUGHAN Derek

ALI Nedzhmi

DE JONG Dennis

JÁVOR Benedek

VALLI Marco
Committee for opinion
LIBE

Rapporteur for opinion

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

Appointed
10/11/2014

GUILLAUME Sylvie

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
30/07/2014

Non-legislative basic document published

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

23/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/03/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

28/04/2015

Debate in Parliament

29/04/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

29/04/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

COM(2014)0510

Summary

A8-0099/2015

Summary

T8-0154/2015

Summary

29/04/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

30/09/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2128(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/01596

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2014)0510

30/07/2014

EC

Summary

N8-0101/2014
OJ C 442 10.12.2014, p. 0326

16/09/2014

CofA

Summary

05304/2015

30/01/2015

CSL

Summary

PE541.392

06/02/2015

EP

Committee draft report

PE539.729

10/02/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE539.759

06/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0099/2015

30/03/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0154/2015

29/04/2015

EP

Summary

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

Document attached to the procedure
Committee opinion

LIBE

Final act
Budget 2015/1677
OJ L 255 30.09.2015, p. 0311 Summary

2014/2128(DEC) - 30/07/2014 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2013, as part of
the 2013 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security
and justice (EU-LISA) new agency.
CONTENT: this Commission document sets out the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2013 as
prepared on the basis of the information presented by the institutions, organisations and bodies of the EU, in accordance with Article 129 (2) of
the Financial Regulation applicable to the EU's General Budget, including the EU-LISA Agency.
The document contains the figures on which the discharge procedure is based.
Discharge procedure of the EU agencies: the EU Budget finances a wide range of policies and programmes throughout the EU. In accordance
with the priorities set by the European Parliament and the Council in the multi-annual financial framework (MFF), the European Commission
carries out specific programmes, activities and projects in the field with the technical support of some specialised agencies.
The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide information on the activities of the institutions, agencies and other bodies of the EU from
a budgetary and accrual accounting perspective.
The consolidated reports on the implementation of the general budget of the EU include the budget implementation of all Institutions. Agencies
do not have a separate budget inside the EU budget; and they are partially financed by a Commission budget subsidy.
Each agency is subject to its own discharge procedure.
EASO: in 2013, the tasks and budget of the Office were as follows:
·

description of the tasks of EU-LISA: the Agency was set up under Regulation (EU) No 1077/2011 of the European Parliament and of
the Council. Its main aim is to ensure the operational management of the second generation Schengen Information System (SIS II),

Eurodac and Visa Information Systems (VIS);
·

EU-LISAs budget for 2013: the accounts of the Office for the year 2013 as presented by the Commission in its document on the
consolidated annual accounts of the European Union are as follows:
§

Commitment appropriations :
- committed : EUR 61 million;
- paid : EUR 61 million;
- carried-over : 0.

§

Payment appropriations :
- committed : EUR 38 million;
- paid : EUR 19 million;
- carried-over : EUR 7 million.

Please refer also to the Final Accounts of the EU-LISA Agency.

2014/2128(DEC) - 16/09/2014 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Court of Auditors report on the annual accounts of the European Agency for the Operational Management
of Large-Scale IT Systems in the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice (eu-LISA) for the financial year 2013, together with the Agencys
replies.
CONTENT: in accordance with the tasks conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the Court
presents to the European Parliament and to the Council, in the context of the discharge procedure, a Statement of Assurance as to the
reliability of the annual accounts of each institution, body or agency of the EU, and the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying
them, on the basis of an independent external audit.
This audit concerned, amongst others, the annual accounts of the eu-LISA Agency.
Statement of assurance: pursuant to the provisions of Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the Court
has audited:
the annual accounts of the Agency, which comprise the financial statements and the reports on the implementation of the budget for
the financial year ended 31 December 2013;
the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying those accounts.
Opinion on the reliability of the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the annual accounts of the Agency present fairly, in all material respects, its
financial position as at 31 December 2013 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the
provisions of its Financial Regulation and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer. Without calling into question
the qualified opinion, the Court draws attention to the valuation of the Schengen Information System (SIS II), the Visa Information System
(VIS) and Eurodac (systems) in the Agencys accounts. The operational management of these systems was transferred to the Agency from the
Commission in May 2013 by way of a non-exchange transaction and is the core task of the Agency. In the absence of reliable and complete
information in respect of their total development cost, they are recorded in the Agencys accounts at their net book values as per the
Commissions books and updated at year-end. These values relate mainly to hardware and off-the-shelf software components and do not
include software development costs.
Opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the transactions underlying the annual
accounts for the year ended 31 December 2013 are legal and regular in all material respects.
The report also makes a series of observations on the budgetary and financial management of the Agency, accompanied by the latters
response. The main observations may be summarised as follows:
The Courts comments:
budgetary management: the Commission was responsible for the establishment and initial operation of the Agency until it was granted
financial autonomy on 22 May 2013. The migration of data on commitment and payment appropriations from the Commission to the
Agency was a complex process and a reconciliation of the figures between the Commissions and the Agencys accounting systems
was finally completed in June 2014. This affected the Agencys payment planning and the preparation of its provisional accounts.
According to the Agencys Founding Regulation (9), countries associated with the implementation, application and development of the
Schengen acquis and Eurodac-related measures must make a contribution to the Agencys budget. Although Schengen associated
countries were using the systems managed by the Agency in 2013 the Commissions negotiations were still ongoing;
headquarters agreement: though the seat of the Agency is in Tallinn, operational activities are carried out in Strasbourg. It is likely that
management effectiveness could be increased and administrative costs reduced if all staff were centralised in one location. A
headquarters agreement that would clarify the conditions under which the Agency and its staff operate has not yet been signed with
the host Member State, Estonia.
The Agencys replies:
budgetary management: the Agency noted that during the handover of responsibilities on operational management of the systems
from the European Commission to the Agency there was intensive exchange of information at working level. As the Commission
informed the Agency: (i) the migration followed a standard process, already used for the independence of other agencies, (ii)

coherence controls by a third independent actor were performed to ensure a safe and complete transfer. As the migration of
appropriations following financial independence is a non-recurring exercise, future budgetary implementation reporting is expected to
provide the basis for fully detailed analysis;
headquarters agreement: the Agency acknowledges the observation. The only outstanding item subject of negotiations with the
Estonian Government is VAT regime applicable to the Agency's staff.
The Court of Auditors report contains a summary of the Agencys activities in 2013. This is focused on the following:
Budget: EUR 61.35 million.
Activities:
operational management and evolution of SISII, VIS and EURODAC;
helpdesk: provided first level support services to users across all systems under the management of eu-LISA;
monitoring and evolution of appropriate Service Level Agreements for such systems under the management of the Agency;
provision of coordination, security and supervision of relations between the Member States and the network provider for the
communication infrastructure for SIS II, Eurodac and VIS (sTESTA network);
participation in preparatory processes to design, develop and implement new systems;
statistics;
reporting;
monitoring of new technologies and solutions relevant for the operational management and evolution of SIS II, VIS, Eurodac and other
large-scale IT systems;
training: provision of bespoke system training plans for national authorities on IT systems managed by the Agency.

2014/2128(DEC) - 30/01/2015 Document attached to the procedure
Having examined the revenue and expenditure accounts for the financial year 2013 and the balance sheet at
31 December 2013 of the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems in
the area of freedom, security and justice (eu-LISA), as well as the Court of Auditors' report on the annual
accounts of the Agency for the financial year 2013, accompanied by the Agency's replies to the Court's
observations, the Council recommends the European Parliament to give a discharge to the Executive
Director of the Agency in respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2013.
Overall, the Council welcomes the Court's opinion that, in all material respects, the Agency's annual
accounts present fairly its financial position as at 31 December 2013 and the results of its operations and its
cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the provisions of the Agency's Financial Regulation
and the accounting rules adopted by the Commission's accounting officer, and that the underlying
transactions for that financial year are legal and regular.
Nevertheless, the Council made some observations. They may be summarised as follows:
establishment of the Agency: the Council notes that 2013 was the first year of the Agency's financial
autonomy and it welcomes the fact that the Agency has taken corrective measures in order to address
the weaknesses identified by the Court as regards the development of the Agency's internal control
standards and the establishment of insurance coverage for fixed tangible assets. It encourages the
Agency to follow up the contributions to be made to the Agency's budget by countries associated with
the implementation, application and development of the Schengen acquis and Eurodac-related
measures;
headquarters: the Council encourages the Agency to pursue its efforts in order to conclude a
headquarters agreement with the host Member State.
2014/2128(DEC) - 30/03/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Ryszard CZARNECKI (ECR, PL) on discharge in respect of the implementation of
the budget of the European Agency for the ?perational Management of Large-Scale IT Systems in the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice
(EU-LISA) for the financial year 2013.
It called on the European Parliament to grant the Executive Director of the Agency discharge in respect of the implementation of the Agencys
budget for the financial year 2013.
Noting that the Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts of the Agency for the financial
year 2013 are reliable, and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular, Members called on the Parliament to approve the closure of
the Agencys accounts. They made, however, a number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is
granted, in addition to the general recommendations that appear in the draft resolution on performance, financial management and control of
EU agencies.
Agencys financial statements: Members noted that the final budget of the Agency for the financial year 2013 was EUR 61 345 072.
The entire budget of the Agency derives from the Union budget.
Carry-overs: Members stated that according to Regulation (EU) No 1077/2011, the Commission was responsible for the Agency's
establishment and initial operation until it was granted financial autonomy. They noted with concern delays in the completion of the
Agency's accounting system. The budget implementation rates were 96% for commitment appropriations and 67% for payment

appropriations. They also noted that countries associated with the implementation, application and development of the Schengen
acquis and EURODAC-related measures must make a contribution to the Agencys budget. Although Schengen-associated countries
were using the systems managed by the Agency in 2013, the Commissions negotiations were still ongoing. Members noted that the
budget monitoring efforts during the financial year 2013 resulted in a budget implementation rate of 98.95% and that the payment
appropriations execution rate was 28.94% with a high level of committed appropriations carried forward to 2014 due to the fact that the
Agency has a number of multiannual contracts related to its core activities.
Members also made a series of observations on procurement procedures, recruitment, prevention and management of conflicts of interest as
well as internal controls and audits.
As regards the reliability of the accounts, Members noted with concern that the Court's report emphasises the issues related to the valuation of
the SIS II, VIS and EURODAC systems in the Agencys accounts. They recalled that the operational management of those systems is the
Agency's core task and that the systems were transferred from the Commission to the Agency in May 2013 by way of a non-exchange
transaction.
Moreover, Members recalled that, given its seat is located in Tallinn while its operational activities are carried out in Strasbourg , management
effectiveness would increase and administrative costs would be reduced if all staff were centralised in one location. They also recalled that at
the time of the Court's audit, negotiations were ongoing between the Agency and the host Member State. The Agency should inform the
discharge authority about the state of play of the negotiations. It called on the Commission to include the advantages and disadvantages of
having three different locations in its evaluation report and reflections on practical arrangements and costs with regard to a potential
centralisation of its activities.

2014/2128(DEC) - 29/04/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 553 votes to 113, with 22 abstentions, a decision to grant discharge to the Executive Director of the
European Agency for the ?perational Management of Large-Scale IT Systems in the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice (EU-LISA) for the
financial year 2013. The vote on the discharge decision approved the closure of the accounts (in accordance with Annex VI, Article 5(1) of the
Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament).
Noting that the Court of Auditors stated that it has obtained reasonable assurances that the annual accounts of the Agency for the financial
year 2013 are reliable, and that the underlying transactions are legal and regular, Parliament adopted by 564 votes to 82, with 34 abstentions,
a resolution containing a number of recommendations that form an integral part of the discharge decision and as well as the general
recommendations that appear in the resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies:
Agencys financial statements: Parliament noted that the final budget of the Agency for the financial year 2013 was EUR 61 345 072.
The entire budget of the Agency derives from the Union budget.
Carry-overs: Parliament stated that according to Regulation (EU) No 1077/2011, the Commission was responsible for the Agency's
establishment and initial operation until it was granted financial autonomy. It noted with concern delays in the completion of the
Agency's accounting system. The budget implementation rates were 96% for commitment appropriations and 67% for payment
appropriations. It also noted that countries associated with the implementation, application and development of the Schengen acquis
and EURODAC-related measures must make a contribution to the Agencys budget. Although Schengen-associated countries were
using the systems managed by the Agency in 2013, the Commissions negotiations were still ongoing. Members noted that the budget
monitoring efforts during the financial year 2013 resulted in a budget implementation rate of 98.95% and that the payment
appropriations execution rate was 28.94% with a high level of committed appropriations carried forward to 2014 due to the fact that the
Agency has a number of multiannual contracts related to its core activities.
Parliament also made a series of observations on procurement procedures, recruitment, prevention and management of conflicts of interest as
well as internal controls and audits.
As regards the reliability of the accounts, Parliament noted with concern that the Court's report emphasises the issues related to the valuation
of the SIS II, VIS and EURODAC systems in the Agencys accounts. It recalled that the operational management of those systems is the
Agency's core task and that the systems were transferred from the Commission to the Agency in May 2013 by way of a non-exchange
transaction.
Moreover, Parliament recalled that, given its seat is located in Tallinn while its operational activities are carried out in Strasbourg , management
effectiveness would increase and administrative costs would be reduced if all staff were centralised in one location. It also recalled that at the
time of the Court's audit, negotiations were ongoing between the Agency and the host Member State. The Agency should inform the discharge
authority about the state of play of the negotiations. It called on the Commission to include the advantages and disadvantages of having three
different locations in its evaluation report and reflections on practical arrangements and costs with regard to a potential centralisation of its
activities. It noted that at the time of the Court's audit, negotiations were ongoing between the Agency and the host Member State (Estonia)
with the aim of reaching a headquarters agreement.

2014/2128(DEC) - 29/04/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom,
security and justice (eu-LISA) for the financial year 2013.
NON LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2015/1677 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of
the European Agency for the operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice for the financial
year 2013.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the Executive Director of the European Agency for the
operational management of large-scale IT systems in the area of freedom, security and justice for the implementation of the latters budget for
the financial year 2013.

This decision is in line with the European Parliament's resolution adopted on 29 April 2015 and comprises a series of observations that form
an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 29 April 2015).
Amongst Parliaments main observations, the latter notes with concern that the Court's report emphasises the issues related to the valuation of
the SIS II, VIS and Eurodac systems in the matter of the reliability of the Agency's accounts. Parliament noted moreover, that in the absence of
reliable and complete information in respect of the total development cost of those systems, the value of the systems was recorded at their net
book values and do not include software development costs.

