Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2014/0346(COD)

Procedure completed

Harmonised indices of consumer prices and house price index
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 2494/95 1995/0009(CNS)
Subject
5.10.02 Price policy, price stabilisation
8.60 European statistical legislation

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
13/01/2015

GUALTIERI Roberto
Shadow rapporteur

MARTUSCIELLO Fulvio

SWINBURNE Kay

GOULARD Sylvie

VIEGAS Miguel

EICKHOUT Bas

VALLI Marco
Committee for opinion
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Eurostat

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commissioner
THYSSEN Marianne

Key events
09/12/2014

Legislative proposal published

15/12/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

13/10/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

13/10/2015

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

27/10/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

COM(2014)0724

Summary

A8-0313/2015

Summary

18/02/2016

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

08/03/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

08/03/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

21/04/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

11/05/2016

Final act signed

11/05/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

24/05/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

PE604.782

Summary

T8-0070/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0346(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Repealing Regulation (EC) No 2494/95 1995/0009(CNS)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 338-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/02259

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2014)0724

09/12/2014

EC

Summary

CON/2015/0010
OJ C 175 29.05.2015, p. 0002

13/03/2015

ECB

Summary

Committee draft report

PE564.902

08/07/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE567.477

08/09/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0313/2015

27/10/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0070/2016

08/03/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)270

19/04/2016

European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report

Additional information
European Commission

Final act
Regulation 2016/792
OJ L 135 24.05.2016, p. 0011 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

EUR-Lex

2014/0346(COD) - 09/12/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish a common legal framework for the production of harmonised indices by Member States.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: harmonised indices of consumer prices (HICP) are designed to measure inflation in a harmonised manner across Member
States. The Commission and the European Central Bank use the HICP in their assessment of price stability in Member States under Article
140 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.
Harmonised consumer price indices are essential for assessing and measuring: (i) convergence in terms of price stability within the EU; and
(ii) the results of euro area monetary policy, in terms of achieving the objective of price stability.
In October 1995, a Council Regulation on harmonised indices of consumer prices (HICP) was drafted and adopted, followed by 20
implementing regulations in the following 17 years.
Certain parameters have changed since the adoption of the original framework: (i) the development of the European Statistical System (ESS);
(ii) the technical aspects of data collection and index compilation have changed dramatically due to the rapid rate of technological progress in
recent years; (iii) the Lisbon Treaty established a new comitology set-up.
These various changes all necessitate redrafting of the legislation on HICP so as to modernise and rationalise the legal basis and adapt it to
todays needs, both actual and potential.
CONTENT: the objective of this proposal is to establish a common legal framework for the production of harmonised indices by Member
States, which involves collecting, compiling, processing and submitting harmonised consumer price indices.
The proposal for a revised HICP Regulation seeks to create a single legal measure covering all uniform conditions. It would combine the
different implementing regulations into a single one, which would give stakeholders and Member States greater clarity and make
administration easier and more effective.
This proposal simplifies and clarifies the requirements for the compilation of these indices. It enshrines the principles of the European Statistics
Code of Practice relating to commitment to quality, sound methodology, cost-effectiveness, relevance, accuracy, reliability, coherence and
comparability.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2014/0346(COD) - 13/03/2015 European Central Bank: opinion, guideline, report
Opinion of the European Central Bank (ECB) on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and the Council on harmonised
indices of consumer prices and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 2494/95.
On 17 December 2014, the ECB received a request from the European Parliament for an opinion on this proposal. On 26 January 2015, the
ECB was consulted on the same proposal by the Council of the European Union.
The proposed regulation lies within the ECBs fields of competence as the ECB is a key user of HICP statistics. Harmonised indices of
consumer prices are important indicators in the context of monetary policy. They are of crucial importance to the ECBs primary objective of
maintaining price stability in the euro area.
The ECB supports the efforts undertaken by the European Commission (Eurostat) concerning the review and modernisation of the Union legal
framework for compilation of HICP statistic.
It made the following remarks:
Consultation of the ECB: the ECB is to be consulted on any implementing and delegated acts, which the Commission may adopt under the
revised legal framework for the HICP. The proposed regulation should reflect the ECBs competence to be consulted on implementing and
delegated acts adopted under the proposed regulation.
Use of delegated and implementing acts:
Regarding the Commissions power to adopt delegated acts, the ECB considers the threshold below which there is no obligation for Member
States to provide sub-indices of harmonised indices, and the list of sub-indices that need not be produced by Member States to be essential
elements of the proposed regulation. These items are fundamental to ensure sound and harmonised consumer price indices. These issues
should be decided and laid down in the proposed regulation.
The ECB supports the proposed Article 5(1) in connection with Article 2(q) on the collection of information about administered prices as part of
the basic information that should be provided with reference to HICPs (and HICPs at constant tax rates). For indices that refer to, or exclude
administered prices, the ECB would welcome if the Commission would provide guidance ensuring the harmonised definition and application of
these concepts in an implementing act.
Methodological issues:
Article 4(2)(b) of the proposed regulation introduces a wider margin for systematic differences in annual growth rates of the owner-occupied
housing price index (OOH-price index) and of the house price index (HPI) that may result from deviations from the concepts or methods laid
down in the proposed Regulation. While Commission Regulation (EU) No 93/2013 is silent on this issue, the ECB strongly suggests applying

the standard of 0.1 percentage points that is used for assessing the comparability of sub-indices.
The production of sub-indices at intervals less frequent than required by the proposed regulation should remain subject to prior approval by the
Commission (Eurostat).

2014/0346(COD) - 27/10/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the report by Roberto GUALTIERI (S&D, IT) on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on harmonised indices of consumer prices and repealing Regulation (EC) No 2494/95.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should
amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Subject matter: this Regulation lays down a common framework for the development, production and dissemination of harmonised indices of
consumer prices (HICP, HICP-CT, OOH price index) and of the house price index (HPI) at Union, national and sub-national level.
Compilation of harmonised indices: the amended text stipulated that neither the HICP nor the HICP-CT shall cover transactions between
households, except in the case of rentals paid by tenants to private landlords, where the latter act as market producers of services purchased
by households (tenants).
OOH indices shall be compiled, where possible and provided that the data is available, for the 10 years preceding the entry into force of this
Regulation.
Depending on the outcome of the report on the suitability of the owner-occupied housing indices for integration into HICP coverage as
provided for in Regulation EU) No 93/2013, the Commission may adopt, within one year of the publication of that report, a delegated act to
integrate the OOH index into the HICP.
Comparability of the harmonised indices: the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts for the amendment of the Annex in
order to ensure comparability at international level of the breakdown of HICP by ECOICOP categories.
In order to ensure uniform conditions of implementation, and for the purposes of achieving the objectives of this Regulation, further details for
producing comparable harmonised indices shall be defined by means of implementing acts. Such implementing acts shall concern: (i)
sampling and representativity; (ii) collection and treatment of prices; (iii) replacements and quality adjustment; (iv) index compilation; (v)
revisions; (vi) special indices; (vii) treatment of products in specific areas.
Data requirements: Member States shall collect basic information representative of their country in order to produce harmonised indices and
their sub-indices.
The amended text stipulated that the sub-indices of ECOICOP that are not required to be produced by the Member States , either because
they do not cover household final monetary consumption expenditure or because the degree of methodological harmonisation is not yet
sufficient, shall be as follows: (i) narcotics; (ii) games of chance; (iii) prostitution; (iv) life insurance; (v) Financial Intermediation Services
Indirectly Measured (FISIM).
In the event that the degree of methodological harmonisation improves sufficiently, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated
acts in order to remove one or more sub-indices listed.
Deadlines, exchange standards and revisions: Member States shall provide the update weights for the monthly indices no later than 13
February each year. The updated weights for the quarterly indices shall be provided no later than 15 June each year.
The text stressed that early provisional information on the monthly Harmonised indices of consumer prices (HICP) in the form of flash
estimates is crucial for monetary policy in the euro area. Therefore flash estimates should be provided by Member States in the euro area
whenever necessary.
Each Member State in the euro area shall provide a flash estimate of the HICP not later than the penultimate calendar day of the month to
which the HICP refers.
Pilot studies: these studies shall assess the feasibility and costs of obtaining improved data quality and composition of basic information or
adopting new methodological approaches.
The general budget of the Union shall, where appropriate, contribute to the financing of pilot studies.
Based on the evaluation of the pilot studies, the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts in order to supplement this
Regulation.
Delegated acts: delegated acts shall not impose a significant additional burden on Member States, nor on the respondent units. A cost-effect
analysis should be fully considered when adopting and implementing those delegated acts.

2014/0346(COD) - 08/03/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 575 votes to 100, with 30 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on harmonised indices of consumer prices and repealing Regulation (EC) No 2494/95.
Parliaments position, adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Objective: the amended Regulation stated that price statistics of high quality and comparability are essential for those responsible for public
policy in the Union, researchers and all European citizens.
This Regulation lays down a common framework for the development, production and dissemination of harmonised indices of consumer prices
(HICP, Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices at constant tax rates - HICP-CT, Owner-Occupied Housing - OOH price index) and of the house

price index (HPI) at Union and national level.
Compilation of harmonised indices: the amended text stipulated that neither the HICP nor the HICP-CT shall cover transactions between
households, except in the case of rentals paid by tenants to private landlords, where the latter act as market producers of services purchased
by households (tenants).
OOH indices shall be compiled, where possible and provided that the data is available, for the 10 years preceding the entry into force of this
Regulation.
By 31 December 2018, the Commission shall prepare a report which shall address the suitability of the OOH price index for integration into the
HICP coverage.
Depending on the outcome of the report on the suitability of the owner-occupied housing indices for integration into HICP coverage, the
Commission may adopt, within one year of the publication of that report, a delegated act to integrate the OOH index into the HICP.
Comparability of the harmonised indices: the Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts for the amendment of the Annex I in
order to ensure comparability at international level of the breakdown of HICP by ECOICOP categories. The ECOICOP should also be
consistent with the UN COICOP, which is the international standard classifying individual consumption according to purpose, therefore the
ECOICOP should be adapted to align it with changes to the UN COICOP.
In order to ensure uniform conditions of implementation, and for the purposes of achieving the objectives of this Regulation, further details for
producing comparable harmonised indices shall be defined by means of implementing acts. Such implementing acts shall concern: (i)
sampling and representativity; (ii) collection and treatment of prices; (iii) replacements and quality adjustment; (iv) index compilation; (v)
revisions; (vi) special indices; (vii) treatment of products in specific areas.
In order to ensure adaptation to changes to the UN COICOP, to amend the list of items regulated by implementing acts by adding items in
order to take account of technical developments in the statistical methods and based on the evaluation of pilot studies, the power to adopt acts
should be delegated to the Commission.
Data requirements: Member States shall collect basic information representative of their country in order to produce harmonised indices and
their sub-indices.
The amended text stipulated that the sub-indices of ECOICOP that are not required to be produced by the Member States, either because
they do not cover household final monetary consumption expenditure or because the degree of methodological harmonisation is not yet
sufficient, shall be as follows: (i) narcotics; (ii) games of chance; (iii) prostitution; (iv) life insurance; (v) Financial Intermediation Services
Indirectly Measured (FISIM).
The Commission shall be empowered to adopt delegated acts to modify the list set out above in order to include games of chance in the HICP
and the HICP-CT.
Deadlines, exchange standards and revisions: Member States shall provide the Commission (Eurostat) with the harmonised indices and all
sub-indices by no later than: (a) 15 calendar days for the February to December indices, and 20 calendar days for the January indices, after
the end of the month for which the indices are calculated; and (b) 85 calendar days after the end of the quarter for which the indices are
calculated.
Member States shall provide the Commission (Eurostat) with the updated weights by no later than the 13 February each year for the monthly
indices and the 15 June each year for the quarterly indices.
Member States whose currency is the euro shall provide the Commission (Eurostat) with the flash estimate of the HICP no later than the
penultimate calendar day of the month to which the flash estimate refers.
Pilot studies: the Commission (Eurostat) may launch pilot studies, to be carried out on a voluntary basis by Member States. They shall assess
the feasibility and costs of obtaining improved data quality and composition of basic information or adopting new methodological approaches.
The general budget of the Union shall, where appropriate, contribute to the financing of pilot studies. By 31 December 2020 and every five
years thereafter, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council evaluating, if applicable, the main findings
of the pilot studies.
Delegated acts and implementing measures: in adopting implementing measures and delegated acts in accordance with this Regulation, the
Commission should consider, where appropriate, cost-effectiveness and ensure that those measures and acts do not impose a significant
additional burden on Member States or respondents.

2014/0346(COD) - 11/05/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to lay down a common framework for the development of harmonised indices of consumer prices and of the house price index
(HPI).
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/792 of the European Parliament and of the Council on harmonised indices of consumer prices and
the house price index, and repealing Council Regulation (EC) No 2494/95
CONTENT: the Regulation establishes a common framework for the development, production and dissemination of harmonised indices of
consumer prices (HICP, HICP-CT, OOH price index) and of the house price index (HPI) at Union and national level.
The harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) is designed to measure inflation in a harmonised manner across Member States. Price
statistics of high quality and comparability are essential for those responsible for public policy in the Union, researchers and all European
citizens.
The new Regulation adapts the legal framework laid down in Council Regulation (EC) No 2494/95 to current requirements and technical
progress, thereby further improving the relevance and comparability of harmonised indices of consumer prices and the HPI. It establishes rules
regarding:

·

the compilation of the harmonised indices;

·

the comparability of the harmonised indices

·

the frequency and the time limits for providing harmonized indices to the Commission.

Requirements on data: basic information collected by Member States for the harmonised indices and their sub-indices shall be representative
at Member State level.
Member States shall not be required to produce the following sub-indices, either because they are not included in the household final
monetary consumption expenditure or because the degree of methodological harmonisation is not yet sufficient: (i) narcotics; (ii) games of
chance; (iii) prostitution; (iv) life insurance; (v) Financial Intermediation Services Indirectly Measured (FISIM).
Pilot studies: whenever improved basic information is required for the compilation of the harmonised indices, or when the need for improved
comparability of the harmonised indices is identified, the Commission (Eurostat) may launch pilot studies, to be carried out on a voluntary
basis by Member States. The general budget of the Union shall, where appropriate, contribute to the financing of such pilot studies.
By 31 December 2020 and every five years thereafter, the Commission shall submit a report to the European Parliament and the Council
evaluating, if applicable, the main findings of the pilot studies.
Delegated acts and implementing measures: the Regulation also takes account of the new provisions introduced in the Treaty of Lisbon on the
decision-making process of the Union, which give the Commission (as Eurostat) the power to adopt implementing measures or legislative
measures for the purpose of amending non-essential elements of a regulation (delegated acts).
In adopting implementing measures and delegated acts, the Commission should consider, where appropriate, cost-effectiveness and ensure
that those measures and acts do not impose a significant additional burden on Member States or respondents.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 13.6.2016.
APPLICATION: the Regulation shall apply for the first time to data relating to January 2017.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission may adopt delegated acts in order to: (i) amend Annex I, in order to ensure comparability of the
harmonised indices at international level; (ii) take account of technical developments in the statistical methods in the production of harmonized
indices; (iii) include games of chance in the HICP and the HICP-CT. The power to adopt such acts is conferred on the Commission for a period
of five years from 13 June 2016 (which may be tacitly extended for the same period). The European Parliament or Council may raise
objections to a delegated act within three months of the date of notification (which may be extended by three months). If Parliament or Council
raise objections, the delegated act may not enter into force.

