Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2250(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Empowering girls through education in the EU

Subject
4.10.09 Women condition and rights
4.40.01 European area for education, training and lifelong learning

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
FEMM

Rapporteur

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

Appointed
02/12/2014

RODRIGUES Liliana
Shadow rapporteur

GÁLL-PELCZ Ildikó

ŽITŇANSKÁ Jana

BEARDER Catherine

BJÖRK Malin

ENGSTRÖM Linnéa

AIUTO Daniela
Committee for opinion
CULT

Rapporteur for opinion

Culture and Education

Appointed
01/12/2014

MARAGALL Ernest

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Justice and Consumers

JOUROVÁ Věra

Key events
15/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

16/06/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

23/06/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

08/09/2015

Debate in Parliament

09/09/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

09/09/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

09/09/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0206/2015

Summary

T8-0312/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2250(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

FEMM/8/02320

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE554.814

15/04/2015

EP

PE549.185

06/05/2015

EP

PE557.238

21/05/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0206/2015

23/06/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0312/2015

09/09/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)748

24/02/2016

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

CULT

2014/2250(INI) - 23/06/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Womens Rights and Gender Equality adopted an own-initiative report by Liliana RODRIGUES (S&D, PT) on empowering
girls through education in the EU.
Members made a series of general recommendations aiming to improve measures to apply gender equality at all levels of the education
system.
Overall, Members called on educational policymakers in the Commission and the Member States to ensure that the commitment to gender
equality goes beyond declarations of principles and political intentions, and is manifested in substantial increases in the efforts and resources
invested in it, recalling the primary importance of education in effecting cultural change.
They called on Member States to increase essential investment in education in order that everyone may benefit from free public education of
high quality. In particular, they called on them to ensure that their education authorities guarantee an equal right to education for women and
men by actively incorporating the principle of equal treatment into educational goals and actions, thus preventing the emergence of inequalities
between women and men as a result of sexist conduct and associated social stereotyping.
The Commission is urged to ensure that this recommendation be put to the national institutions responsible for implementing central, regional
and local education policies, school management bodies and regional and local authorities.
Fighting stereotypes: specific measures are called for in this regard such as: (i) increasing the presence of women both in vocational education
and in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)-related sectors; (ii) encouraging teachers to guide girls towards these
subjects.
Members urged the Commission to initiate as soon as possible the procedure for EU accession to the Istanbul Convention. They underlined
the close links between gender stereotypes and bullying, cyberbullying and violence against women, and the need to fight these from an early
age. In this context, Members stressed that the Istanbul Convention calls for signatories to include teaching materials on issues such as
non-stereotyped gender roles and mutual respect, adapted to the evolving capacity of learners, in formal curricula and at all levels of
education.
Improve the quality of education: Members called on the Member States to ensure equal access to education for girls and boys, regardless of
their age, gender, socio-economic status, cultural background or religion, and emphasises the need for European, national, and local
institutions to promote specific programmes to integrate marginalised communities. They also called for support to ensure that migrant women
and their families can be taught the language of their host country in locally based, free public education services.
As regards Roma women, the Member States are called upon to develop specific programmes to ensure that Roma girls and young women
remain in primary, secondary and higher education, and also to put in place special measures for teenage mothers and early school leaver
girls.
Curriculum and training: Members insisted on paying proper attention to gender equality in all its forms, in curricula. They considered that
gender equality in education should explicitly address the principle of equality and must include a range of issues, such as literacy, bullying,
violence, hate speech, human rights and civic education.

The report stressed that schools should help to develop an intercultural approach to education, in contrast to one geared to assimilation or
multiculturalism, in order to promote openness, mutual respect and intercultural and interreligious dialogue.
Measures are called for to promote gender equality in their comprehensive sex and relationship education programmes, including teaching
girls and boys about relationships based on consent, respect and reciprocity. Sensitive, age-appropriate, and scientifically accurate sex and
relationship education is an essential tool in the empowerment of girls and boys.
The implementation of sex and relationship education in curricular programmes aimed at empowering girls through awareness and control
over their own bodies is called for.
Members urged the Commission to support the inclusion of objective information on LGBTI issues in school curricula.
Further measures are called for in order to:
promote women in the fields of culture and the production and dissemination of artistic and intellectual works;
improve education in rural areas, marginalised communities, and those with special needs;
improve training and entrepreneurship.
Member States should ensure the elimination of stereotypes and sexist distortions that textbooks and teaching materials may include.
Teachers should be aware of the impact of gender roles and stereotypes on their students self-confidence and their subject choices during
their studies.
Fight against violence: convinced of the transformative potential of education in championing gender equality, Members recognised that formal
and informal education programmes must address and fight against gender-based violence, gender discrimination, harassment, homophobia
and transphobia in all their forms, including forms of cyberbullying or online harassment.
As regards childcare, Members called on the Member States to engage in initiatives that reduce direct and indirect educational costs and to
increase the capacity of all nurseries and creches, pre-school, school and after-school networks, in due respect of the principles of inclusion
for children living in poverty or at risk of poverty.
They stressed that any strategy for promoting gender equality and for the empowerment of girls and women must actively involve and engage
boys and men.
Investment, monitoring and evaluation: Members noted the need for monitoring and evaluation by independent bodies of the progress made
as a result of the adoption of gender equality policies in educational institutions.
They called on the European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE) to continue its work on putting together comparable gender-disaggregated
data and scoreboards in all policy areas, including in the field of education, and reiterates the importance of conducting impact studies for
educational policies to address gender inequalities.
Lastly, according to Members, it is of fundamental importance to assess the impact of future education legislation on gender equality and,
where necessary, to revise existing laws in accordance with this principle.
To conclude, Members suggested the creation of an Annual European Award for Gender Equality for educational institutions which have
excelled in attaining this objective, and encourages Member States to do the same at national level.

2014/2250(INI) - 09/09/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 408 votes to 236 with 40 abstentions, a resolution on empowering girls through education in the EU.
Parliament made a series of general recommendations aiming to improve measures to apply gender equality at all levels of the education
system.
Parliament began by calling on Member States to implement and improve measures to apply gender equality at all levels of the education
system, and to fully integrate improving awareness of gender issues into teacher training, and into training for all categories of school
professionals.
It called on educational policymakers in the Commission and the Member States to ensure that the commitment to gender equality went
beyond declarations of principles and political intentions, and was manifested in substantial increases in the efforts and resources invested in
it, recalling the primary importance of education in effecting cultural change.
It called on Member States to increase essential investment in education in order that everyone might benefit from free public education of
high quality. In particular, it called on them to ensure that their education authorities guarantee an equal right to education for women and men
by actively incorporating the principle of equal treatment into educational goals and actions, thus preventing the emergence of inequalities
between women and men as a result of sexist conduct and associated social stereotyping.
The Commission was urged to ensure that this recommendation be put to the national institutions responsible for implementing central,
regional and local education policies, school management bodies and regional and local authorities.
Fighting stereotypes: specific measures were called for in this regard such as: (i) increasing the presence of women both in vocational
education and in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics)-related sectors; (ii) encouraging teachers to guide girls towards
these subjects. Parliament also urged the Commission to initiate as soon as possible the procedure for EU accession to the Istanbul
Convention. It underlined the close links between gender stereotypes and bullying, cyber bullying and violence against women, and the need
to fight these from an early age. In this context, Members stressed that the Istanbul Convention called for signatories to include teaching
materials on issues such as non-stereotyped gender roles and mutual respect, adapted to the evolving capacity of learners, in formal curricula
and at all levels of education.
Improve the quality of education: Parliament called on Member States to ensure equal access to education for girls and boys, regardless of
their age, gender, socio-economic status, cultural background or religion, and emphasised the need for European, national, and local

institutions to promote specific programmes to integrate marginalised communities. It called on Member States to provide the active support
necessary to ensure that migrant women and their families could be taught the language of their host country in locally based, free public
education services.
As regards Roma women, Member States were called upon to develop specific programmes to ensure that Roma girls and young women
remained in primary, secondary and higher education, and also to put in place special measures for teenage mothers and early school leaver
girls.
Curriculum and training: Parliament insisted on paying proper attention to gender equality in all its forms, in curricula. It considered that gender
equality in education should explicitly address the principle of equality and must include a range of issues, such as literacy, bullying, violence,
hate speech, human rights and civic education.
It stressed that schools should help to develop an intercultural approach to education, in order to promote openness, mutual respect and
intercultural and interreligious dialogue.
Measures were called for to promote gender equality in their comprehensive sex and relationship education programmes, including teaching
girls and boys about relationships based on consent, respect and reciprocity. Sensitive, age-appropriate, and scientifically accurate sex and
relationship education was an essential tool in the empowerment of girls and boys.
The implementation of sex and relationship education in curricular programmes aimed at empowering girls through awareness and control
over their own bodies was called for. Parliament encouraged Member States to consider making age-appropriate comprehensive sex and
relationship education compulsory in their school curricula for all primary and secondary school children.
Members urged the Commission to support the inclusion of objective information on LGBTI issues in school curricula.
Further measures are called for in order to:
promote women in the fields of culture and the production and dissemination of artistic and intellectual works;
improve education in rural areas, marginalised communities, and those with special needs;
improve training and entrepreneurship.
Member States should ensure the elimination of stereotypes and sexist distortions that textbooks and teaching materials may include in their
content, language or illustrations.
Parliament also stressed the need to integrate the study and application of the principle of equality between women and men into both initial
and ongoing training of teachers, in order to remove any obstacles to realising students full potential, irrespective of gender.
Fight against violence: convinced of the transformative potential of education in championing gender equality, Parliament recognised that
formal and informal education programmes must address and fight against gender-based violence, gender discrimination, harassment,
homophobia and transphobia in all their forms, including forms of cyberbullying or online harassment.
As regards childcare, Parliament called on the Member States to engage in initiatives that reduce direct and indirect educational costs and to
increase the capacity of all nurseries and creches, pre-school, school and after-school networks, in due respect of the principles of inclusion
for children living in poverty or at risk of poverty.
It stressed that any strategy for promoting gender equality and for the empowerment of girls and women must actively involve and engage
boys and men.
Recognition of diplomas: Members called on the EU institutions and Member States to make progress on the mutual recognition of diplomas,
certificates and other evidence of vocational qualifications issued in the various Member States, and on coordinating and harmonising national
rules on access to various professions, so that emigrant women from within or outside the Union could get jobs appropriate to their training
and qualifications.
Investment, monitoring and evaluation: Parliament noted the need for monitoring and evaluation by independent bodies of the progress made
as a result of the adoption of gender equality policies in educational institutions.
They called on the European Institute for Gender Equality (EIGE) to continue its work on putting together comparable gender-disaggregated
data and scoreboards in all policy areas, including in the field of education, and reiterates the importance of conducting impact studies for
educational policies to address gender inequalities.
Parliament felt that it was of fundamental importance to assess the impact of future education legislation on gender equality and, where
necessary, to revise existing laws in accordance with this principle.
To conclude, Members suggested the creation of Annual European Award for Gender Equality for educational institutions that had excelled in
attaining this objective, and encourages Member States to do the same at national level.
It should be noted that an alternative motion for a resolution tabled by the ENF group was rejected by Parliament.

