Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2014/0180(COD)

Procedure completed

Financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union: procurement
procedure
Amending Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 2010/0395(COD)
Subject
2.10.02 Public procurement
8.70.02 Financial regulations

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
BUDG

Rapporteur

Budgets

Appointed
24/09/2014

GRÄSSLE Ingeborg
Shadow rapporteur

NEGRESCU Victor

KÖLMEL Bernd

ALI Nedzhmi

NÍ RIADA Liadh

TARAND Indrek

VALLI Marco
Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
22/09/2014

EHLER Christian
INTA

CONT

International Trade

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Budgetary Control

30/09/2014
DEUTSCH Tamás

ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

REGI

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

CULT

Culture and Education

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

JURI

Legal Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

European Court of Auditors

Key events
18/06/2014

Legislative proposal published

03/07/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

26/02/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

26/02/2015

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

12/03/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

16/07/2015

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

07/10/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

07/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

22/10/2015

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

22/10/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

28/10/2015

Final act signed

30/10/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

COM(2014)0358

Summary

A8-0049/2015

Summary

T8-0341/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0180(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 2010/0395(COD)

Legal basis

Euratom Treaty A 106-pa; Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 322-p1

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Court of Auditors

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

BUDG/8/00619

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2014)0358

18/06/2014

EC

PE544.201

01/12/2014

EP

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

N8-0022/2015
OJ C 052 13.02.2015, p. 0001

15/01/2015

CofA

Amendments tabled in committee

PE546.617

19/01/2015

EP

Committee draft report

Summary

Summary

Committee opinion

CONT

PE539.750

27/01/2015

EP

Committee opinion

AFET

PE541.620

27/01/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0049/2015

12/03/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0341/2015

07/10/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)750

10/12/2015

Additional information
European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2015/1929
OJ L 286 30.10.2015, p. 0001 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2014/0180(COD) - 18/06/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to amend the Financial Regulation (FR) to take account of the new directives on public procurement and on the award of
concession contracts awarded by the European institutions on their own account.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council lays down the rules for the
establishment and the implementation of the general budget of the European Union. In particular, it also contains rules on public procurement.
Following the adoption of Directive 2014/24/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on public procurement and repealing Directive
2004/18/EC and of Directive 2014/23/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council on the award of concession contracts, provision
should be made for the rules contained in these Directives to apply to contracts awarded by the European institutions on their own account.
CONTENT: the proposal aims to amend Regulation (EU, EURATOM) No 966/2012 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of
the Union in order to take account of the new directives on public procurement and on the award of concession contracts awarded by the
European institutions on their own account.
The modifications brought about to the text of the Financial Regulation (FR) can be classified into three main groups.
Alignment with the Directive: new provisions are introduced, such as market consultation, the new innovation partnership as a procedure, the
introduction of compliance with environmental, social and labour law as a key requirement, evaluation of criteria in no particular order, award
methodology based on the most economically advantageous tender.
In addition, concessions for works and services are introduced for the first time in the FR and are subject to the same types of procedures as
public contracts.
Provisions on exclusion: the grounds for exclusion are clarified and aligned with the Directive as well as the possibility for the economic
operator concerned to take remedial measures. Exclusion is clearly separated from the rejection from a given procedure to avoid confusion.

A single system is set up for increasing the protection of the Union financial interests which takes into account the existing Central Exclusion
Database. The aim of the system is to ensure the early detection and prevention of risk as well as the publication of information related to
excluded economic operators. An exclusion panel is set up to take exclusion decisions after the analysis of the case and it guarantees the right
of defence of economic operators.
Clarifications of the text and simplifications: these concern publicity measures above and below thresholds, requirements for opening and
evaluation, rejection of non-compliant tenders, bank guarantees for works and complex services contracts, the fact that Union institutions are
considered central contracting authorities according to the Directive, the reference to applicable Directive thresholds, electronic procedures
and the opening up of procurement by institutions to international organisations.

2014/0180(COD) - 15/01/2015 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
OPINION No 1/2015 of the COURT OF AUDITORS concerning the proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council
amending Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union.
Following the requests addressed by the European Parliament (23 July 2014) and by the Council (18 July 2014), the Court of Auditors made
the following remarks on the proposal.
1) Purpose of the proposal for a Regulation
The Court of Auditors approved of the goal of alignment of the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union contained in
Directive 2014/24/EU and in Directive 2014/23/EU on the award of concession contracts.
Since the provisions of the Financial Regulation and the rules of implementation are closely linked, the Court of Auditors considers that it
should be informed about the amendments which the Commission proposes to the rules of application before the legislator adopts the rules
amending the Financial Regulation.
The proposal should therefore also have Article 325 of the TFEU as its legal basis given it also involves a considerable number of rules aimed
at reinforcing the protection of the EU's financial interests.
2) Infringement of the rules on decision-making; impediment to the objective of clarification
The Court of Auditors considered that dividing the topic of public procurement between, on the one hand, the Financial Regulation and, on the
other, the rules of application infringes the rules on and procedures for decision-making.
The Court of Auditors therefore is of the opinion that the legislator cannot delegate to the Commission, under Article 290 of the TFEU, the
power to determine the essential elements relating to public procurement as would be done through the current proposal for a Regulation.
Moreover, given that the proposal would probably place most key notions and concepts of public procurement in the regulation containing the
rules of application, the Court of Auditors is unable to appraise whether this revision would fully achieve the objective of clarifying the public
procurement rules.
The Court of Auditors recommended that priority be given to compliance with the decision-making process and to the objective of clarification.
In the Court's view, that objective would be met by codifying all the public procurement rules applicable to the institutions in a separate
regulation, which would make the rules easier to comprehend and consult.
3) Financial rules not fully aligned with the objectives of the directives revising and modernising the public procurement rules
The Court of Auditors recommended that there be a clear reminder of the objectives in the recitals to the proposed regulation. These are: (i) to
increase the efficiency of public spending, facilitating in particular the participation of SMEs in public procurement, and; (ii) to enable procurers
to make better use of public procurement in support of common societal goals.
According to the Court, the aim of making better use of public procurement in support of common societal goals should be clearly expressed,
but with the proviso that using public procurement in this way cannot be allowed to detract from the sound financial management of the EU
budget.
Moreover, the obligation to comply with environmental, social and labour law should be reiterated among the general principles that are
applicable to procurement and accompanied by explicit sanctions against non-compliant tenderers or contractors.
4) Unsuitability of the proposed mechanisms to protect the financial interests of the European Union
The Court of Auditors considered that the Commission should continue to be the only institution entrusted with managing the central exclusion
database, using timely information sent by the other institutions and bodies of the EU. A system of this kind could remove those institutions'
and bodies' control over their own procurement procedures and the management of their own contracts and generate conflicting
responsibilities among the authorities and panels charged with the protection of financial interests and with OLAF in particular.
The Court of Auditors considers that the system envisaged by the proposal for a Regulation should be revised in the light of the principles that
penalties must be defined by law and be proportionate and that the right of defence must be respected.

2014/0180(COD) - 12/03/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Budgets adopted the report by Ingeborg GRÄSSLE (EPP, DE) on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament
and of the Council amending Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union.
The proposal under consideration aimed at aligning the financial regulation with the new directives on public procurement and on the award of
concession contracts awarded by the European institutions on their own account.
The committee recommended that the position of the European Parliament adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure

should amend the commission proposal as follows:
Principles applicable to public procurement: the estimated value of a contract may not be determined with a view to circumventing the
applicable rules, nor may a contract be split up for that purpose. The contracting authority shall give reasons when it decides not to divide a
contract into lots.
In accordance with the principle of sustainability, contracting authorities shall take suitable measures to ensure that, when executing contracts,
economic operators comply with the environmental, social and labour law obligations established by Union or national legislation, collective
agreements or the international environmental, social and labour conventions listed in Annex X to Directive 2014/24/EU.
Exclusion criteria: in order to protect the financial interests of the Union, Members proposed integrating tax fraud, tax evasion - including tax
evasion via untaxed offshore structures - misuse of corporate assets, embezzlement of public funds in the criteria for exclusion from
participation in procurement procedures of EU institutions.
Conflicts of interests and grave professional misconduct: the report aimed to distinguish different kinds of conflict of interests and treat them
differently. Accordingly, the term conflict of interest should be solely used for cases where an official or agent of an EU institution is in such
situation.
On the other hand, grave professional misconduct would mean:
fraudulently or negligently misrepresenting information;
entering into agreement with other economic operators with the aim of distorting competition or violating intellectual property rights;
attempting to influence the decision-making process of the contracting authority during the procedure;
attempting to obtain confidential information on the procedure.
Before taking a decision to reject an economic operator from a given procedure, the contracting authority should give the economic operator
the opportunity to submit its observations, unless the rejection had been justified, by an exclusion decision taken with regard to the economic
operator, following the examination of its observations.
The early detection and exclusion system: for cases of grave professional misconduct, fraud, corruption, participation in a criminal
organisation, money laundering, terrorist financing, or serious breach of contract, a panel should be set up by the Commission at the request
of an authorising officer of the Commission or of an executive agency.
Where the request of the authorising officer was based, inter alia, on the information provided by OLAF, the Office should cooperate
with the panel in accordance with Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 883/2013, with due regard to the respect for procedural and
fundamental rights, and to the protection of whistle-blowers.
The panel might take an exclusion decision including as regards the duration of the exclusion and/or may impose a financial penalty
which should represent between 2 % and 10 % of the total value of the contract, without prejudice to the application of liquidated
damages or other contractual penalties.
In cases of corruption, terrorist financing, human trafficking, etc. the panel would have the option of permanently excluding the
economic operator.
Where the exclusion or financial penalty was not published, the Commission should regularly inform the European Parliament and the
Council of those decisions, using appropriate measures to ensure confidentiality.
The limitation period for excluding or imposing financial penalties on an economic operator should be five years calculated from the
date on which the wrongdoing was committed or the date of the final judgment of a national jurisdiction.
Members introduced an additional sanction mechanism for Member States who failed to cooperate with the Commission on the early
detection and exclusion system.
Submission and evaluation: the proposal stated that the contracting authority might require tenderers to submit a guarantee in advance to
make sure that the tenders submitted would not be withdrawn. In such cases, Members considered that the guarantee required should be
proportionate to the estimated value of the contract and be set at a very low level in order to prevent discrimination against diverse economic
operators.
Members also set out the cases where a contract or a specific contract might be modified without a new procurement procedure.
Electronic procurement: the report stressed that Union public procurement should serve to ensure that Union funds are used in an effective,
transparent, and appropriate way and, in that regard, electronic procurement should contribute to better use of public funds and enhance
access to public contracts for all economic operators.
Framework contracts: for framework contracts with reopening of competition, Members felt that it was appropriate to waive the obligation to
provide the characteristics and relative advantages of the successful tender to an unsuccessful contractor, on the basis that the receipt of such
information by parties to the same framework contract each time a competition was reopened might prejudice fair competition between them.
Separate discharge: Members introduced an amendment implementing the Joint Statement of 29 May 2014 made by the European
Parliament, the Council and the Commission on the separate discharge for Joint Undertakings under Article 209 of the Financial Regulation,
as confirmed by all stakeholders at the Round Table of 13 November 2014 on audit and discharge for Joint Undertakings.

2014/0180(COD) - 07/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 645 votes to 16, with 27 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU, Euratom) No 966/2012 on the financial rules applicable to the general
budget of the Union.
The European Parliaments position adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amend the Commission proposal. The
main amendments adopted in plenary concerning the following issues:
Public procurement: it is stipulated that the term "procurement" shall mean the acquisition by means of a contract of works, supplies or
services and the acquisition or rental of land, existing buildings or other immovable property, by one or more contracting authorities from

economic operators chosen by those contracting authorities.
Obligations in the areas of environmental, social and labour law: minimum requirements shall include compliance with applicable
environmental, social and labour law obligations established by Union law, national legislation, collective agreements or the applicable
international social and environmental conventions listed in Annex X to Directive 2014/24/EU.
It has been clarified how the contracting authorities can contribute to the protection of the environment and the promotion of sustainable
development, while ensuring that they can obtain the best value for money for their contracts, in particular through requiring specific labels
and/or through the use of appropriate award methods.
Single early detection system: the Commission should set up and operate a single early detection and exclusion system. The purpose of such
a system shall be to facilitate: (i) the early detection of risks threatening the Union's financial interests; (ii) the exclusion of an economic
operator which is in one of the exclusion situations; (iii) the imposition of a financial penalty on an economic operator.
Information exchanged within the early detection system shall be centralised in a database set up by the Commission and shall be managed in
full compliance with the right to privacy and other rights.
The decision to exclude and/or to impose a financial penalty shall be taken by the contracting authority. Such a decision shall be based on a
final judgment or on a final administrative decision.
In the absence of a final judgment or final administrative decision and in cases related to a serious breach of contract, the contracting authority
should take its decision having regard to the recommendation of a panel on the basis of a preliminary classification in law of the conduct of the
economic operator concerned. The role of the panel should be to ensure the coherent operation of the exclusion system. The panel should be
composed of a standing chair, representatives of the Commission and a representative of the relevant contracting authority. The panel should
also assess the duration of an exclusion in the cases where the duration has not been set by the final judgment or the final administrative
decision.
Criteria for exclusion: an economic operator should be excluded by the contracting authority when a final judgment or a final administrative
decision has been taken in the case of: (i) grave professional misconduct, (ii) non-compliance, whether intentional or not, with the obligations
related to the payment of social security contributions or the payment of taxes, (iii) fraud affecting the general budget of the Union, (iv)
corruption, (v) participation in a criminal organisation, (vi) money laundering, terrorist financing, terrorist related offences, (vii) child labour or
other forms of trafficking in human beings or irregularity. It should also be excluded in the case of a serious breach of contract or bankruptcy.
The contracting authority should also be able to exclude an economic operator where a natural or legal person assuming unlimited liability for
the debts of that economic operator is bankrupt or in a similar situation of insolvency or where that natural or legal person fails to comply with
its obligations to pay social security contributions or taxes, where such situations impact the financial situation of the economic operator.
An economic operator should not be subject to a decision of exclusion when it has taken remedial measures, thus demonstrating its reliability.
Conflict of interest and grave professional misconduct: the amended Regulation makes a distinction between different cases usually referred to
as situations of conflict of interest. The notion of a "conflict of interest" should be solely used for cases where an official or an agent of a Union
institution is in such a situation.
On the other hand, grave professional misconduct includes, in particular, any of the following:
fraudulently or negligently misrepresenting information required for the verification of the absence of grounds for exclusion or the
fulfilment of selection criteria or in the performance of a contract;
entering into agreement with other economic operators with the aim of distorting competition;
violating intellectual property rights;
attempting to influence the decision-making process of the contracting authority and attempting to obtain confidential information that
may confer upon it undue advantages in the procurement procedure.
Financial penalties: the contracting authority may impose a financial penalty on an economic operator who has attempted to obtain access to
Union funds by participating or requesting to participate in a procurement procedure while being, without having declared it, in one of the
exclusion situations. The amount of the financial penalty shall represent between 2% and 10% of the total value of the contract.
The decision of exclusion of an economic operator from participation in procurement procedures or the imposition of a financial penalty and the
decision to publish the related information should be taken by the relevant contracting authority, in view of its autonomy in administrative
matters.
Rejection of a procurement procedure: before taking a decision to reject an economic operator from a given procurement procedure, the
contracting authority shall give the economic operator the opportunity to submit its observations, unless the rejection has been justified by an
exclusion decision taken with regard to the economic operator, following an examination of its observations.
Presentation and evaluation of offers: according to the Regulation, the contracting authority may require tenderers to submit a guarantee in
advance to make sure that the tenders submitted are not withdrawn. The required guarantee shall be proportionate to the estimated value of
the contract and shall be set at an appropriate level in order to prevent discrimination against diverse economic operators.
Parliament also lays down the cases in which a contract or a specific contract under a framework contract may be modified without a new
procurement procedure.
Electronic procurement: in order to ensure that Union funds are used in an effective, transparent, and appropriate way, an amendment
stressed that electronic procurement should contribute to a better use of Union funds and enhance access to contracts for all economic
operators.

2014/0180(COD) - 28/10/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to align the Financial Regulation to new procurement rules.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2015/1929 of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU, Euratom)

No 966/2012 on the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union.
CONTENT: the Regulation amends the financial rules applicable to the general budget of the Union. The aim of the new Regulation is to align
the procurement procedures used by the EU institutions for awarding contracts to the new procurement rules applicable to member states, set
out in directives 2014/24/EU and 2014/23.
In addition, concessions for works and services are introduced for the first time in the Financial Regulation and are subject to the same types
of procedures as public contracts.
The revised Financial Regulation provides for the following:
Respect for environmental, social and labour law obligations: the Regulation stipulated that the contracting authorities may contribute to the
protection of the environment and the promotion of sustainable development, while ensuring that they can obtain the best value for money for
their contracts, in particular through requiring specific labels and/or through the use of appropriate award methods.
Economic operators shall comply with the applicable environmental, social and labour law obligations established by Union law, national
legislation, collective agreements or the applicable international social and environmental conventions listed in Annex X to Directive
2014/24/EU.
Such obligations should be part of the minimum requirements defined by the contracting authority and should be integrated in the contracts
signed by the contracting authority.
Single early detection system: in order to protect the Union's financial interests, a single early detection and exclusion system should be set up
by the Commission, and the rules for exclusion from participation in procurement procedures should be improved in order to strengthen the
protection of those interests. Information exchanged within the early detection system shall be centralised in a database set up by the
Commission and shall be managed in full compliance with the right to privacy and other rights.
Exclusion of economic operators: the decision of exclusion of an economic operator from participation in procurement procedures or the
imposition of a financial penalty and the decision to publish the related information should be taken by the relevant contracting authority, in
view of its autonomy in administrative matters.
In the absence of a final judgment or final administrative decision and in cases related to a serious breach of contract, the contracting authority
should take its decision having regard to the recommendation of a panel on the basis of a preliminary classification in law of the conduct of the
economic operator concerned. The panel should also assess the duration of an exclusion in cases where the duration has not been set by the
final judgment or the final administrative decision.
Reasons for exclusion: the Regulation provides that an economic operator should be excluded by the contracting authority when a final
judgment or a final administrative decision has been taken in the case of grave professional misconduct, non-compliance, whether intentional
or not, with the obligations related to the payment of social security contributions or the payment of taxes, fraud affecting the general budget of
the Union, corruption, participation in a criminal organisation, money laundering, terrorist financing, terrorist related offences, child labour or
other forms of trafficking in human beings or irregularity. It should also be excluded in the case of a serious breach of contract or bankruptcy.
An economic operator should not be subject to a decision of exclusion when it has taken remedial measures, thus demonstrating its reliability.
The information related to an exclusion or a financial penalty should only be published in the case of grave professional misconduct, fraud, a
significant deficiency in complying with the main obligations of a contract financed by the budget or an irregularity.
Conflicts of interest and grave professional misconduct: the new Regulation states that it is appropriate that different cases usually referred to
as situations of conflict of interest are identified and treated distinctly. The notion of a conflict of interest should be solely used for cases where
an official or an agent of a Union institution is in such a situation.
In cases where an economic operator attempts to unduly influence a procedure or obtain confidential information, this should be treated as
grave professional misconduct.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 31.10.2015. The Regulation shall apply from 1.1.2016.

