Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2204(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Ebola crisis: long-term lessons and how to strengthen health systems in
developing countries to prevent future crises

Subject
4.20.01 Medicine, diseases
6.30.02 Financial and technical cooperation and assistance

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
DEVE

Rapporteur

Development

Appointed
07/10/2014

GOERENS Charles
Shadow rapporteur

PONGA Maurice

NEUSER Norbert

DEVA Nirj

SÁNCHEZ
CALDENTEY Lola

SARGENTINI Judith

CORRAO Ignazio
Committee for opinion
ENVI

Rapporteur for opinion

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Appointed
13/11/2014

JUARISTI ABAUNZ
Josu
FEMM

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

20/11/2014
JIMÉNEZ-BECERRIL
BARRIO Teresa

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

International Cooperation and Development

MIMICA Neven

Key events
15/12/2014

Debate in Council

17/12/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

16/03/2015

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

22/09/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

01/10/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

26/10/2015

Debate in Parliament

27/10/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

27/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/10/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0281/2015

Summary

T8-0374/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2204(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

DEVE/8/02133

Documentation gateway
Committee opinion

FEMM

PE544.351

04/03/2015

EP

Committee opinion

ENVI

PE544.486

27/03/2015

EP

Committee draft report

PE552.141

29/04/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE557.184

28/05/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0281/2015

01/10/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0374/2015

27/10/2015

EP

Summary

SP(2016)67

15/03/2016

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

2014/2204(INI) - 01/10/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Development adopted the own-initiative report by Charles GOERENS (ADLE, LU) on the Ebola crisis: the long-term
lessons and how to strengthen health systems in developing countries to prevent future crises.
Members recalled the magnitude of the Ebola catastrophe can be attributed to several factors, among which:
the political failure of the affected countries to sound the alarm;
the ill-adapted response of the international community;
the shattering effects of closure of borders and restrictions on people;
the ineffectiveness of the surveillance and alert mechanisms;
the slow and poorly adapted response once aid was eventually mobilised;
the stark absence of leadership from the WHO;
the lack of research and development of drugs, diagnostics and vaccines.
With regard to the illness itself, Members indicated that still too little was known about the prevalence, transmission and mutation potential of
the Ebola virus. Furthermore, widespread confusion and prevailing misunderstandings about the causes and consequences of the illness had
perpetuated the spread of the virus.
Slow response to the virus: Members criticised the slow international response to the crisis during the first few months. They stressed,
however, the response and commitment of the EU and its Member States since March 2014 to help contain the propagation of the Ebola virus.
They welcomed the development of a new vaccine (in record time), which has proven 100 % effective in Guinea as of 23 March 2015, and
called for urgent guaranteed access to this vaccine, which should be affordable to everyone in Liberia and Sierra Leone.

Learning lessons from the crisis: Members called on all parties concerned, particularly governments of developing countries, European
institutions and international organisations, to learn from this crisis, including from the negative impacts on health sectors in developing
countries of the conditionalities of IMF and World Bank structural adjustment facilities.
They welcomed the establishment of a new emergency programme and a world reserve of staff who could be deployed quickly on the ground,
and the establishment of a new reserve fund of USD 100 million specifically for emergencies, and also welcomed the commitment to increase
the WHOs budget by 10 % within two years, bringing it to USD 4.5 billion.
The committee called on the international community to promote information and education campaigns in the countries concerned.
EU response: Members took the view that the EUs long-term response should focus first on development assistance, which would need to
include investment in the health sector to promote resilience, particularly as regards the organisation and management of health systems,
health monitoring and information, medicine supply systems, domestic governance and state-building.
They recalled the importance of conflict prevention as conflicts and fragility had a very negative impact on health systems;
The committee recommended a series of measures:
the establishment of a permanent European rapid response capability comprising experts, laboratory support staff, epidemiologists
and logistics facilities, including mobile laboratories, that can be deployed extremely swiftly;
screening at land and maritime borders;
the establishment of a network of monitoring points in developing countries to make it possible to detect as quickly as possible new
cases of infectious disease which have the potential to develop into pandemics
the establishment of cooperation between the EU and its Member States and developing countries, in particular those of West Africa,
as far as training medical staff was concerned.
Developing health services in West Africa: Members called for the development of infrastructure required to ensure that all the citizens of the
countries affected have access to public healthcare, based on the following:
investing resources in basic public health services;
ensuring safe and quality care by increasing resources to train, supervise and pay health workers adequately and by giving access to
safe drugs;
engaging local stakeholders and communities in crisis response and development planning.
The report also called on international donors to increase Official Development Assistance (ODA) to these countries.
It stressed, in general, the need for developing countries to give budgetary priority to setting up robust and resilient public social security and
public health systems, building sufficient numbers of well-equipped, sustainable healthcare infrastructure (in particular laboratories, water and
sanitation facilities) and offering high-quality basic services and healthcare.
Members acknowledged, nevertheless, that crises such as the current one could not be solved by health systems alone, and that a
comprehensive approach involving different sectors such as education and training, sanitation, food safety and drinking water, was needed to
address the critical gaps in all essential services. They stressed, at the same time, that education, covering cultural dimensions and beliefs,
were also key in the recovery.
They called for research infrastructure to be bolstered by the establishment of a regional public infectious disease research centre in West
Africa, and for inter-university cooperation to be established with the participation of the EU and its Member States.
Universal health coverage: Members supported the introduction of publicly funded universal health coverage free at the point of use, and
urged the Commission to submit as soon as possible a programme for establishing universal health cover, which will guarantee the
mutualisation of health risks. They supported the target of scaling-up healthcare spending in all countries to the recognised minimum of
USD 86 per person for essential health services.
They also supported the idea of a Marshall Plan to help kick-start those countries economies, and technical assistance to their administrations
to enhance their capacity and to ensure that money reaches the people and was not lost to corruption or other purposes.
The committee believed that the programming of the 11th European Development Fund should be reviewed to ensure that investments in
health and good governance become priority areas for all countries with fragile public infrastructure.
Access to medicines: Members believed that access to medicines should, as a matter of principle, no longer be dependent on patients
purchasing power but should instead be geared to patients needs, and that market forces should not be the sole determinant of which
medicines to produce. They called for the EU and its Member States to honour the EUs Policy Coherence for Development principle, set out in
Article 208 TFEU though the promotion of fair and equitable international trade, medical research and innovation policies that foster and
facilitate universal access to medicines. The committee called on the Commission to explore alternative models to those based on patent
monopolies when it came to the development of drugs or vaccines produced by public-private partnerships, such as the Innovative Medicines
Initiative.
It stressed the importance of increasing global epidemiological research capacity, developing quick tests and providing access to vaccines.
Members underlined that, although vaccines were welcome, they were most probably not suitable to eradicate Ebola, as the virus was
mutating, so funding priority had to be given to general health system strengthening, hygiene, containment, reliable quick testing in tropical
settings and medication targeting the virus and the symptoms it caused.
Investing in neglected diseases: Members reiterated the need to invest in neglected diseases. They called, in this context, on the Commission
to continue the discussions on this issue and to make arrangements for wide-ranging cooperation between the public and private sectors,
provided that safeguards were introduced to prevent public-private partnerships from harming vulnerable people in an unregulated market.
They welcomed in this regard the fact that, to address the urgent need for research into new treatments, the EU had made available
EUR 138 million for projects developing clinical trials for new vaccines, rapid diagnostic tests and treatments under Horizon 2020 and the
Innovative Medicines Initiative.
Lastly, Members stressed that Ebola and other epidemics were transnational threats that called for international cooperation. They called on
the WHO to revise the World Health Organisations International Health Regulations (IHR) of 2005 with a view to incorporating interdependent

responsibility and financial support, including for addressing root causes.

2014/2204(INI) - 27/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 632 votes to 11, with 38 abstentions, a resolution on the Ebola crisis: the long-term lessons and how to
strengthen health systems in developing countries to prevent future crises.
Parliament recalled the magnitude of the Ebola catastrophe can be attributed to several factors, among which:
the political failure of the affected countries to sound the alarm;
the ill-adapted response of the international community;
the shattering effects of closure of borders and restrictions on people;
the ineffectiveness of the surveillance and alert mechanisms;
the slow and poorly adapted response once aid was eventually mobilised;
the stark absence of leadership from the WHO;
the lack of research and development of drugs, diagnostics and vaccines.
With regard to the illness itself, Parliament indicated that still too little was known about the prevalence, transmission and mutation potential of
the Ebola virus. Furthermore, widespread confusion and prevailing misunderstandings about the causes and consequences of the illness had
perpetuated the spread of the virus.
At the same time, Parliament noted that three new confirmed cases of Ebola virus disease were registered in October 2015, all in Guinea
(Sierra Leone and Liberia reported zero cases). There have been 28 512 confirmed cases, including 11 313 confirmed deaths. Therefore,
there should be no lowering of the guard in relation to some new cases of Ebola, the mode of transmission of which remains open to question.
Slow response to the virus: Parliament criticised the slow international response to the crisis during the first few months. It stressed, however,
the response and commitment of the EU and its Member States since March 2014 to help contain the propagation of the Ebola virus. It
welcomed the development of a new vaccine (in record time), which has proven 100 % effective in Guinea as of 23 March 2015, and called for
urgent guaranteed access to this vaccine, which should be affordable to everyone in Liberia and Sierra Leone.
Learning lessons from the crisis: Parliament called on all parties concerned, particularly governments of developing countries, European
institutions and international organisations, to learn from this crisis, including from the negative impacts on health sectors in developing
countries of the conditionalities of IMF and World Bank structural adjustment facilities. Members welcomed the establishment of a new
emergency programme and a world reserve of staff who could be deployed quickly on the ground, and the establishment of a new reserve
fund of USD 100 million specifically for emergencies, and also welcomed the commitment to increase the WHOs budget by 10 % within two
years, bringing it to USD 4.5 billion.
Parliament called on the international community to promote information and education campaigns in the countries concerned.
EU response: Parliament took the view that the EUs long-term response should focus first on development assistance, which would need to
include investment in the health sector to promote resilience, particularly as regards the organisation and management of health systems,
health monitoring and information, medicine supply systems, domestic governance and state-building.
It recalled the importance of conflict prevention as conflicts and fragility had a very negative impact on health systems;
Parliament recommended a series of measures:
the establishment of a permanent European rapid response capability comprising experts, laboratory support staff, epidemiologists
and logistics facilities, including mobile laboratories, that can be deployed extremely swiftly;
screening at land and maritime borders;
the establishment of a network of monitoring points in developing countries to make it possible to detect as quickly as possible new
cases of infectious disease which have the potential to develop into pandemics
the establishment of cooperation between the EU and its Member States and developing countries, in particular those of West Africa,
as far as training medical staff was concerned.
Developing health services in West Africa: Parliament urged the Commission to help the three countries affected to develop their own public
health systems in order for them to be able to meet basic healthcare needs and to build up the infrastructure required to ensure that all their
citizens have access to public healthcare. It called for the following measures:
investing resources in basic public health services,
ensuring safe and quality care by increasing resources to train, supervise and pay health workers adequately and by giving access to
safe drugs,
engaging local stakeholders and communities in crisis response and development planning.
International donors should increase Official Development Assistance (ODA) to these countries.
It stressed, in general, the need for developing countries to give budgetary priority to setting up robust and resilient public social security and
public health systems, building sufficient numbers of well-equipped, sustainable healthcare infrastructure (in particular laboratories, water and
sanitation facilities) and offering high-quality basic services and healthcare.
Parliament acknowledged, nevertheless, that crises such as the current one could not be solved by health systems alone, and that a
comprehensive approach involving different sectors such as education and training, sanitation, food safety and drinking water, was needed to
address the critical gaps in all essential services. It stressed, at the same time, that education, covering cultural dimensions and beliefs, were
also key in the recovery.
Parliament also called for research infrastructure to be bolstered by the establishment of a regional public infectious disease research centre in
West Africa, and for inter-university cooperation to be established with the participation of the EU and its Member States.
Universal health coverage: Parliament supported the introduction of publicly funded universal health coverage free at the point of use, and

urged the Commission to submit as soon as possible a programme for establishing universal health cover, which will guarantee the
mutualisation of health risks. It supported the target of scaling-up healthcare spending in all countries to the recognised minimum of USD 86
per person for essential health services.
It also supported the idea of a Marshall Plan to help kick-start those countries economies, and technical assistance to their administrations to
enhance their capacity and to ensure that money reaches the people and was not lost to corruption or other purposes.
Members believed that the programming of the 11th European Development Fund should be reviewed to ensure that investments in health
and good governance become priority areas for all countries with fragile public infrastructure.
Access to medicines: Parliament believed that access to medicines should, as a matter of principle, no longer be dependent on patients
purchasing power but should instead be geared to patients needs, and that market forces should not be the sole determinant of which
medicines to produce. It called for the EU and its Member States to honour the EUs Policy Coherence for Development principle, set out in
Article 208 TFEU though the promotion of fair and equitable international trade, medical research and innovation policies that foster and
facilitate universal access to medicines. The Commission is called upon to explore alternative models to those based on patent monopolies
when it comes to the development of drugs or vaccines produced by public-private partnerships, such as the Innovative Medicines Initiative,
which can guarantee patient accessibility to treatments, sustainability of healthcare budgets and an efficient response to crises such as the
one caused by the Ebola virus or similar threats.
Members stressed the importance of increasing global epidemiological research capacity, developing quick tests and providing access to
vaccines. They underlined that, although vaccines were welcome, they were most probably not suitable to eradicate Ebola, as the virus was
mutating, so funding priority had to be given to general health system strengthening, hygiene, containment, reliable quick testing in tropical
settings and medication targeting the virus and the symptoms it caused.
Investing in neglected diseases: Parliament reiterated the need to invest in neglected diseases. It called, in this context, on the Commission to
continue the discussions on this issue and to make arrangements for wide-ranging cooperation between the public and private sectors,
provided that safeguards were introduced to prevent public-private partnerships from harming vulnerable people in an unregulated market. It
welcomed in this regard the fact that, to address the urgent need for research into new treatments, the EU had made available
EUR 138 million for projects developing clinical trials for new vaccines, rapid diagnostic tests and treatments under Horizon 2020 and the
Innovative Medicines Initiative.
Family planning: Parliament stressed that now that the outbreak is in decline, while the virus stays in the gonads for months after recovery,
sexual counselling and family planning has to be made available as part of the health system and education measures.
Lastly, Parliament stressed that Ebola and other epidemics were transnational threats that called for international cooperation. It called on the
WHO to revise the World Health Organisations International Health Regulations (IHR) of 2005 with a view to incorporating interdependent
responsibility and financial support, including for addressing root causes.

