Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Decision

2014/0124(COD)

Procedure completed

European Platform to enhance cooperation in tackling undeclared work

Subject
2.80 Cooperation between administrations
4.15.04 Workforce, occupational mobility, job conversion, working conditions
4.15.14 Social dialogue, social partners

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL

Rapporteur

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
15/09/2014

PIRINSKI Georgi
Shadow rapporteur

TOMC Romana

MCINTYRE Anthea

TOOM Yana

KUNEVA Kostadinka

REINTKE Terry

BEGHIN Tiziana
Former committee responsible
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

Committee for opinion
ECON

ITRE

IMCO

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Industry, Research and Energy

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

17/07/2014
DE JONG Dennis

JURI

Legal Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

FEMM

Women's Rights and Gender Equality

15/09/2014
KUNEVA Kostadinka

Former committee for opinion
ECON
ITRE

Economic and Monetary Affairs
Industry, Research and Energy

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

JURI

Legal Affairs

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

FEMM

Women's Rights and Gender Equality

Committee for opinion on the legal basis
JURI

Rapporteur for opinion

Legal Affairs

Appointed
12/06/2015

GUTELAND Jytte

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

THYSSEN Marianne

European Economic and
Social Committee
European Committee of the
Regions

Key events
09/04/2014

Legislative proposal published

16/04/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

19/06/2014

Debate in Council

Summary

16/10/2014

Debate in Council

Summary

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

07/05/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

07/05/2015

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

22/05/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

02/02/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

02/02/2016

Debate in Parliament

02/02/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/02/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

15/02/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

09/03/2016

Final act signed

11/03/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

COM(2014)0221

Summary

A8-0172/2015

Summary

T8-0033/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0124(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Decision

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 153-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee
European Committee of the Regions

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/8/00424

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2014)0221

09/04/2014

EC

Document attached
to the procedure

SWD(2014)0137

09/04/2014

EC

Document attached
to the procedure

SWD(2014)0138

09/04/2014

EC

PE536.050

01/07/2014

NP

Economic and Social
Committee: opinion,
report

CES2865/2014

10/09/2014

ESC

Committee of the
Regions: opinion

CDR3236/2014

07/10/2014

CofR

Committee draft
report

PE539.484

11/11/2014

EP

Amendments tabled
in committee

PE544.465

18/12/2014

EP

Amendments tabled
in committee

PE541.655

19/12/2014

EP

Reasoned opinion

UK_HOUSE-OF-COMMONS

Committee opinion

FEMM

PE541.601

22/01/2015

EP

Committee opinion

IMCO

PE539.571

23/01/2015

EP

PE551.891

06/05/2015

EP

A8-0172/2015

22/05/2015

EP

PE564.983

14/07/2015

EP

Text adopted by
Parliament, 1st
reading/single
reading

T8-0033/2016

02/02/2016

EP

Commission
response to text
adopted in plenary

SP(2016)221

31/03/2016

Amendments tabled
in committee
Committee report
tabled for plenary,
1st reading/single
reading
Opinion on the legal
basis

JURI

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Summary

Summary

Summary

Final act
Decision 2016/344
OJ L 065 11.03.2016, p. 0012 Summary

2014/0124(COD) - 09/04/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to establish a Platform to enhance EU cooperation in the prevention of undeclared work.
PROPOSED ACT: Decision of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the draft decision notes that undeclared work has serious budgetary implications through decreased tax and social security
revenues. It has negative impacts on employment, productivity and working conditions, skills development and life-long learning. It results in
lower pension rights and less access to health care and causes unfair competition between undertakings. A closely related phenomenon is
falsely declared work, or bogus self-employment, which also has negative consequences in terms of health and safety and social security
coverage of the workers concerned.
The European Parliament in its resolution of 14 January 2014 called for stronger cooperation and reinforcement of labour inspectorates to fight
undeclared work.
The main responsibility for tackling undeclared work lies with Member States and relies mostly on three types of enforcement bodies: labour
inspectorates, social security inspectorates fighting fraud on social insurance contributions, and tax authorities. In some Member States, social
partners, customs authorities, migration bodies, the police and the public prosecutor's office are involved. It has, however, been noticed that, in
some cases, cooperation between these different bodies at national level is not as structured or effective as necessary.
As the challenges are common to Member States, and as undeclared work often has a cross-border dimension, EU level action can play an
important role by reinforcing cooperation between enforcement authorities within and between different Member States in the prevention and
deterrence of undeclared work. At the moment, there is no formal mechanism in place for all relevant authorities from Member States to
address issues related to cross-border aspects of undeclared work.
The Communication of 2012 "Towards a job-rich recovery" highlighted the need for improved cooperation among Member States and
announced the launch of consultations on setting up an EU-level platform between labour inspectorates and other enforcement bodies to
combat undeclared work, aimed at improving cooperation, sharing best practices and identifying common principles for inspections.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: this included several options for enhancing EU cooperation in the prevention and deterrence of undeclared work,
and concluded that the preferred option would be the establishment of a European Platform with mandatory membership.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 153(2)(a) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: the draft decision establishes a Platform to enhance EU cooperation in the prevention and deterrence of undeclared work,
composed of national enforcement authorities as nominated by all the Member States and the Commission.
Observers: representatives of the social partners at cross-industry level, as well as from sectors with high incidence of undeclared work may
attend meetings of the Platform as observers. Other observers include Eurofound, the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work and
the ILO.
Objectives : the Platform will contribute to better enforcement of EU and national law, to the reduction of undeclared work and the emergence
of formal jobs, by:
improving cooperation between Member States' different enforcement authorities at EU level to prevent and deter undeclared work,
including bogus self-employment, more efficiently and effectively ;
improving Member States' different enforcement authorities' technical capacity to tackle cross-border aspects of undeclared work,
increasing public awareness on the urgency of action and encouraging Member States to step up their efforts in dealing with
undeclared work.
To achieve these objectives, the Platform will: (i) exchange best practices and information, (ii) develop expertise and analysis, (iii) coordinate
cross-border operational actions.
Tasks: the draft decision sets out a list of tasks that the Platform should carry out for the execution of its mission. These include :
establishing a knowledge bank of different practices/measures, including bilateral agreements used in Member States to deter
undeclared work ;
adopting non-binding guidelines for inspectors, handbooks of good practice and common principles of inspections ;
developing permanent training capacity for enforcement authorities and adopting a common framework for carrying out joint trainings ;
and
organising peer reviews to follow Member States progress, including support for the implementation of country-specific
recommendations.
Single Pint of Contact: to achieve its objectives, the Platform will be supported by a 'Single point of contact' in each Member State who should
have the necessary authority to liaise with national authorities dealing with the multifaceted aspects of undeclared work.
Operation: the Commission will coordinate the work of the Platform and chair its meetings.
The Platform shall adopt by majority decision, the rules of procedure, a two-year work programme, and the establishment of working groups to

examine issues specified in work Programmes.
Review: four years after its entry into force, the Commission must submit a report on the application of the decision and assess to what extent
the Platform has contributed to the achievement of its objectives.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: Regulation (EU) No 1296/2013 establishes an EU Programme for Employment and Social Innovation ("EaSI")
for the period 2014-2020. Funding for the Platform will come from the PROGRESS axis. An indicative amount of 2.1 million EUR per year is
provided for carrying out the tasks, such as the establishment of practical tools, support by service providers, publishing of common guidelines
and principles, and handbooks, developing a permanent training capacity and a common framework for carrying out joint trainings, organising
peer reviews and European Campaigns. In addition, grants to finance projects supporting the achievement of the objectives of the Platform will
be covered. Up to 224 000 EUR per year will be used to reimburse the costs related to participation in the Platform meetings.
It is also recalled that the European Social Fund (ESF) supports Member States' efforts to improve the quality of public administration.
Financing is envisaged within the Multiannual Financial Framework 2014-2020.
The legislative proposal is budget-neutral and does not require additional staff resources.

2014/0124(COD) - 19/06/2014 Debate in Council
The Council took note of a progress report on a decision establishing a Platform to improve cooperation at EU level in order to prevent and
deter undeclared work more effectively.
Many ministers expressed appreciation for the rapid progress made on this dossier during the Hellenic presidency and regretted that the
Council was not in a position to agree a general approach.
They called for the completion of the discussions as soon as possible under the Italian Presidency.
The Platform will aim to facilitate the exchange of best practices and information, provide a framework at EU level to develop expertise and
analysis, and promote joint actions between the different national enforcement authorities of Member States.
The proposal envisages the participation of all Member States in the Platform, as this is crucial to address cross-border situations. Each
Member State would be invited to nominate a single contact point.
In its progress report, the Council noted the following main elements:
- legal base: while favourably welcoming the text, a number of delegations raised legal questions, including the legal basis as such. At the
request of the Working Party, the Council Legal Service (CLS) provided its opinion in writing. In particular, the Working Party has examined the
appropriateness of the proposed legal basis (Article 153(2)(a) TFEU) and the different limitations on the legislator in using that Article,
including the possibility of Member States' mandatory participation in the proposed Platform .
A consensus could be found that so as to offer a solid legal framework for the Platform (based on Article 153 TFEU) with a certain flexibility
within this framework. A large number of delegations supported this text, considering it as a good negotiation position of the Council with the
European Parliament.
- other questions debated: the two main issues discussed during the Hellenic Presidency related to the nature of the Member States'
participation in the Platform and to the initiatives the Platform could take.
- definition of undeclared work: certain delegations note that there is no Union level definition on undeclared work and that a definition should
be included to cover (or not) the question of falsely declared work;
- participation in the Platform: a large number of delegations either accept the Commission's proposal of making the participation mandatory or
otherwise stress that in any case all Member States should participate. However, one delegation considers that the legal basis, Article
153(2)(a), cannot be used to oblige the Member States to participate in the Platform, and some delegations are still scrutinising this issue;
- initiatives envisaged: the proposal provides the possibility to expand the list of initiatives that the Platform may take. The Presidency's
compromise text, however, makes it clear that there is only limited flexibility in adding initiatives to the list included in the Decision and that any
new initiative the Platform might undertake would have to be for the execution of its mission as set out in Article 3 and in accordance with the
priorities set in the Platform's two-year work programme. To this effect, several delegations consider that the list included in the Decision
should be exhaustive. One of these delegations has stressed that the extension of the list should require supervision of the co-legislators.
Therefore, Recital 10 states that Member States' participation in certain activities would be on a voluntary basis. The Member States will be
able to decide on their participation in any joint cross-border operations and in working parties set up by the Platform.
In general, the Greek Presidency considers that its latest compromise text strikes the correct balance between, on the one hand, setting out
clearly the Platform's mission and its initiatives and, on the other, giving the Platform the necessary flexibility in the implementation of that
mission. The Presidency recommends finally that the forthcoming discussions on the file under the Italian Presidency should be based on this
latest compromise text in order to reach a general approach in due time to serve as the Council's mandate during the first reading negotiations
with the European Parliament.

2014/0124(COD) - 16/10/2014 Debate in Council
The Council agreed a general approach on a decision establishing a Platform to improve cooperation at EU level in order to prevent and deter
undeclared work more effectively. This general approach will be the Council's basis for negotiations with the European Parliament.
The general approach set out in the Annex follows the Commission's proposal on the mandatory participation of all Member States in the
Platform and a non-exhaustive list of initiatives the Platform can carry out.
At the same time, the draft Decision ensures that the Member States:

remain competent to decide on their level of involvement in the Platform's initiatives;
decide what measures to take at national level to give effect to the outcomes of these initiatives, depending on their own priorities and
needs in the prevention and deterrence of undeclared work.
The Platform's tasks would include (i) analysing policy measures taken until now; (ii) developing knowledge banks on different measures; (iii)
developing tools and handbooks for Member States' cooperation.
The Platform would
allow the Member States to learn from each other and would also give them the tools to join forces, where necessary, in curbing
undeclared work;
involve the social partners at EU level, both cross-industry and in those sectors more severely affected by undeclared work;
cooperate with relevant international organisations such as the International Labour Organisation and EU decentralised agencies, in
particular Eurofund and the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work;
work on the basis of two-year work programmes, setting out its detailed tasks covering all aspects related to undeclared work such as
labour law, labour inspections, health and safety, social security, tax and migration;
regularly inform the European Parliament and the Council about its activities.
In the absence of the European Parliament's opinion, the Commission maintains its original proposal. It has also expressed a specific
reservation on recital 11a(new) of the Council's general approach as it considers that the effective functioning of the Platform could be at risk,
if (too many) Member States' involvement in the Platform's initiatives were low or inexistent. While some delegations share this concern, many
other delegations stressed that all Member States are supporting the aims of the Platform.

2014/0124(COD) - 22/05/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the report by Georgi PIRINSKI (S&D, BG) on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council on establishing a European Platform to enhance cooperation in the prevention and deterrence of
undeclared work.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position adopted at first reading of the ordinary legislative procedure should
amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Establishment of the Platform: a European Platform to enhance the cooperation at Union level in tackling undeclared work should be
established.
The term tackling undeclared work shall mean the prevention, deterrence and combating of undeclared work as well as encouraging and
promoting declared work.
The Platform shall be composed of:
one senior representative (as opposed to a single national contact point) nominated by each Member State, representing national
enforcement bodies, and/or other actors involved in the tackling of undeclared work;
a maximum of four representatives of cross-industry social partners organised at Union level nominated by the social partners
themselves, equally representing both sides of industry.
Members have increased the number of stakeholders who may be actively involved in the meetings of the Platform as observers and their
contributions shall be taken into due consideration under the conditions set in its rules of procedure:
a maximum of 14 representatives of social partners in sectors with a high incidence of undeclared work nominated by the social
partners themselves, equally representing both sides of industry;
a representative of the Committee of Senior Labour Inspectors (SLIC);
a representative of the Administrative Commission for the Coordination of Social Security Systems;
a representative of the Public Employment Services Network (PES);
a representative of the European Economic and Social Committee (EESC);
a representative of each third-country EEA state.
Objectives of the Platform: the overriding objective of the Platform shall be to provide value-added input at Union level to the efforts of Member
States and Union institutions to successfully tackle the complex problem of undeclared work and its manifold implications and consequences
including encouraging and promoting declared work.
The Platform shall, to that end, contribute to an improvement in Union and national law, help to achieve the Union's employment targets
providing a more effective Union framework for employment and workplace health and safety.
The Platform should also deal with falsely declared work and bogus self-employment.
Missions and tasks: as a follow-up to the European Parliament resolution of 14 January, the European Platform should enhance the exchange
of experience and good practices, provide up-to-date, objective, reliable and comparative information, enhance cross-border cooperation and
identify and keep a record of letter-box companies and similar operation.
Tasks: the Platform shall thus: (i) encourage and facilitate practical, effective and efficient cross-border operational action; (ii) contribute to a
horizontal understanding of matters relating to undeclared work.
In order to execute its mission, the Platform shall in particular carry out the following tasks:
improve the knowledge of all forms of undeclared work, by means of common concepts, including comprehensive definitions of
existing and new forms of undeclared work, indicators and methodologies for data collection;
improve the knowledge and mutual understanding of different national labour inspection systems and practices to tackle undeclared
work;
develop guidelines for enforcement;

draw up and publish information to facilitate the activities of national labour inspection systems;
contribute to the identification of areas related to undeclared work where Union legislation is not achieving its intended objectives;
make proposals to the Commission, to the European Parliament and to the Council for inclusion in the country specific
recommendations of appropriate action addressing the particular aspects of tackling undeclared work;
provide opinions and proposals to the institutions on issues relating to better regulation;
encourage active cooperation between the enforcement authorities of Member States and third countries where appropriate, in order
to resolve problems related to undeclared work involving those third countries;
encourage national authorities and other bodies to provide advice and information to workers who have been victimised by practices
of undeclared work.
Operation: the Commission shall coordinate the work of the Platform and the Commission representative to the Platform shall co-chair its
meetings. The members of the Platform shall elect from among their number another co-chair of equal standing as well as two substitutes. The
Platform shall meet at least twice a year.
Defence of rights: persons bringing cases of undeclared work to the attention of the Platform, either directly or via national enforcement
authorities shall be protected against any unfavourable treatment by their employer.

2014/0124(COD) - 02/02/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 619 votes to 69, with 7 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a decision of the
European Parliament and of the Council on establishing a European Platform to enhance cooperation in the prevention and deterrence of
undeclared work.
Parliaments positon recalled that in its resolution of 14 January 2014 on effective labour inspections as a strategy to improve working
conditions in Europe, it welcomed the Commission's initiative to create a European platform and called for enhanced cooperation at Union
level to tackle undeclared work, which, according to the resolution, is damaging the Unions economy, leading to unfair competition,
endangering the financial sustainability of the Union social models and resulting in an increasing lack of social and employment protection for
workers.
The European Parliaments position, adopted at first reading of the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal as
follows:
Establishment of the Platform: Parliament stated that the main aim of this Directive is to encourage cooperation at Union level between
Member States and to successfully tackle the complex problem of undeclared work and its manifold implications and consequences including
encouraging and promoting declared work.
The Platform should also deal with falsely declared work and bogus self-employment.
Composition of the Platform: other than a representative of the Commission, the Platform shall be composed of: (i) a senior representative
appointed by each Member State to represent that Member State; (ii) a maximum of four representatives of cross-industry social partners at
Union level, appointed by those social partners, equally representing both sides of industry.
The following may attend the meetings of the Platform as observers and their contributions shall be taken into due consideration in accordance
with its rules of procedure: (a) a maximum of 14 representatives of the social partners in sectors with a high incidence of undeclared work,
appointed by those social partners, equally representing both sides of industry; (b) a representative of each third country in the European
Economic Area; (c) other observers if necessary.
National measures: the Decision is without prejudice to the competence of Member States to decide on the measures to take at national level
to tackle undeclared work. Member States and their relevant authorities remain competent with regard to the identification, analysis and
solving of practical problems relating to the enforcement of relevant Union law on working conditions and social protection at work, and for
deciding what measures to take at national level to give effect to the outcomes of the activities of the Platform.
Objectives: the defining purpose of the Platform shall be to provide input with added value at Union level in order to contribute to tackling the
complex problem of undeclared work, while fully respecting national competences and procedures. It shall contribute to more effective Union
and national actions aiming to improve working conditions, promote integration in the labour market and social inclusion, including better
enforcement of law within those fields. The aim is to avoid the deterioration of the quality of work and of health and safety at work, by: (i)
enhancing cooperation between Member States' relevant authorities and other actors involved; (ii) improving the capacity of Member States'
different relevant authorities and actors to tackle undeclared work with regard to its cross-border aspects; (iii) increasing public awareness of
issues relating to undeclared work.
Mission: the Platform at Union level shall encourage cooperation between Member States through:
exchanging best practices and information;
developing expertise and analysis;
encouraging and facilitating innovative approaches to effective and efficient cross-border cooperation and evaluating experiences;
contributing to a horizontal understanding of matters relating to undeclared work.
Activities: these shall aim, inter alia, to:
improve the knowledge of undeclared work, also with regard to causes and regional differences, by means of shared definitions and
common concepts,
improve the knowledge and mutual understanding of different systems and practices to tackle undeclared work, including the
cross-border aspects thereof;
establish tools for efficient sharing of information and experiences;
develop tools, such as guidelines for enforcement;
facilitate and support different forms of cooperation between Member States by increasing their capacity to tackle cross-border
aspects of undeclared work by promoting and facilitating innovative approaches, such as the exchange of staff, use of databases in

accordance with applicable national data protection law, and joint activities;
examine the feasibility of a system of rapid information exchange;
exchange national authorities' experiences in applying Union law that is relevant to tackling undeclared work;
exchange experiences and developing best practices with regard to cooperation between the relevant authorities of Member States
and, where relevant, third countries;
exchange experiences with regard to counselling and information provided to workers affected by practices of undeclared work.
Operation: the Platform shall meet twice a year and be chaired by the representative of the Commission. The Chair shall be assisted by two
Co-Chairs chosen from among the senior representatives. The Chair and the Co-Chairs shall constitute the Bureau.
Cooperation: the Platform shall cooperate effectively and shall avoid duplication of work with other relevant expert groups and committees at
Union level whose work has a link with undeclared work. It shall also cooperated with international organisations such as the ILO, the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and Union agencies, in particular Eurofound and the European Agency for Safety
and Health at Work (EU-OSHA).

2014/0124(COD) - 09/03/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish a Platform to enhance EU cooperation in the prevention of undeclared work.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2016/344 of the European Parliament and of the Council on establishing a European Platform to enhance
cooperation in tackling undeclared work.
CONTENT: the Decision establishes a Platform, at Union level, to enhance cooperation between Member States in tackling undeclared work .
For the purpose of this Decision, tackling, in relation to undeclared work, means preventing, deterring and combating undeclared work as well
as promoting the declaration of undeclared work. Member States remain competent to decide on their level of involvement in the activities
approved at plenary level by the Platform.
The European Parliament in its resolution of 14 January 2014 welcomed the Commission's initiative to create a European platform and called
for enhanced cooperation at Union level to tackle undeclared work, which, according to the resolution, is damaging the Union's economy,
leading to unfair competition, endangering the financial sustainability of the Union social models and resulting in an increasing lack of social
and employment protection for workers.
Composition of the Platform: the Platform shall be composed of:
a senior representative appointed by each Member State to represent that Member State;
a representative of the Commission;
a maximum of four representatives of cross-industry social partners at Union level, appointed by those social partners, equally
representing both sides of industry.
The Platform should involve the social partners at Union level, both cross-industry and in those sectors that are most severely affected by, or
have a particular role in the tackling of, undeclared work, and should cooperate with relevant international organisations, such as the ILO, the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development and Union agencies, in particular Eurofound and the European Agency for Safety
and Health at Work (EU-OSHA).
Objectives, mission and activities: the defining purpose of the Platform shall be to provide input with added value at Union level in order to
contribute to tackling the complex problem of undeclared work, while fully respecting national competences and procedures. The Platform shall
contribute to this objective by:
enhancing cooperation between Member States' relevant authorities and other actors involved in order to tackle more efficiently and
effectively undeclared work in its various forms and falsely declared work associated with it, including bogus self-employment;
improving the capacity of Member States' different relevant authorities and actors to tackle undeclared work with regard to its
cross-border aspects, and in this way contributing to a level playing field;
increasing public awareness of issues relating to undeclared work and of the urgent need for appropriate action as well as
encouraging Member States to step up their efforts to tackle undeclared work.
To achieve the objectives, the Platform at Union level shall encourage cooperation between Member States through:
exchanging best practices and information;
developing expertise and analysis;
encouraging and facilitating innovative approaches to effective and efficient cross-border cooperation and evaluating experiences;
contributing to a horizontal understanding of matters relating to undeclared work.
The actions of the Platform could take the form of a framework for joint training, peer reviews, the establishment of tools such as an interactive
knowledge bank, guidelines for enforcement, handbooks of good practices, examining the feasibility of a system of rapid information exchange
and improving data sharing in compliance with the Union data protection rules. European campaigns or common strategies could increase the
awareness of undeclared work, building on policies and strategies to raise awareness of undeclared work which already exist to varying
degrees in the Member States.
Financial support: the Platform and its activities should be funded through the PROGRESS axis of the European Union Programme for
Employment and Social Innovation (EaSI) within the appropriations set by the European Parliament and the Council.
Review: by 13 March 2020, the Commission shall, after consulting the Platform, submit a report on the application and the added value of this
Decision, and shall propose, where appropriate, necessary amendments.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 12.3.2016.

