Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2008(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Annual report of the 2013 activities of the Committee on Petitions

Subject
1.20.03 Right of petition
8.40.01.06 Committees, interparliamentary delegations

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
PETI

Petitions

Rapporteur

Appointed

PPE WAŁĘSA Jarosław

16/12/2013

Shadow rapporteur
S&D GERINGER DE
OEDENBERG Lidia Joanna
ALDE WERTHMANN Angelika
Verts/ALE IRAZABALBEITIA
FERNÁNDEZ Iñaki
GUE/NGL CHOUNTIS
Nikolaos
EFD SALAVRAKOS Nikolaos

Key events
06/02/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

11/02/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

19/02/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

10/03/2014

Debate in Parliament

11/03/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

11/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

11/03/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0131/2014

Summary

T7-0204/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2008(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Annual report

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 216-p8; Rules of
Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

PETI/7/14832

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE526.099

30/01/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE528.021

30/01/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A7-0131/2014

19/02/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0204/2014

11/03/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2014)457

11/08/2014

2014/2008(INI) - 19/02/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Petitions adopted an own-initiative report by Jaros?aw Leszek WA??SA (EPP, PL) on the activities of the Committee on
Petitions 2013.
The report acknowledged the substantial and fundamental role of the Petitions Committee in defending and promoting the rights of EU citizens
and residents. The petition procedure should be made more efficient, transparent, and impartial, while preserving the participatory rights of the
Members of the Committee on Petitions, so that the handling of petitions will stand up to judicial review even at a procedural level.
Members noted the variety of thematic key areas concerned in the citizens petitions, such as fundamental rights, internal market,
environmental law, public health issues, child welfare, transport and constructions, Spanish Coastal Law, new Regulation on good
administration, persons with disabilities, age discrimination, public access to documents, European Schools, Fiscal Union, and the Steel
Industry, animal rights and many more.
Petitions which fall under said thematic areas lend proof to the issue that the frequencies of widespread situations of unsatisfactory
transposition of EU legislation or misapplication of the law are still occurring. This is why Members consider it important to enhance
cooperation with Member States parliaments and governments, based on reciprocity, and, where necessary, to encourage Member States
authorities to transpose and apply EU legislation with full transparency.
New horizons and relations with other institutions: the report underlined the importance of making this Committee work more substantial inside
the House by raising its profile as a scrutiny Committee. It invited the newly elected Petitions Committee to nominate internal Annual
Rapporteurs on the major policies, which are of concern of European petitioners, and to enhance cooperation with other parliamentary
committees.
Members highlighted the need to reinforce the Petitions Committee collaboration with the other EU Institutions and bodies, and the national
authorities in the Member States. Structured dialogue and systematic cooperation with Member States especially with the National Parliaments
Petitions Committees should be enhanced. For their part, Member States are urged to play a proactive role in responding to petitions related to
the implementation and enforcement of European law.
Working methods: the committee is invited to adopt final internal rules to ensure maximum efficiency and openness in the work of the
Committee and to make proposals to revise accordingly the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament.
The Petitions Committee is called upon to adopt clear deadlines in the process of petitions in order to speed up the petitions life-cycle in the
European Parliament and make the whole process even more transparent and democratic. This could put in place a defined lifecycle of the
petition from registration until their final closure in the European Parliament.
These deadlines should establish an alert mechanism which automatically draws Members attention to petitions on which there has not been
any action or correspondence for a considerable amount of time, in order to avoid old petitions staying open over years without substantial
reason.
Lastly, Members called for an urgent revision of the relevant rules, in order to enable the newly elected Members to carry out efficient visits
and report swiftly back to the petitioners and the Committee on their findings and recommendations.

2014/2008(INI) - 11/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 482 votes to 120, with 60 abstentions, a resolution on the activities of the Committee on Petitions 2013.
The resolution noted that 2885 petitions were received in 2013, which was the Year of the European Citizen, representing an increase of
almost 45% on the year 2012 and that for the current legislature until now, almost 10 000 petitions have been registered.
Improving the petitions procedure: Parliament acknowledged the substantial and fundamental role of the Petitions Committee in defending and
promoting the rights of EU citizens and residents. The petition procedure should be made more efficient, transparent, and impartial, while
preserving the participatory rights of the Members of the Committee on Petitions, so that the handling of petitions will stand up to judicial
review even at a procedural level.
Members noted the variety of thematic key areas concerned in the citizens petitions, such as fundamental rights, internal market,
environmental law, public health issues, child welfare, transport and constructions, Spanish Coastal Law, new Regulation on good
administration, persons with disabilities, age discrimination, public access to documents, European Schools, Fiscal Union, and the Steel

Industry, animal rights and many more.
Petitions which fall under said thematic areas lend proof to the issue that the frequencies of widespread situations of unsatisfactory
transposition of EU legislation or misapplication of the law are still occurring. This is why Parliament considers it important to enhance
cooperation with Member States parliaments and governments, based on reciprocity, and, where necessary, to encourage Member States
authorities to transpose and apply EU legislation with full transparency.
Parliament also emphasised:
the importance of citizens direct involvement in the Parliaments activity and to have their concerns, proposals or complaints
specifically addressed by the Committee members;
points out the amount of work that had been done to resolve possible infringements of citizens rights and by cooperating with national,
regional and local authorities on issues related to the application of European laws; while maintaining a vital role in reconnecting with
European citizens and reinforcing the democratic legitimacy and accountability of the EU decision-making process;
the Commissions significant role in assisting with the handling of the cases raised by petitions. The Commissions investigation of
petitions should go into greater depth and look into the substance of cases with regard to EU legislation;
the need to find better solutions for dealing with the submissions from citizens while taking into account Parliaments obligations with
regard to its correspondence with citizens on issues that fall outside the EUs area of competence;
the need for a more active collaboration between the petitions committee and the SOLVIT network, which regularly uncovers and
resolves problems linked to the implementation of internal market legislation.
Deploring that European citizens continue to experience frequent problems caused by the misapplication of Internal Market law by public
authorities while exercising their freedom of movement, Parliament called on the Commission to propose legislation to resolve the issues
surrounding mutual recognition by Member States of civil status documents, while respecting the competences of the Member States.
New horizons and relations with other institutions: the resolution underlined the importance of making this Committee work more substantial
inside the House by raising its profile as a scrutiny Committee. It invited the newly elected Petitions Committee to nominate internal Annual
Rapporteurs on the major policies, which are of concern of European petitioners, and to enhance cooperation with other parliamentary
committees.
Parliament highlighted the need to reinforce the Petitions Committee collaboration with the other EU Institutions and bodies, and the national
authorities in the Member States. Structured dialogue and systematic cooperation with Member States especially with the National Parliaments
Petitions Committees should be enhanced. For their part, Member States are urged to play a proactive role in responding to petitions related to
the implementation and enforcement of European law.
Working methods: Parliament is invited to adopt final internal rules to ensure maximum efficiency and openness in the work of the Committee.
The Petitions Committee is called upon to adopt clear deadlines in the process of petitions in order to speed up the petitions life-cycle in the
European Parliament and make the whole process even more transparent and democratic. This could put in place a defined lifecycle of the
petition from registration until their final closure in the European Parliament.
These deadlines should establish an alert mechanism which automatically draws Members attention to petitions on which there has not been
any action or correspondence for a considerable amount of time, in order to avoid old petitions staying open over years without substantial
reason.
Parliament called for an urgent revision of the relevant rules, in order to enable the newly elected Members to carry out efficient visits and
report swiftly back to the petitioners and the Committee on their findings and recommendations.
Lastly, concerned that delays and response times are still too long throughout the registration phase and the admissibility phase in the
process, Parliament called for providing the Unit for Reception and Referral of Official Documents and the Petitions Committee Secretariat,
respectively, with an additional administrator with juridical background, to issue recommendations related to whether the petition lies within the
competence of European law.

