Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2135(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2013 discharge: ENIAC Joint Undertaking for the implementation of the Joint
Technology Initiative on nanoelectronics

Subject
8.70.03.03 2013 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

CONT

Appointed
03/07/2015

CZARNECKI Ryszard
Shadow rapporteur

MARINESCU
Marian-Jean

BALČYTIS Zigmantas

DLABAJOVÁ Martina

ŠOLTES Igor

VALLI Marco
Former committee responsible
Budgetary Control

CONT

09/10/2014
CZARNECKI Ryszard

Former committee for opinion
ITRE

European Commission

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
30/07/2014

Non-legislative basic document published

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

23/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

31/03/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

28/04/2015

Debate in Parliament

29/04/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

COM(2014)0510

Summary

A8-0104/2015

Summary

29/04/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

29/04/2015

Report referred back to committee

22/09/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/10/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

26/10/2015

Debate in Parliament

27/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/10/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

01/12/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

T8-0165/2015

Summary

A8-0285/2015

Summary

T8-0372/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2135(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/01606; CONT/8/03533

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2014)0510

30/07/2014

EC

Summary

N8-0004/2015
OJ C 452 16.12.2014, p. 0026

21/10/2014

CofA

Summary

Committee draft report

PE541.307

28/01/2015

EP

Document attached to the procedure

05306/2015

30/01/2015

CSL

Amendments tabled in committee

PE549.355

05/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0104/2015

31/03/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0165/2015

29/04/2015

EP

Summary

Committee draft report

PE557.305

06/07/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE565.167

04/09/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0285/2015

02/10/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0372/2015

27/10/2015

EP

Summary

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

Summary

Final act
Decision 2015/2212
OJ L 314 01.12.2015, p. 0041 Summary

2014/2135(DEC) - 30/07/2014 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2013, as part of

the 2013 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the ENIAC Joint Undertaking.
CONTENT: this Commission document sets out the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2013 as
prepared on the basis of the information presented by the institutions, organisations and bodies of the EU, in accordance with Article 129 (2) of
the Financial Regulation applicable to the EU's General Budget, including the ENIAC Joint Undertaking.
The document contains the figures on which the discharge procedure is based.
Discharge procedure of the EU Joint Undertakings: the EU Budget finances a wide range of policies and programmes throughout the EU. In
accordance with the priorities set by the European Parliament and the Council in the multi-annual financial framework (MFF), the European
Commission carries out specific programmes, activities and projects in the field with the technical support of some specialised agencies.
The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide information on the activities of the institutions, agencies and other bodies of the EU from
a budgetary and accrual accounting perspective.
The consolidated reports on the implementation of the general budget of the EU include the budget implementation of all Institutions. Agencies
and Joint Undertakings (JUs) do not have a separate budget inside the EU budget ; and they are partially financed by a Commission budget
subsidy.
Each JU is subject to its own discharge procedure.
ENIAC: in 2013, the tasks and budget of the Joint Undertaking were as follows:
description of the tasks of the Joint Undertaking: the ENIAC Joint Undertaking, located in Brussels, was set up by Council Regulation
(EC) No 72/2008 for a period of 10 years. The aim of ENIAC is to define a commonly agreed research agenda in the field of
nano-electronics. It pursues this by pooling resources from the public and private sectors to support R&D activities in the form of
projects;
accounts of the JU: the total commitment of the EU amounts to EUR 450 million. At 31 December 2013, the Commission held 95.41%
of the ownership participation in ENIAC. The cumulative unrecognised share of losses is EUR 26 million.
Please also consult the final accounts of ENIAC Joint Undertaking.

2014/2135(DEC) - 21/10/2014 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Court of Auditors report on the annual accounts of the ENIAC Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013,
together with the Joint Undertakings replies.
CONTENT: in accordance with the tasks conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the Court
presents to the European Parliament and to the Council, in the context of the discharge procedure, a Statement of Assurance as to the
reliability of the annual accounts of each institution, body or agency of the EU, and the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying
them, on the basis of an independent external audit.
This audit concerned, amongst others, the annual accounts of the ENIAC Joint Undertaking.
Statement of assurance: pursuant to the provisions of Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the Court
has audited:
the annual accounts of the ENIAC Joint Undertaking, which comprise the financial statements and the reports on the implementation
of the budget for the financial year ended 31 December 2013;
the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying those accounts.
Opinion on the reliability of the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the Joint Undertakings annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects,
its financial position as at 31 December 2013 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with
the provisions of its financial rules and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer.
Basis for a qualified opinion on the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions: the Court noted that, except for the possible effects of
the matter described below, the transactions underlying the annual accounts of the Joint Undertaking for the financial year ended 31
December 2013 are, in all material respects, legal and regular.
The administrative agreements established between the Joint Undertaking and the NFAs of the Member States provide in principle that the
NFAs will perform audits on behalf of the Joint Undertaking. The Joint Undertakings ex-post audit strategy relies heavily on the NFAs to audit
project cost claims. In 2013, the Joint Undertaking itself carried out a limited review of cost claims which is not sufficient to give assurance on
the error rate reported by the Joint Undertaking.
As a consequence, the Court concluded that the information available on the implementation of the Joint Undertakings ex post audit strategy
was not sufficient to conclude whether this key control tool is functioning effectively . The Court issued a qualified opinion for ENIAC because
there was insufficient appropriate audit evidence on which to base the opinion and the possible effects are considered material but not
pervasive.
At the end of this audit, the Court concluded the following:
internal audit function: the Commissions Internal Audit Service audited the adequacy and effectiveness of the Grant Management
process and concluded that the procedures in place are providing enough assurance. The two main recommendations included in the
report, dealing with the setting up of a documented process for selecting experts and control over access rights, were addressed by
the Joint Undertaking;
conflicts of interest: ENIAC has set up comprehensive measures to prevent conflicts of interest and published them on its website.
Further improvements should be considered such as setting up a database to include all information related to conflicts of interest.

Cross-cutting remarks for all the Joint undertakings: the prevention of conflicts of interest is addressed by most Joint Undertakings by the
adoption of specific rules and by the development of tools to document all related information. An Interim Evaluation was performed over 2013
assessing all Joint Undertakings in terms of relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and research quality. The reports, while positive, also
highlighted areas for further improvement.
Joint Undertakings replies: the Joint Undertaking replied point by point to all of the technical elements highlighted by the Court of Auditors.
ARTEMIS submitted a common action plan with ENIAC to mitigate this qualified opinion. Visits to National Funding Authorities (NFA) took
place already in Germany, Belgium and France, followed by additional documentation; the assessment reports are in the process of being
elaborated. The results may be found in the Court of Auditors report.
As regards the activities of the Joint Undertaking in 2013, the report refers to the Annual Activity Report 2013 which can be found at
www.eniac.eu.
It should be noted that the budget for the Joint Undertaking for 2013 amounted to EUR 172 608 784.19 in commitment appropriations and
EUR 36 609 726.23 in payment appropriations.
Remark: the ARTEMIS and ENIAC Joint Undertakings were merged to create the Electronic Components and Systems for European
Leadership Joint Technology Initiative (ECSEL JTI). In addition to combining the ARTEMIS initiative on embedded systems and the ENIAC
initiative on nano-electronics, ECSEL JTI will incorporate research and innovation on smart systems. ECSEL JTI started in June 2014 and will
run for 10 years.

2014/2135(DEC) - 30/01/2015 Document attached to the procedure
Having examined the revenue and expenditure accounts for the financial year 2013 and the balance sheet at 31 December 2013 of the ENIAC
Joint Undertaking, and the report by the Court of Auditors on the annual accounts of the ENIAC Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013,
accompanied by the ENIAC Joint Undertaking's replies to the Court's observations, the Council recommended the European Parliament to
give a discharge to the Executive Director of the ECSEL Joint Undertaking in respect of the implementation of the budget of the ENIAC Joint
Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
Overall, the Council welcomes the Court's opinion that, in all material respects, the ENIAC Joint Undertaking's annual accounts fairly present
the financial position as at 31 December 2013 and the results of operations and cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with the
provisions of the ENIAC Joint Undertaking's Financial Rules.
However, the Council regretted the Court's qualified opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts , based
on the Court's assessment that the ENIAC Joint Undertaking's ex-post audit strategy does not provide sufficient assurance that this key control
tool is functioning effectively. The Council urged the ECSEL Joint Undertaking as the successor Joint Undertaking to examine the audit
strategies of the National Funding Authorities (NFAs), to ensure that all NFAs deliver their audit reports in time and that they include all
relevant information for the ex-post audit strategy to function effectively.
In addition, the following observations were made:
carry-overs: with regard to the budget implementation, the Council called on the ECSEL Joint Undertaking to pay due attention to the
proper implementation of commitment and payment appropriations in the course of the budgetary year and to decommit if necessary
in order to avoid excessive carry-overs;
conflicts of interest: the Council requested the putting in place a proper procedure for dealing with conflict of interests situations;
research results: it invited the ECSEL Joint Undertaking to further improve the monitoring and reporting of the research results.
Finally, the Council called on the ECSEL Joint Undertaking to take dully into account the recommendations put forward in the Commission's
Second Interim Evaluation report and to implement them.

2014/2135(DEC) - 31/03/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Ryszard CZARNECKI (ECR, PL) on discharge in respect of the implementation of
the budget of the ENIAC Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
The committee called on Parliament to postpone its decision on granting the Executive Director of the ECSEL Joint Undertaking discharge in
respect of the implementation of the ENIAC Joint Undertakings budget for the financial year 2013. It made a number of recommendations that
needed to be taken into account when the discharge is granted, in addition to the general recommendations that appear in the draft resolution
on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies.
·

Budgetary and financial management: Members were deeply concerned that the Court issued a qualified opinion, for a third
consecutive year, on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the annual accounts, on the grounds of not being able
to conclude whether or not the ex post audit strategy provided sufficient assurance with respect to the legality and regularity of the
underlying transactions. The qualified opinion put into question the willingness of the Joint Undertaking to be effective and efficient .
Members acknowledged that the Joint Undertaking had submitted an action plan which aimed to remedy the deficiencies identified
by the Court in its qualified opinion, and they looked forward to the successful implementation of the entire action plan. They called
on the Joint Undertaking to provide a first interim evaluation report on the implementation of the action plan. At the same time, the
committee was concerned that there was limited information available regarding the evaluation of the Member States' and AENEAS'
contributions corresponding to the actual level of Union payments. It called on the Joint Undertaking to submit a report to the
discharge authority concerning the contributions of all members other than the Commission, including the application of the
evaluation rules, together with an assessment by the Commission.

·

Conflicts of interests: Members acknowledged that the Joint Undertaking had taken comprehensive measures to prevent conflicts of
interest and had published them on its website. They called on the Joint Undertaking to inform the discharge authority about the
progress of the database concerning conflicts of interest.

Other observations: Members went on to make a series of observation on the legal framework of the Undertaking, the calls for proposals
underway and the system of internal control at the Undertaking. Lastly, they noted that between September 2012 and February 2013, the
Commission carried out its Second Interim Evaluation in order to assess the Joint Undertaking and the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking in terms of
relevance, effectiveness, efficiency and research quality. They took note that the report was issued in May 2013 and contained several
recommendations for the Joint Undertaking.

2014/2135(DEC) - 29/04/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament decided by 439 votes to 248, with 8 abstentions, to postpone its decision on granting the Executive Director of the
ECSEL Joint Undertaking discharge in respect of the implementation of the ENIAC Joint Undertakings budget for the financial year 2013. It
postponed the closure of the accounts of the ECSEL accounts for the financial year 2013.
Parliament also adopted by 659 votes to 19, with 9 abstentions, a resolution containing a number recommendations that form an integral part
of the discharge decision and as well as the general recommendations that appear in the resolution on performance, financial management
and control of EU agencies:
Budgetary and financial management: Parliament was deeply concerned that the Court issued a qualified opinion, for a third
consecutive year, on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the annual accounts, on the grounds of not being able to
conclude whether or not the ex post audit strategy provided sufficient assurance with respect to the legality and regularity of the
underlying transactions. The qualified opinion put into question the willingness of the Joint Undertaking to be effective and efficient .
Members acknowledged that the Joint Undertaking had submitted an action plan which aimed to remedy the deficiencies identified by
the Court in its qualified opinion, and they looked forward to the successful implementation of the entire action plan. Parliament called
on the Joint Undertaking to provide a first interim evaluation report on the implementation of the action plan. At the same time,
Parliament was concerned that there was limited information available regarding the evaluation of the Member States' and AENEAS'
contributions corresponding to the actual level of Union payments. It called on the Joint Undertaking to submit a report to the
discharge authority concerning the contributions of all members other than the Commission, including the application of the evaluation
rules, together with an assessment by the Commission.
Conflicts of interests: Parliament acknowledged that the Joint Undertaking has taken comprehensive measures to prevent conflicts of
interest and has published them on its website; notes from the Court's report that further improvements should be considered such as
setting up a database to include all information concerning conflicts of interest. It recalled that the discharge authority has previously
requested the Court to draw up a special report on the capacity of the joint undertakings, together with their private partners, to ensure
added value and efficient execution of Union research, technological development and demonstration programmes.
Other observations: Parliament went on to make a series of observation on the legal framework of the Undertaking, the calls for proposals
underway and the system of internal control at the Undertaking. It noted that between September 2012 and February 2013, the Commission
carried out its Second Interim Evaluation in order to assess the Joint Undertaking and the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking in terms of relevance,
effectiveness, efficiency and research quality. It also noted that the report was issued in May 2013 and contained several recommendations for
the Joint Undertaking.

2014/2135(DEC) - 02/10/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the 2nd report by Ryszard CZARNECKI (ECR, PL) and called on the European Parliament to
grant discharge to the Executive Director of the ENIAC Joint Undertaking in respect of the implementation of the budget of the ENIAC Joint
Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
Members called on Parliament to approve the closure of ENIACs accounts.
Budgetary and financial management: Members recalled that the Court of Auditors stated that the 2013 annual accounts of the Joint
Undertaking presented fairly, in all material respects, its financial position as of 31 December 2013 and the results of its operations and its
cash flows for the year-end.
They recalled that the Court issued a qualified opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the annual accounts, on the
grounds of not being able to conclude whether or not the ex post audit strategy, which relied heavily on the National Funding Authorities
(NFAs) auditing project cost claims, provided sufficient assurance with respect to the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions.
Noting from the Joint Undertaking that the Court would take steps in order to obtain sufficient assurances on the audits carried out by the
NFAs, Members acknowledged that the ECSEL JTI was making further assessments of the national assurance systems following the merger
of the Joint Undertaking and ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking.
The Joint Undertaking established the practical arrangements for ex post audits concerning the administrative agreements signed with the
NFAs. Members welcomed the fact that in order to complement the information obtained by the Joint Undertaking, the Court acquired
additional information directly from the NFAs in order to express an opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the
account.
They acknowledged from the Joint Undertaking that it made progress in implementing the action plan aimed at remedying the deficiencies
identified by the Court in its qualified opinion. They also noted that the Joint Undertaking developed a new methodology for residual error rate
estimation, similar to the one used by the Commission services in charge of co-managed funding.
Private sector contributions: Members ascertained from the Joint Undertaking that the Member States contributions were under the level of 1.8
as requested by the Joint Undertakings statute in order to comply with the limitations imposed by the State aid rules. For the industrial
participants in large pilot line projects the total public funding could exceed 25 % while the Joint Undertakings statute required allocating the
same reimbursement rate to each participant. The committee acknowledged that the lower contributions from the Members States were more
than compensated by increased private sector contributions, carrying 65% of the total costs and thus reaching a very high leverage of the
Union funding.

Monitoring and reporting of research results: lastly, Members recalled that the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) Decision established a
monitoring and reporting system related to the protection, dissemination and transfer of research results. They acknowledged from the Joint
Undertaking that 211.5 publications and 16.6 patents per EUR 10 000 000 of Union grants shows a high productivity of its research results and
that it is compliant with all requests expressed so far by the FP7 coordinators.

2014/2135(DEC) - 27/10/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the ENIAC Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2015/2212 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of
the ENIAC Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the Executive Director of the ECSEL Joint Undertaking in
respect of the implementation of the ENIAC Joint Undertaking's budget for the financial year 2013. It approved the closure of the accounts of
the Joint Undertaking in a parallel decision (Decision (EU) 2015/2213).
This decision is in line with the European Parliament's second resolution adopted on 27 October 2015 and comprises a series of observations
that form an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 27 October 2015).
Amongst the main observations made, Parliament recalled that the Court issued a qualified opinion on the legality and regularity of the
transactions underlying the annual accounts, on the grounds of not being able to conclude whether or not the ex post audit strategy provided
sufficient assurance with respect to the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions.
The resolution acknowledged furthermore that the ECSEL JTI is making further assessments of the national assurance systems following the
merger of the Joint Undertaking and ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking.

2014/2135(DEC) - 27/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 565 votes to 106, with 20 abstentions, a decision to grant discharge to the Executive Director of the
ENIAC Joint Undertaking in respect of the implementation of the budget of the ENIAC Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
At the same time, Parliament approved the closure of ENIACs accounts.
Budgetary and financial management: Parliament recalled that the Court of Auditors stated that the 2013 annual accounts of the Joint
Undertaking presented fairly, in all material respects, its financial position as of 31 December 2013 and the results of its operations and its
cash flows for the year-end.
It recalled that the Court issued a qualified opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the annual accounts, on the
grounds of not being able to conclude whether or not the ex post audit strategy, which relied heavily on the National Funding Authorities
(NFAs) auditing project cost claims, provided sufficient assurance with respect to the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions.
Noting from the Joint Undertaking that the Court would take steps in order to obtain sufficient assurances on the audits carried out by the
NFAs, Members acknowledged that the ECSEL JTI was making further assessments of the national assurance systems following the merger
of the Joint Undertaking and ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking.
The Joint Undertaking established the practical arrangements for ex post audits concerning the administrative agreements signed with the
NFAs. Parliament welcomed the fact that in order to complement the information obtained by the Joint Undertaking, the Court acquired
additional information directly from the NFAs in order to express an opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the
account.
It acknowledged from the Joint Undertaking that it made progress in implementing the action plan aimed at remedying the deficiencies
identified by the Court in its qualified opinion. Parliament also noted that the Joint Undertaking developed a new methodology for residual error
rate estimation, similar to the one used by the Commission services in charge of co-managed funding.
Private sector contributions: Parliament ascertained from the Joint Undertaking that the Member States contributions were under the level of
1.8 as requested by the Joint Undertakings statute in order to comply with the limitations imposed by the State aid rules. For the industrial
participants in large pilot line projects the total public funding could exceed 25 % while the Joint Undertakings statute required allocating the
same reimbursement rate to each participant. Moreover, Members acknowledged that the lower contributions from the Members States were
more than compensated by increased private sector contributions, carrying 65% of the total costs and thus reaching a very high leverage of
the Union funding.
Prevention and management of conflicts of interests and transparency: Parliament noted that a comprehensive database including all
identified information related to conflicts of interests as well as the measures taken has been established and is regularly maintained.
Monitoring and reporting of research results: lastly, Parliament recalled that the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) Decision established a
monitoring and reporting system related to the protection, dissemination and transfer of research results. It acknowledged from the Joint
Undertaking that 211.5 publications and 16.6 patents per EUR 10 000 000 of Union grants shows a high productivity of its research results and
that it is compliant with all requests expressed so far by the FP7 coordinators.

