Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Decision

2014/0107(COD)

Procedure completed

Cableway installations
Repealing Directive 2000/9/EC 1994/0011(COD)
Subject
2.10.03 Standardisation, EC/EU standards and trade mark, certification,
compliance
3.20 Transport policy in general
3.40.03 Motor industry, cycle and motorcycle, commercial and agricultural
vehicles
4.60.08 Safety of products and services, product liability

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
IMCO

Rapporteur

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Appointed
17/07/2014

LÓPEZ-ISTÚRIZ
WHITE Antonio
Shadow rapporteur

ANDERSON Lucy

TREBESIUS Ulrike

CHARANZOVÁ Dita

DURAND Pascal
Former committee responsible
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Committee for opinion
ITRE

TRAN

Industry, Research and Energy

Transport and Tourism

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Former committee for opinion
ITRE
TRAN

Industry, Research and Energy
Transport and Tourism

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Mobility and Transport

Commissioner
BULC Violeta

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
27/03/2014

Legislative proposal published

COM(2014)0187

Summary

02/04/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

04/12/2014

Debate in Council

17/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

17/03/2015

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

25/03/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0063/2015

10/11/2015

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE610.758
GEDA/A/(2015)010803

19/01/2016

Debate in Parliament

20/01/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

20/01/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/02/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

12/02/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

09/03/2016

Final act signed

31/03/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

Summary

T8-0014/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0107(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Decision
Repealing Directive 2000/9/EC 1994/0011(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

IMCO/8/00405

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2014)0187

27/03/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0116

27/03/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0117

27/03/2014

EC

CES2911/2014

09/07/2014

ESC

Economic and Social Committee: opinion, report

Summary

Committee draft report

PE537.493

27/11/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE544.306

16/01/2015

EP

A8-0063/2015

25/03/2015

EP

GEDA/A/(2015)010803

12/10/2015

CSL

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single
reading

T8-0014/2016

20/01/2016

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2016)191

16/03/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading
Coreper letter confirming interinstitutional
agreement

Summary

Summary

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2016/424
OJ L 081 31.03.2016, p. 0001 Summary
Corrigendum to final act 32016R0424R(01)
OJ L 266 30.09.2016, p. 0008

2014/0107(COD) - 27/03/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to revise Directive 2000/9/EC in order to ensure that cableway installations fulfil the requirements providing for a high level
protection of and safety of users while guaranteeing the functioning of the internal market for subsystems and safety components.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: Directive 2000/9/EC relating to cableway installations designed to carry persons became applicable on 3 May 2002. It sets
out essential requirements with which cableway installations, their infrastructure, subsystems and safety components must comply in order to
be safe. The main types of cableway installations covered by Directive 2000/9/EC are funiculars, gondolas, detachable chair lifts, fixed-grip
chair lifts, aerial tramways, funitels, combined installations (made of several cableway types, such as those of gondolas and chairlifts) and drag
lifts.
Experience from the implementation of Directive 2000/9/EC showed the need to modify some of its provisions in order to clarify and update
them and ensure thus legal certainty mainly as regards the: (i) scope, in particular with regard to new types of cableway installations; (ii) lack of
an appropriate range of conformity assessment procedures for subsystems, which has led to divergent interpretations and implementation of
the conformity assessment of subsystems.
It is also necessary to align Directive 2000/9/EC to the goods package adopted in 2008 and in particular to the NLF Decision EC No 768/2008
establishing a common framework for the marketing of products (NLF Decision). The Commission has already proposed the alignment of nine
other Directives to the NLF Decision within an alignment package adopted on 21 November 2011.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the preferred solution consists of combining two options: (i) amending Directive 2000/9/EC; (ii) providing more
extensive guidance on the implementation of Directive 2000/9/EC with regard to its scope and of recommending the application of specific
conformity assessment procedures for the assessment of subsystems.
CONTENT: the proposal intends to replace Directive 2000/9/EC on cableway installations designed to carry persons by a Regulation. It lays
down rules on the design and construction of cableway installations designed to transport persons and on the making available on the market
and the free movement of subsystems and safety components for such installations.
The proposal intends to align Directive 2000/9/EC to the goods package adopted in 2008 and in particular to the NLF Decision EC No
768/2008.
Scope: the proposal clarifies and updates the existing scope:
in light of the development of new types of cableway installations, it is clarified that the exclusion of cableway installations used for
leisure purposes in fairgrounds or amusement parks does not apply to cableway installations that are intended for a dual function,
namely of transporting persons and for leisure activities;
the exclusion of certain cableway installations intended for agricultural or industrial purposes is maintained, but it clarifies that it also
covers cableway installations intended for the service of mountain shelters or huts that are not intended for the transport of the public;

the current exclusion of cable-operated ferries is also updated to all cable-operated installations where the users or carriers are
water-borne, such as cable-operated water ski installations;
the exclusions provided for in Directive 2000/9/EC relating to rack-and-pinion railways and chain-driven installations are not
reintroduced.
Obligations of economic operators: the proposal contains, with regard to subsystems and safety components, the typical provisions for
product-related Union harmonisation legislation and sets out the obligations of the relevant economic operators (manufacturers, authorised
representatives, importers and distributors), in accordance with the NLF Decision.
Harmonised standards: Regulation (EU) No 1025/2012 sets out a horizontal legal framework for European standardisation. Consequently the
provisions of Directive 2000/9/EC which cover the same aspects have not been reintroduced in this proposal for reasons of legal certainty.
Conformity assessment: the proposal keeps the requirement for a notified body intervention in the design and production phase of all
subsystems and safety components. It introduces a range of conformity assessment procedures for subsystems based on the conformity
assessment modules of the NLF Decision. In this framework, it also introduces the CE marking for subsystems.
Notified bodies: in line with the NLF Decision, the proposal reinforces the notification criteria for notified bodies and introduces specific
requirements for notifying authorities.
Application: the proposed Regulation will become applicable two years after its entry into force to allow manufacturers, notified bodies and
Member States time to adapt to the new requirements. However, the designation of notified bodies pursuant to the new requirements and
process needs to start shortly after the entry into force of this Regulation.
A transitional provision is foreseen for the certificates issued by notified bodies under Directive 2000/9/EC with regard to subsystems and
safety components so as to allow stocks to be absorbed and ensure a smooth transition to the new requirements.

2014/0107(COD) - 25/03/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection adopted the report by Antonio LÓPEZ-ISTÚRIZ WHITE (EPP, ES) on the
proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on cableway installations.
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should
amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Purpose and scope of the proposal: this Regulation applies to new cableway installations and covers subsystems and safety components
which are new to the Union market when they are placed on the market; that is to say they are either new subsystem and safety components
made by a manufacturer established in the Union or subsystems and safety components, whether new or second-hand, imported from a third
country.
Cableway installations are mainly lift systems, such as funicular railways, aerial ropeways, cable cars, gondolas, chairlifts drag lifts and other
installations for tourism or sport purpose.
The provisions of this Regulation are based on the precautionary principle. The Regulation shall not apply to:
cableway installations of historical construction, including cable-operated tramways, funicular railways and cliff railways, as identified
by national law, including subsystems and safety components specifically designed for them;
installations intended for agricultural or forestry purposes;
cableway installations for the service of mountain shelters and huts intended only for the transport of goods and specifically authorised
persons;
on-site or mobile equipment exclusively designed for leisure and amusement purposes and not as a means for transporting persons.
Entry into service of cableway installations: the subsystems and safety components should be incorporated into cableway installations only if
they enable the construction of cableway installations which satisfy the requirements of this Regulation and are not liable to endanger the
health or safety of persons or property when properly incorporated, maintained and operated in accordance with their intended purpose.
Safety analysis: the person responsible for the cableway installation, determined by a Member State in accordance with national law, shall
submit the safety report.
The safety analysis required for every cableway installation shall take into account every mode of operation envisaged taking into account the
local surroundings and the most adverse situations in order to ensure satisfactory safety conditions. The safety analysis shall also cover the
safety devices and their effect on the cableway installation and related subsystems that they bring into action.
Consistency with the New Legislative Framework (NLF): Members supported the alignment of the provisions to the goods package adopted in
2008 and in particular to the Decision No 768/2008/EC on a common framework for the marketing of products. The framework set out by the
NLF consists of provisions which are commonly used in EU product legislation.
Following the adoption of nine proposals which together form the "alignment package", the report proposed amendments seek to improve the
consistency of the text with the NLF in particular as regards the obligations of economic operators, the EU declaration of conformity, rules on
affixing the CE marking requirements, the information obligation incumbent on notifying authorities, the presumption of conformity of the
notified bodies and the information obligation on notified bodies.
Market surveillance: Members proposed the addition of a new Chapter IV on the Union market surveillance and control of subsystems and
safety components entering the Union market and the Union safeguard procedure.
In order to increase transparency and to reduce processing time, it is necessary to improve the existing safeguard procedure, with a view to
making it more efficient and drawing on the expertise available in the Member States. The existing system should:
be supplemented by a procedure under which interested parties are informed of measures intended to be taken with regard to
subsystems and safety components presenting a risk to the health or safety of persons;

allow market surveillance authorities, in cooperation with the relevant economic operators, to act at an earlier stage in respect of such
subsystems and safety components.
When matters relating to this Regulation, other than its implementation or infringements, are being examined, the European Parliament should
in line with existing practice receive full information and documentation and an invitation to attend such meetings.

2014/0107(COD) - 20/01/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 639 votes to 69, with 2 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on cableway installations.
Parliament?s position, adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Subject matter and scope: this Regulation:
lays down rules on the making available on the market and the free movement of subsystems and safety components for cableway
installations ;
contains rules on the design, construction and entry into service of new cableway installations;
applies to new cableway installations designed to transport persons, to modifications of cableway installations requiring a new
authorisation, and to subsystems and safety components for cableway installations.
Cableway installations are mainly lift systems, such as funicular railways, aerial ropeways (cable cars, gondolas, chairlifts) and drag lift.
The Regulation does not apply to the following:
lifts covered by Directive 2014/33/EU;
cableway installations that are categorised by Member States as historic, cultural or heritage installations, that entered into service
before 1 January 1986 and that are still in operation, and that have not had any significant changes in design or construction, including
subsystems and safety components specifically designed for them;
installations intended for agricultural or forestry purposes;
cableway installations for the service of mountain shelters and huts intended only for the transport of goods and specifically authorised
persons;
Entry into service of cableway installations: Member States shall take all appropriate measures to determine the procedures for ensuring that
the subsystems and safety components are incorporated into cableway installations only if they enable the construction of cableway
installations which comply with this Regulation and are not liable to endanger the health or safety of persons or property when properly
installed, maintained and operated in accordance with their intended purpose.
Safety analysis: the person responsible for the cableway installation, determined by a Member State in accordance with national law, shall
carry out a safety analysis of the planned cableway installation or have such a safety analysis carried out. The safety analysis required for
each cableway installation shall take into account all modes of operation envisaged and ensure that the design and configuration of the
cableway installation takes account of the local surroundings and the most adverse situations in order to ensure satisfactory safety conditions.
The analysis shall also cover the safety devices and their effects on the cableway installation and related subsystems that they bring into
action so that the safety devices are capable of reacting to an initial breakdown or failure detected so as to remain either in a state that
guarantees safety, in a lower operating mode or in a fail-safe state.
The result of the safety analysis shall be included in a safety report.
Each Member State shall lay down procedures for authorising the construction and the entry into service of cableway installations which are
located within its territory.
Consistency with the New Legislative Framework (NLF): Parliament approved the alignment of the provisions to the goods package adopted in
2008 and in particular to the Decision No 768/2008/EC on a common framework for the marketing of products. The framework set out by the
NLF consists of provisions which are commonly used in EU product legislation.
The amendments seek to improve the consistency of the text with the NLF. They state inter alia that:
manufacturers shall indicate on the subsystem or the safety component their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark
and the postal address at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on the packaging or in a document
accompanying the subsystem or safety component. Where the manufacturer indicates a website address, he shall ensure that the
information on that website is accessible and kept updated;
where a large number of subsystems or safety components are delivered to a single economic operator or user, the batch or
consignment concerned may be accompanied by a single copy of the EU declaration of conformity;
the CE marking shall be affixed visibly, legibly and indelibly to the subsystem or the safety component or to its data plate. Where that
is not possible or not warranted on account of the nature of the subsystem or the safety component, it shall be affixed to the packaging
and to the accompanying documents.
Right to appeal: interested parties should have the right to appeal against the result of a conformity assessment carried out by a notified body.
For that reason, Members proposed that notified bodies shall ensure that an appeal procedure against their decisions is available.
Market surveillance: Parliament proposed the addition of a new provisions on the Union market surveillance and control of subsystems and
safety components entering the Union market and the Union safeguard procedure.
Penalties: the penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive and may be increased where the relevant economic
operator has previously committed a similar infringement of this Regulation.

2014/0107(COD) - 09/03/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to update internal market rules applicable to cableway installations in order to ensure that these installations conform to
requirements guaranteeing a high level of protection of the health and safety of persons and ensuring the proper functioning of the internal
market for subsystems of cableway installations and safety components.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/424 of the European Parliament and of the Council on cableway installations and repealing
Directive 2000/9/EC.
CONTENT: the new Regulation replaces Directive 2000/9/EC. It lays down rules on the making available on the market and the free
movement of subsystems and safety components for cableway installations. It also contains rules on the design, construction and entry into
service of new cableway installations.
Scope: the Regulation applies to cableway installations designed to transport persons used in particular in high-altitude tourist resorts, in urban
transport facilities or in sports facilities. Cableway installations are mainly lift systems, such as funicular railways, aerial ropeways (cable cars,
gondolas, chairlifts) and drag lifts.
Excluded from the scope of the Regulation are: lifts; cableway installations that are categorised by Member States as historic, cultural or
heritage installations, that entered into service before 1 January 1986 and that are still in operation; installations intended for agricultural or
forestry purposes; cableway installations for the service of mountain shelters.
The Regulation applies to new cableway installations, to modifications of cableway installations requiring a new authorisation and covers
subsystems and safety components that are new to the Union market when they are placed on it.
Safety analysis, entry into service, authorisation and operation of cableway installations: the new Regulation specifies the following:
Member States should take the necessary steps to ensure that cableway installations enter into service only if they comply with the
Regulation and are not liable to endanger the health or safety of persons or property when properly installed, maintained and operated
in accordance with their intended purpose;
the person responsible for the cableway installation, determined by a Member State, shall carry out a safety analysis of the planned
cableway installation. The safety analysis shall ensure that the design and configuration of the cableway installation takes account of
the local surroundings and the most adverse situations in order to ensure satisfactory safety conditions. The safety analysis shall also
cover the safety devices. The result of the safety analysis shall be included in a safety report;
each Member State shall lay down procedures for authorising the construction and the entry into service of cableway installations
which are located within its territory.
Obligations of economic operators (manufacturers, importers, distributors): all economic operators intervening in the supply and distribution
chain should take appropriate measures to ensure that they only make available on the market subsystems and safety components which are
in conformity with the Regulation.
In particular, manufacturers shall ensure, when placing their subsystems or safety components on the market or when incorporating them into
a cableway installation, that the former have been designed and manufactured in accordance with the essential requirements on health and
safety set out in Annex II. They must:
implement the conformity assessment procedures established by the Regulation;
draw up an EU declaration of conformity and affix the CE marking;
keep the technical documentation and the EU declaration of conformity for 30 years after the subsystem or the safety component has
been placed on the market;
carry out sample testing of subsystems or safety components made available on the market, investigate, and, if necessary, keep a
register of complaints, of non-conforming subsystems and safety components and recalls of such subsystems and safety components,
and shall keep distributors informed of any such monitoring;
ensure that subsystems or safety components bear a type, batch or serial number or other element allowing their identification;
indicate on the subsystem or the safety component their name, registered trade name or registered trade mark and the postal address
at which they can be contacted or, where that is not possible, on the packaging or in a document accompanying the subsystem or
safety component;
ensure that instructions and safety information, as well as any labelling, is clear, understandable, intelligible and legible;
further to a reasoned request from a competent national authority, provide it with all the information and documentation necessary to
demonstrate the conformity of the subsystem or the safety component with this Regulation, in a language which can be easily
understood by that authority
immediately take the corrective measures necessary to bring that subsystem or safety component into conformity, to withdraw it or
recall it, if appropriate.
For their part, importers must make sure that the subsystems or safety components they place on the market comply with the essential
requirements and which do not present a risk. They must also make sure that conformity assessment procedures have been carried out and
that subsystem and safety component marking and documentation drawn up by manufacturers are available for inspection by the competent
national authorities.
CE marking: before the subsystem or the safety component is placed on the market, the CE marking shall be affixed visibly, legibly and
indelibly to the subsystem or the safety component or to its data plate, or where that is not possible, it shall be affixed to the packaging and to
the accompanying documents. The CE marking and the identification number may be followed by any other mark indicating a special risk or
use. Member States shall take appropriate action in the event of improper use of that marking.
Notifying authorities: the Regulation sets requirements for notifying authorities responsible for conformity assessment bodies. These bodies
must apply the conformity assessment procedures without creating unnecessary burdens for economic operators. Interested parties have the
right to appeal against the result of a conformity assessment carried out by a notified body.
Market surveillance: in the context of aligning the legislation on subsystems and safety components with the new legislative framework for the
marketing of products, and in order to ensure legal certainty, the rules on Union market surveillance and control of products entering the Union
market provided for in Regulation (EC) No 765/2008 apply to subsystems or safety components referred to in the Regulation.

The new Regulation also contains provisions regarding procedures at national level for dealing with subsystems or safety components
presenting a risk, Union safeguard procedures, and compliant subsystems or safety components which present a risk to health and safety.
Transitional provisions: Member States shall not impede the making available on the market of subsystems or safety components which are in
conformity with Directive 2009/9/EC and which were placed on the market before 21 April 2018.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 20.4.2016.
APPLICATION: from 21.4.2018, with the exception on certain provisions which are applicable from 21.10.2016 or from 21.3.2018.

