Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2014/0005(COD)

Procedure completed

Trade in certain goods which could be used for capital punishment, torture
or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment
Amending Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005
See also 2010/2685(RSP)
Subject
6.10.08 Fundamental freedoms, human rights, democracy in general
6.20.02 Export/import control, trade defence

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
INTA

Rapporteur

International Trade

Appointed
21/01/2015

SCHAAKE Marietje
Shadow rapporteur

FISAS AYXELÀ
Santiago

RODRÍGUEZ-PIÑERO
FERNÁNDEZ Inmaculada

LOONES Sander

FORENZA Eleonora

KELLER Ska

BEGHIN Tiziana
Former committee responsible
AFET

Foreign Affairs

Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
03/12/2014

LOCHBIHLER Barbara
Former committee for opinion
INTA

International Trade

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission
Trade

Commissioner
ASHTON Catherine

Key events
14/01/2014

Legislative proposal published

24/02/2014

Committee referral announced in

COM(2014)0001

Summary

Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

22/09/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

29/09/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

26/10/2015

Debate in Parliament

27/10/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

27/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/10/2015

Matter referred back to the committee
responsible

14/07/2016

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

04/10/2016

Debate in Parliament

04/10/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

14/11/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

23/11/2016

Final act signed

23/11/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

13/12/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

A8-0267/2015

Summary

T8-0368/2015

Summary

T8-0369/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0005(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005
See also 2010/2685(RSP)

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 059-p4; Treaty on the
Functioning of the EU TFEU 207

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

INTA/8/00332

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal
Committee draft report
Committee opinion

AFET

COM(2014)0001

14/01/2014

EC

PE554.890

20/05/2015

EP

PE555.011

06/07/2015

EP

Summary

Amendments tabled in committee

PE560.865

14/07/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0267/2015

29/09/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at
1st reading/single reading

T8-0368/2015

27/10/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0369/2016

04/10/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)805

29/11/2016

Additional information
Research document

Briefing

European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2016/2134
OJ L 338 13.12.2016, p. 0001 Summary
Corrigendum to final act 32016R2134R(03)
OJ L 098 11.04.2017, p. 0044
Corrigendum to final act 32016R2134R(04)
OJ L 157 20.06.2017, p. 0022
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2014/0005(COD) - 14/01/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to amend Council Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 concerning trade in certain goods which could be used for capital punishment,
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: in June 2005, the Council of the European Union adopted Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 concerning trade in certain goods
which could be used for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. The Regulation entered into
force on 30 July 2006.
In response to calls from the European Parliament in 2010 and indications that medicines exported from the Union had been used for capital
punishment in a third country, the lists of prohibited and controlled goods in Annexes II and III to that Regulation were amended by means of
Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1352/2011.
The Commission also started a process to review Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 in its entirety, responding in particular to a Resolution of the
European Parliament of 17 June 2010. In spring 2012, the Commission issued a call for applications with a view to establishing a Group of
Experts to assist it with this review. During the period from July 2012 to July 2013, the Group of Experts met six times in Brussels with relevant
Commission services.
CONTENT: the main amendments that the Commission proposes to make to Council Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 focus on the following:
Export controls targeting capital punishment: given these firm international commitments under either Protocol No 13 to the European
Convention on Human Rights or, the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, exports to the States
that are parties to one of them need not be subject to specific authorisation in order to prevent the relevant goods from being used for capital
punishment and can be covered by a general export authorisation.
According to the proposal, such authorisation should be subject to appropriate conditions to avoid the diversion of the goods to a country that
has not abolished capital punishment without prior scrutiny by the competent authorities. The general authorisation should, therefore, only
apply where the end-user of the exported goods is established in the country of destination and no re-export to another country takes place. If
these conditions are not met, a request for a specific or global authorisation should be made to the competent authorities.
Additional measures concerning listed goods: the proposal prohibits brokers in the Union from providing brokering services in relation to goods
whose export and import are prohibited as such goods have no practical use other than for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment. Prohibiting the provision of such services serves the purpose of protecting public morals.
Where controls on exports are applied, the provision of brokering services and the supply of technical assistance in relation to any of the listed

goods should be prohibited, if the broker or supplier of technical assistance is aware that the relevant goods are or may be intended for capital
punishment, when the controls are applied to prevent use for such punishment, or for torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment, when the controls are intended to prevent such use.
Definition of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment: the definition in Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 currently
covers acts inflicting significant pain or suffering, whereas the definition of torture refers to severe pain or suffering.
Instead of being based on different levels of pain or suffering, the distinction between these types of acts should take account of the presence
or absence of an intention to inflict pain or suffering and of the use of pain or suffering for a purpose included in the definition of torture.
The definition of other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, which is not found in the Convention, should be amended to align
it with the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights. The Commission also considers it appropriate to clarify the meaning of the term
lawful penalties in the definitions of torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, taking into account this case-law
and the Unions policy on capital punishment.
Exchange of information between customs authorities: the proposal requires customs authorities to share certain information with other
customs authorities and, when they detect prohibited exports or imports of goods or exports of goods for which the required authorisation has
not been granted, to inform the relevant authorities with a view to imposing penalties on the economic operator that committed the
infringement.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2014/0005(COD) - 29/09/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on International Trade adopted the report by Marietje SCHAAKE (ADLE, NL) on the proposal for a regulation of the European
Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 concerning trade in certain goods which could be used for
capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Parliaments position adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amends the proposal as follows:
Definition of broker: Members feel that the EU should also be able to enforce this Regulation when EU nationals or legal persons established
in the EU are involved in transactions that take place outside the Union territory.
Prohibition of commercial marketing and promotion: online and offline commercial marketing and promotion activities within the Union, by any
natural or legal person or partnership, for the purpose of the transfer of goods listed in Annex II shall be prohibited.
Targeted end-use clause: Members propose to insert such a clause in order for Member States to suspend or halt the transfer of
security-related items not listed in Annexes II and III that clearly have no practical use other than for the purposes of capital punishment,
torture or other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment or punishment, or where there are reasonable grounds to believe that the transfer of
those items would lead to the facilitation or the commission of capital punishment, torture or other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment or
punishment. Powers granted under the targeted end-use clause should not extend to medical products that could be used for the purpose of
capital punishment,
Criteria for granting export authorisations: the amended text stipulates that the competent authority shall not grant any authorisation when
there are reasonable grounds to believe that goods listed in Annex III and Annex IIIa might be used for torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, including judicial corporal punishment, by a law enforcement authority or any natural or legal person in a
third country.
The competent authority shall take into account available international court judgements and findings of the competent bodies of the UN, the
Council of Europe and the EU.
Transit authorisation requirement: Members proposed to strengthen the provision regarding authorisation in order to prevent the transit of
goods for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Technical assistance delivered independently of the supply of equipment: a supplier of technical assistance shall be prohibited from giving
instruction, advice, training or transmitting working knowledge or skills that could aid the commission of capital punishment, torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Exchange of best practices: Members consider that best practice guidelines built upon the experiences of both Member States and third
country authorities would set a clearer framework for determining the end-use of goods that could be misused for capital punishment, thereby
also facilitating legitimate exports for intended use, especially in the medicinal and pharmaceutical sector.
Non-listed goods: Members suggested introducing a catch-all clause to ensure that additional safeguards against the risks are in place with
regard to the export of goods not listed in the annexes. In such cases the Commission should adopt delegated acts adding items to Annex II,
Annex III or Annex IIIa.
Customs procedures: if a customs declaration is made concerning goods listed in Annex II, III, or IIIa and it is confirmed that no authorisation
has been granted pursuant to this Regulation for the intended export or import, the customs authorities shall detain the goods declared and
draw attention to the possibility to apply for an authorisation pursuant to the Regulation. If the competent authority dismisses such an
application, the customs authorities shall dispose of the detained goods.
Delegation of power: the delegation of powers has been carried out under Regulation (EU) 37/2014 (the "Trade Omnibus I"). Consequently,
provisions on the delegation of powers in the current proposal are redundant and are deleted.
Anti-Torture Coordination Group: Members proposed the setting up of Coordination Group chaired by a representative of the Commission.
Each Member State shall appoint a representative to this Group. It shall examine any question concerning the application of the Regulation
and take appropriate measures to establish direct cooperation and exchange of information between competent authorities.
Report: three years after the entry into force of the Regulation and every three years thereafter, the Commission shall review the

implementation of the Regulation and present a comprehensive report which may include proposals for its amendment.
The Commission shall assess whether rules on penalties laid down by Member States are of a similar nature and effect.
Annex II Part 2: Members deleted from the Annex certain countries that have not abolished the death penalty or have not ratified without
reservation the 2nd Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (Benin, Madagascar, Liberia, Mongolia and
Sao Tomé-et-Principe).

2014/0005(COD) - 27/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, partial vote at 1st reading/single
reading
The European Parliament adopted amendments to the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending
Council Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 concerning trade in certain goods which could be used for capital punishment, torture or other cruel,
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
The matter had been referred back to the competent committee for re-consideration. The vote on the legislative resolution has been put back
to a later session.
The main amendments adopted in plenary are the following:
Definition of broker: Parliament feels that the EU should also be able to enforce this Regulation when EU nationals or legal
persons established in the EU are involved in transactions that take place outside the Union territory. Prohibiting the provision of such services
serves the purpose of protecting public morals and respecting the principles of human dignity which underpin European values, as embodied
in the Treaty on European Union and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.
Prohibition of commercial marketing and promotion: any transit of goods listed in Annex II (banned from import and export) shall be prohibited,
irrespective of the origin of such goods, unless it is demonstrated that, in the country to which the goods will be exported, such goods will be
used for the exclusive purpose of public display in a museum in view of their historic significance.
Similarly, online and offline commercial marketing and promotion activities within the Union, by any natural or legal person or partnership, for
the purpose of the transfer of goods listed in Annex II shall be prohibited.
All companies marketing security equipment must be made aware of the fact that such equipment could be used for torture and other cruel,
degrading or inhuman treatment or punishment and that marketing such equipment may become prohibited and authorisations relating to it
may be withdrawn.
Targeted end-use clause: Parliament proposed to insert such a clause in order for Member States to suspend or halt the transfer of
security-related items not listed in Annexes II and III that clearly have no practical use other than for the purposes of capital punishment,
torture or other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment or punishment, or where there are reasonable grounds to believe that the transfer of
those items would lead to the facilitation or the commission of capital punishment, torture or other cruel, degrading or inhuman treatment or
punishment. Powers granted under the targeted end-use clause should not extend to medical products that could be used for the purpose of
capital punishment,
Criteria for granting export authorisations: the amended text stipulates that the competent authority shall not grant any authorisation when
there are reasonable grounds to believe that goods listed in Annex III and Annex IIIa might be used for torture or other cruel, inhuman or
degrading treatment or punishment, including judicial corporal punishment, by a law enforcement authority or any natural or legal person in a
third country.
The competent authority shall take into account available international court judgements and findings of the competent bodies of the UN, the
Council of Europe and the EU.
Transit authorisation requirement: Members proposed to strengthen the provision regarding authorisation in order to prevent the transit of
goods for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Technical assistance delivered independently of the supply of equipment: a supplier of technical assistance shall be prohibited from giving
instruction, advice, training or transmitting working knowledge or skills that could aid the commission of capital punishment, torture or other
cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Exchange of best practices: the Commission, in cooperation with competent authorities of the Member States and third countries where
appropriate, shall adopt best practice guidelines on the verification of end-use.
Non-listed goods: Members suggested introducing a catch-all clause to ensure that additional safeguards against the risks are in place with
regard to the export of goods not listed in the annexes. In such cases the Commission should adopt delegated acts adding items to Annex II,
Annex III or Annex IIIa. Medicinal products, as defined in Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council shall be
excluded from the scope of this prohibition.
Customs procedures: if a customs declaration is made concerning goods listed in Annex II, III, or IIIa and it is confirmed that no authorisation
has been granted pursuant to this Regulation for the intended export or import, the customs authorities shall detain the goods declared and
draw attention to the possibility to apply for an authorisation pursuant to the Regulation. If the competent authority dismisses such an
application, the customs authorities shall dispose of the detained goods.
Delegation of power: the delegation of powers has been carried out under Regulation (EU) 37/2014 (the "Trade Omnibus I"). Consequently,
provisions on the delegation of powers in the current proposal are redundant and are deleted.
Anti-Torture Coordination Group: Parliament proposed the setting up of Coordination Group chaired by a representative of the Commission.
Each Member State shall appoint a representative to this Group. It shall examine any question concerning the application of the Regulation
and take appropriate measures to establish direct cooperation and exchange of information between competent authorities.
Report: three years after the entry into force of the Regulation and every three years thereafter, the Commission shall review the

implementation of the Regulation and present a comprehensive report which may include proposals for its amendment.
The Commission shall assess whether rules on penalties laid down by Member States are of a similar nature and effect.
Union General Export Authorisation No EU (Annex II Part 2): Members deleted from the Annex certain countries that have not abolished the
death penalty or have not ratified without reservation the 2nd Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights
(Benin, Madagascar, Liberia, Mongolia and Sao Tomé-et-Principe).

2014/0005(COD) - 04/10/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 612 votes to 11 with 54 abstentions a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 concerning trade in certain goods which could be
used for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
Parliaments position adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Prohibition of imports and exports: Parliament specified that Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 prohibit the export and import of goods listed in
Annex II to that Regulation and the supply of technical assistance in respect of such goods. Goods listed in Annex II have no practical use
other than for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. Where such goods are located in third
countries, brokers in the Union are prohibited from providing brokering services in relation to such goods.
Prohibition on training, promotion and advertising: as goods listed in Annex II to the Regulation have no practical use other than for capital
punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, the amended text:
prohibits brokers and suppliers of technical assistance from providing training on the use of such goods to third countries;
prohibits both the promotion of such goods in trade fairs or exhibitions in the Union, and the sale or purchase of advertising space in
print media or on the Internet and of advertising time on television or radio in relation to such goods.
Prohibition on transit: in order to prevent economic operators from deriving benefits from transporting goods which pass through the customs
territory of the Union on their way to a third country and which are intended to be used for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment, the text prohibits transport within the Union of such goods, if they are listed in Annex II.
By way of derogation, a transit of goods may be authorised if it is demonstrated that, in the country of destination, such goods will be used for
the exclusive purpose of public display in a museum in view of their historic significance.
In addition, transit of goods listed in Annex III or Annex IIIa to the Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 (goods that could be used for the purpose of
capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment) is prohibited if the economic operator has
knowledge about the intended use.
Criteria for granting export authorisations: Parliament introduced a number of rules that apply to the verification of the intended end-use and
the risk of diversion.
If the manufacturer of goods listed in Annex III requests an authorisation for exporting such goods to a distributor, the competent authority shall
make an assessment of the contractual arrangements made by the manufacturer and the distributor and of the measures that they are taking
to ensure that these goods and, if applicable, the products in which they will be incorporated will not be used for torture or other cruel, inhuman
or degrading treatment or punishment.
An authorisation shall be required for any supply, by a supplier of technical assistance or a broker, respectively, of one of the following
services: (i) technical assistance related to goods listed in Annex III, irrespective of the origin of such goods; and (ii) brokering services related
to goods listed in Annex III, irrespective of the origin of such goods.
Authorisations: authorisations for export, import or transit shall be issued on a form consistent with the models set out in Annexes V, VI and
VII. Such authorisations shall be valid throughout the Union. The period of validity of an authorisation shall be from three to twelve months with
a possible extension of up to 12 months. The period of validity of a global authorisation shall be from one year to three years with a possible
extension of up to two years.
Urgent action on new goods: Members extended the scope of the procedure allowing the Commission to add new goods to the list of those
that are prohibited or controlled.
Anti-Torture Coordination Group: the amended text provides for a coordination group to serve as a platform for Member States experts and the
Commission to exchange information on administrative practices and to discuss questions of interpretation of the Regulation, technical issues
with respect to the goods listed, and developments related to the Regulation. The Commission shall submit an annual report in writing to the
European Parliament on the activities, examinations and consultations of the Group.
Review: by 31 July 2020, and every five years thereafter, the Commission shall review the implementation of this Regulation and assess the
need to include the activities of EU nationals abroad.

2014/0005(COD) - 23/11/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to amend Council Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 concerning trade in certain goods which could be used for capital punishment,
torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/2134 of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No
1236/2005 concerning trade in certain goods which could be used for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment.
CONTENT: the amending Regulation amends Council Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005 in the light of developments since it entered into force in

2006. It lays down Union rules governing trade with third countries in goods that could be used for the purpose of capital punishment or for the
purpose of torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment , and rules governing the supply of brokering services,
technical assistance, training and advertising related to such goods.
It amends the definition of other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment to align it with the case-law of the European Court of
Human Rights.
The amending Regulation:
prohibits imports and exports of goods listed in Annex II to that Regulation and the supply of technical assistance in respect of such
goods. Goods listed in Annex II have no practical use other than for capital punishment, torture or other cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment or punishment;
prohibits the supply of technical assistance related to goods listed in Annex II to any person, entity or body in a third country, whether
for consideration or not;
prohibits the transit of goods listed in Annex II or Annex IIIa (goods that could be used for the purpose of capital punishment, torture
or other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment) is prohibited if the economic operator has knowledge about the
intended use;
prohibits brokers from supplying to any person, entity or body in a third country brokering services in relation to goods listed in Annex
II, irrespective of the origin of such goods;
prohibits promotion and advertising of goods listed in Annex II to the Regulation at trade fairs or exhibitions in the Union;
introduces a prior authorisation system for the supply of brokering services and technical assistance in respect of the goods listed in
Annex III or in Annex IIIa;
provides authorisations for export, import or transit, authorisations concerning brokering services and authorisations concerning
technical assistance shall be issued on a form consistent with the model set out in Annexes V, VI and VII. Such authorisations shall be
valid throughout the Union. The period of validity of an authorisation shall be from three to twelve months with a possible extension of
up to 12 months;
provides an urgency procedure in the cases where amendments to the Annexes to the Regulation are needed when new goods enter
into the market;
establishes an anti-torture coordination group enabling Member States experts and the Commission to exchange information on
administrative practices and to discuss questions of interpretation of the Regulation, technical issues with respect to the goods listed,
and developments related to the Regulation.
By 31 July 2020, and every five years thereafter, the Commission shall review the implementation of this Regulation and assess the need to
include the activities of EU nationals abroad.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 16.12.2016 with the exception of certain provisions which shall enter into force on 17.3.2017.
DELEGATED ACTS: the power to adopt delegated acts shall be delegated to the Commission to amend Annexes I, II, III, IIIa, IIIb, IV, V, VI
and VII of Council Regulation (EC) No 1236/2005. The power to adopt delegated acts shall be conferred on the Commission for a period of
five years (renewable) from 16 December 2016. The European Parliament or the Council shall have the right to object to a delegated act within
a period of two months (extendable for two months) from the date of notification.

