Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2232(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Human rights and technology: impact of intrusion and surveillance systems
on human rights in third countries

Subject
6.10.09 Human rights situation in the world

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/11/2014

SCHAAKE Marietje
Shadow rapporteur

QUISTHOUDT-ROWOHL
Godelieve

WEIDENHOLZER Josef

HENKEL Hans-Olaf

IGLESIAS Pablo

SARGENTINI Judith

CORRAO Ignazio

Key events
15/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

26/05/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

03/06/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

07/09/2015

Debate in Parliament

08/09/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

08/09/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

08/09/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2232(INI)

A8-0178/2015

Summary

T8-0288/2015

Summary

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/02279

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE549.160

16/02/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE549.164

27/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0178/2015

03/06/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0288/2015

08/09/2015

EP

Summary

2014/2232(INI) - 03/06/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Marietje SCHAAKE (ADLE, NL) on Human rights and technology: the
impact of intrusion and surveillance systems on human rights in third countries.
Members noted that technological developments and access to the open internet are playing an increasingly important role in enabling and
ensuring the fulfilment and full respect for human rights and freedom of expression.
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) can be used as a tool to be able to intercept communications and data as the US National
Security Agency (NSA) has done. The surveillance of communications interferes with the rights to privacy and expression, if conducted outside
an adequate legal framework. Members stated that the active complicity of certain EU Member States in the NSAs mass surveillance of
citizens and spying on political leaders has caused serious damage to the credibility of the EUs human rights policy and has undermined
global trust in the benefits of ICTs.
Members called for further coherence between the EUs external actions and its internal policies related to ICTs. The impact of technologies on
the improvement of human rights should be mainstreamed in all EU policies and programmes, if applicable, to advance the protection of
human rights and the promotion of democracy, the rule of law and good governance, and peaceful conflict resolution. They called on the EU to
increase its support for actors who work on strengthening security and privacy protection standards in ICTs at all levels and called for a human
rights and technology fund to be established under the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights.
Encryption software: Members urged the EU itself, and in particular the EEAS, to use encryption in its communications with human rights
defenders, to avoid putting defenders at risk and to protect its own communications with outsiders from surveillance. They drew attention to the
importance of developing ICTs in conflict areas to promote peacebuilding activities with a view to providing secure communication between
parties involved in peaceful resolution of conflicts. Furthermore, they called on the Commission and the Council to further support, train and
empower human rights defenders, civil society activists and independent journalists using ICTs in their activities in a safe manner.
Fight against terrorism and protection of privacy: Members deplored the fact that security measures, including counterterrorism measures, are
increasingly used as pretexts for violations of the right to privacy and for clamping down on the legitimate activities of human rights defenders,
journalists and political activists. According to members, national security can never be a justification for untargeted, secret or mass
surveillance programmes.
They recognise that the internet has become a public space as well as a marketplace, for which the free flow of information and access to
ICTs are indispensable. They called for the inclusion of clauses in all agreements with third countries that refer explicitly to the need to
promote, guarantee and respect digital freedoms.
Moreover, they urged the EU to counter the criminalisation of human rights defenders use of encryption, censorship-bypassing and privacy
tools. Members stressed that an effective EU development and human rights policy will require the mainstreaming of ICTs, and the bridging of
the digital divide.
Democratic scrutiny: Members considered that mass surveillance that is not justified by a heightened risk of terrorist attacks and threats to be
in violation of the principles of necessity and proportionality, and, therefore, a violation of human rights. They urged the Member States to
promote full democratic scrutiny of the operations of intelligence services in third countries.
They stressed the need to implement and monitor EU regulations and sanctions relating to ICTs more effectively, including the use of catch-all
mechanisms, so as to ensure that all parties, including the Member States, comply with legislation and that a level playing field is preserved.
They stressed the fact that respect for fundamental rights is an essential element in successful counter-terrorism policies, including the use of
digital surveillance technologies.
Dual-use regime: Members urged the Commission to put forward a proposal for smart and effective policies to limit and regulate the
commercial export of services regarding the implementation and use of so-called dual-use technologies, addressing potentially harmful exports
of ICT products and services to third countries. They called on the Commission to include effective safeguards to prevent any harm of these
export controls to research, including scientific and IT security research.

They reaffirmed that EU standards, particularly the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, should prevail in assessments of incidents involving
dual-use technologies used in ways that may restrict human rights. Members deplored the active co-operation of certain European companies,
as well as of international companies trading in dual-use technologies with potential detrimental effects on human rights while operating in the
EU, with regimes whose actions violate human rights. They urged the Commission publicly to exclude companies engaging in such activities
from EU procurement procedures, from research and development funding and from any other financial support.
Internet neutrality: Members urged the Commission and Council actively to defend the open internet, multi-stakeholder decision-making
procedures, net neutrality, digital freedoms and data protection safeguards in third countries through internet governance. They called explicitly
for the promotion of tools enabling the anonymous and/or pseudonymous use of the internet, and challenges the one-sided view that such
tools serve only to allow criminal activities. They recalled that mesh-based, ad hoc wireless technologies offer great potential in providing
backup networks in areas where the internet is unavailable or blocked, and can help the advancement of human rights.
Encryption for all: Members called for each individual to be entitled to encryption, and for the conditions needed to allow encryption to be
created. Controls should be a matter for the end user, who will need the skills required to carry out such controls properly. The also called for
the introduction of end to end encryption standards as a matter of course for all communication services, so as to make it more difficult for
governments, intelligence agencies and surveillance bodies to read content. They emphasised the special responsibility of government
intelligence services to build trust, and called for an end to mass surveillance.
Protection of whistleblowers: Members called for the scope for international protection of whistleblowers to be extended, and encouraged the
Member States to table laws to protect whistleblowers. Lastly, they called for measures to ensure that the privacy of activists, journalists and
citizens is protected everywhere in the world and that they are able to network via the internet.

2014/2232(INI) - 08/09/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 371 vote to 293, with 43 abstentions, a resolution concerning Human rights and technology: the impact
of intrusion and surveillance systems on human rights in third countries.
Parliament recalled that technological developments and access to the open internet are playing an increasingly important role in enabling and
ensuring the fulfilment and full respect for human rights and freedom of expression.
Information and communication technologies (ICTs) can be used as a tool to be able to intercept communications and data as the US National
Security Agency (NSA) has done. The surveillance of communications interferes with the rights to privacy and expression, if conducted outside
an adequate legal framework. Parliament stated that the active complicity of certain EU Member States in the NSAs mass surveillance of
citizens and spying on political leaders has caused serious damage to the credibility of the EUs human rights policy and has undermined
global trust in the benefits of ICTs.
Members called for further coherence between the EUs external actions and its internal policies related to ICTs. The impact of technologies on
the improvement of human rights should be mainstreamed in all EU policies and programmes, if applicable, to advance the protection of
human rights and the promotion of democracy, the rule of law and good governance, and peaceful conflict resolution. They called on the EU to
increase its support for actors who work on strengthening security and privacy protection standards in ICTs at all levels and called for a human
rights and technology fund to be established under the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights.
Encryption software: Parliament urged the EU itself, and in particular the EEAS, to use encryption in its communications with human rights
defenders, to avoid putting defenders at risk and to protect its own communications with outsiders from surveillance. It drew attention to the
importance of developing ICTs in conflict areas to promote peacebuilding activities with a view to providing secure communication between
parties involved in peaceful resolution of conflicts. Furthermore, it called on the Commission and the Council to further support, train and
empower human rights defenders, civil society activists and independent journalists using ICTs in their activities in a safe manner.
Whistleblowers: Parliament drew attention to the plight of whistleblowers and their supporters, including journalists, following their revelations
of abusive surveillance practices in third countries. It considered that such individuals should be considered human rights defenders and that,
as such, they deserve the EUs protection, as required under the EU Guidelines on Human Rights Defenders. It reiterated its call on the
Commission and the Member States to examine thoroughly the possibility of granting whistleblowers international protection from prosecution.
Parliament called for measures to ensure that the privacy of activists, journalists and citizens is protected everywhere in the world and that
they are able to network via the internet.
Fight against terrorism and protection of privacy: Parliament deplored the fact that security measures, including counterterrorism measures,
are increasingly used as pretexts for violations of the right to privacy and for clamping down on the legitimate activities of human rights
defenders, journalists and political activists. According to Parliament, national security can never be a justification for untargeted, secret or
mass surveillance programmes. It recognised that the internet has become a public space as well as a marketplace, for which the free flow of
information and access to ICTs are indispensable. It called for the inclusion of clauses in all agreements with third countries that refer explicitly
to the need to promote, guarantee and respect digital freedoms.
Democratic scrutiny: Parliament considered that mass surveillance that is not justified by a heightened risk of terrorist attacks and threats to be
in violation of the principles of necessity and proportionality, and, therefore, a violation of human rights. It urged the Member States to promote
full democratic scrutiny of the operations of intelligence services in third countries.
Members urged the EU to ensure greater transparency in the relationship between mobile phone carriers or ISPs and governments, and to call
for it in its relations with third countries, by demanding that carriers and ISPs publish yearly detailed transparency reports.
It stressed the need to implement and monitor EU regulations and sanctions relating to ICTs more effectively, including the use of catch-all
mechanisms, so as to ensure that all parties, including the Member States, comply with legislation and that a level playing field is preserved. In
general, Parliament stressed the fact that respect for fundamental rights is an essential element in successful counter-terrorism policies,
including the use of digital surveillance technologies.
Dual-use regime: Parliament urged the Commission to put forward a proposal for smart and effective policies to limit and regulate the
commercial export of services regarding the implementation and use of so-called dual-use technologies, addressing potentially harmful exports
of ICT products and services to third countries. It called on the Commission to include effective safeguards to prevent any harm of these export
controls to research, including scientific and IT security research.

Members reaffirmed that EU standards, particularly the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights, should prevail in assessments of incidents
involving dual-use technologies used in ways that may restrict human rights. They deplored the active co-operation of certain European
companies, as well as of international companies trading in dual-use technologies with potential detrimental effects on human rights while
operating in the EU, with regimes whose actions violate human rights. Parliament urged the Commission publicly to exclude companies
engaging in such activities from EU procurement procedures, from research and development funding and from any other financial support.
Internet neutrality: it also urged the Commission and Council actively to defend the open internet, multi-stakeholder decision-making
procedures, net neutrality, digital freedoms and data protection safeguards in third countries through internet governance. It called explicitly for
the promotion of tools enabling the anonymous and/or pseudonymous use of the internet, and challenges the one-sided view that such tools
serve only to allow criminal activities. Members recalled that mesh-based, ad hoc wireless technologies offer great potential in providing
backup networks in areas where the internet is unavailable or blocked, and can help the advancement of human rights.
Encryption for all: Members called for each individual to be entitled to encryption, and for the conditions needed to allow encryption to be
created. Controls should be a matter for the end user, who will need the skills required to carry out such controls properly. They also called for
the introduction of end to end encryption standards as a matter of course for all communication services, so as to make it more difficult for
governments, intelligence agencies and surveillance bodies to read content. They emphasised the special responsibility of government
intelligence services to build trust, and called for an end to mass surveillance.
Lastly, Parliament condemned the weakening and undermining of encryption protocols and products, particularly by intelligence services
seeking to intercept encrypted communications.

