Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Directive

2014/0091(COD)

Procedure completed

Activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision
(IORPs). Recast
Repealing Directive 2003/41/EC 2000/0260(COD)
Subject
2.50.05 Insurance, pension funds
2.50.10 Financial supervision
4.10.11 Retirement, pensions

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ECON

Rapporteur

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Appointed
22/07/2014

HAYES Brian
Shadow rapporteur

TANG Paul

FOX Ashley

IN 'T VELD Sophia

URBÁN CRESPO
Miguel

EICKHOUT Bas

VALLI Marco
Former committee responsible
ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

Committee for opinion
EMPL

Rapporteur for opinion

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
01/10/2014

LENAERS Jeroen
JURI

FEMM

Legal Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Women's Rights and Gender Equality

17/10/2014
PIETIKÄINEN Sirpa

Former committee for opinion
EMPL
JURI
FEMM

Employment and Social Affairs
Legal Affairs
Women's Rights and Gender Equality

Committee for opinion on the recast technique
JURI

Rapporteur for opinion

Legal Affairs

Appointed
10/07/2014

SVOBODA Pavel

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Commissioner

Financial Stability, Financial Services and Capital
Markets Union

HILL Jonathan

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
27/03/2014

Legislative proposal published

COM(2014)0167

Summary

14/04/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

25/01/2016

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

25/01/2016

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

03/02/2016

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0011/2016

Summary

13/07/2016

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE604.785

23/11/2016

Debate in Parliament

24/11/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

24/11/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

08/12/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

12/12/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

14/12/2016

Final act signed

23/12/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

T8-0448/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0091(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Recast

Legislative instrument

Directive
Repealing Directive 2003/41/EC 2000/0260(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ECON/8/00408

Summary

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2014)0167

27/03/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0102

27/03/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0103

27/03/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0104

27/03/2014

EC

CES2354/2014

10/07/2014

ESC

PE536.213

16/07/2014

EP

Economic and Social Committee: opinion,
report
Opinion on the recast technique

Summary

Committee opinion

FEMM

PE549.448

06/05/2015

EP

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE541.293

23/06/2015

EP

Committee draft report

PE565.015

28/07/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE567.843

05/10/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE569.481

20/10/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0011/2016

03/02/2016

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0448/2016

24/11/2016

EP

Summary

SP(2017)8

17/01/2017

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

Additional information
European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Directive 2016/2341
OJ L 354 23.12.2016, p. 0037 Summary

2014/0091(COD) - 27/03/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to facilitate the development of occupational retirement savings.
PROPOSED ACT: Directive of the European Parliament and the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: European society is ageing. Pension systems across the European Union (EU) have to adapt in order to ensure adequate,
safe and sustainable pensions.
The institutions for occupational retirement provision (IORPs) sector is being developed in many Member States where occupational pensions
so far play a limited role, including by setting up regulatory frameworks. Failing to provide an up-to-date EU regulatory framework now entails
the risk that Member States continue to develop diverging solutions, thereby exacerbating regulatory fragmentation. Furthermore,
improvements to the performance of occupational pensions require long periods of time to materialise.
According to the Commission, a revision of Directive 2003/41/EC on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement
provision is necessary for the following reasons:
(1) protect members and beneficiaries, and facilitate safe cross-border provisioning through higher governance standards reflecting best
practices at national level following the economic and financial crisis;
(2) reduce the obstacles to develop cross border occupational pensions markets, which would help companies, including SMEs and
multinationals, to organise their pension provision on a European scale more efficiently;

(3) there is evidence of significant gaps in the level of information provided to scheme members and beneficiaries across the EU.
This proposal builds on a number of initiatives launched in recent years such as the White Paper on pensions and the Green Paper on
long-term financing of the European economy.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: this proposal is accompanied by an impact assessment report that considers a range of policy options and
sub-options. The report was first submitted to the Impact Assessment Board on 4 September 2013. The Board asked for resubmission with
additional information on the views of the different stakeholder groups, problem definition, subsidiarity and proportionality aspects, options and
expected impacts.
The impact assessment was resubmitted on 16 October 2013. On 6 November the Board stated it could not issue a positive opinion and
requested some further amendments.
CONTENT: this proposal to recast Directive 2003/41/EC has four specific objectives:
1. Removing remaining prudential barriers for cross-border IORPs, notably by:
requiring that the rules on investment and disclosure of information to members and beneficiaries are those of the home Member
State,
clarifying procedures for cross-border activities,
clearly defining the scope of action of home and host Member State.
2. Ensuring good governance and risk management: the proposal: (i) establishes that institutions need to have in place an effective system of
governance which provides for sound and prudent management of their activities; (ii) sets out that institutions must have a sound remuneration
policy; (iii) provides for an effective internal audit function which evaluates the adequacy and effectiveness of the internal control system; (iv)
sets out that IORPs need to appoint a single depositary for safekeeping of assets and oversight duties if members and beneficiaries fully bear
the investment risk.
3. Providing clear and relevant information to members and beneficiaries: the proposal places an obligation on IORPs to provide, every twelve
months, a pension benefit statement (PBS) for the individual in the clearest possible way, also as a basis to feed information into a potential
pension tracking service.
4. Ensuring that supervisors have the necessary tools to effectively supervise IORPs: the proposal lays down that the competent authority of
the home Member State has the sole responsibility for the prudential supervision of all IORPs authorised or registered in its jurisdiction. It
establishes the principle that supervision of IORPs needs to be prospective and risk-based, as well as timely and proportionate. In addition, the
proposal introduces the supervisory review process which aims to identify IORPs with financial, organisational or other features susceptible to
producing a higher risk profile.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the budgetary implications relate to tasks allocated to European Insurance and Occupational Pensions
Authority (EIOPA).
No new resources will be needed. Operation appropriations which are necessary for the implementation of this initiative will be covered by
redeployment within the contribution granted to EIOPA during the annual budgetary procedure, in accordance with the financial programming
set by the Communication from the Commission "Programming of human and financial resources for decentralised agencies 2014-2020". The
estimated impact on expenditure is EUR 2.035 million for the period 2015-2020.

2014/0091(COD) - 03/02/2016 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs adopted the report by Brian HAYES (EPP, IE) on the proposal for a directive of the
European Parliament and of the Council on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision (recast).
The committee recommended that the European Parliaments position, adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure,
should amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Purpose and scope: Members stressed that institutions for occupational retirement provision play an important role in the long-term financing
of the Unions economy and in providing secure retirement benefits for citizens of the Union. Member States should take into account the
objective for all institutions of ensuring the intergenerational balance of occupational pension schemes, by aiming to have an equitable spread
of risks and benefits between generations.
This Directive aims to provide for minimum harmonisation and should not preclude Member States from maintaining or introducing further
provisions in order to protect members and beneficiaries, provided that such provisions are consistent with Member States' obligations under
Union law. The Directive does not concern issues of national social, labour, tax , and contract law, nor the adequacy of pension provisions in
Member States,.
The Directive shall:
encourage Member States to build up safe and adequate occupational pension provision and facilitate cross-border activity;
ensure good governance, provision of information to scheme members, transparency and safety of occupational retirement provision;
facilitate the development of new and innovative pension products within collective systems which aim to guarantee adequate
retirement provisions for all;
clarify the procedures enabling institutions to carry out cross-border activity and remove unnecessary obstacles, which hamper such
cross-border activity.
Registration or authorisation: Member States shall, in respect of every institution located in their territories, ensure that the institution is
registered in a national register, or authorised, by the competent authority. The location of the main administration refers to the place where
the main strategic decisions of an institution are made. Member States shall require an institution to have its main administration in the same
Member State as its registered office.
Transfers of pension schemes: according to the amended text, Member States shall allow institutions authorised or registered in their

territories to transfer all or a part of a pension scheme's liabilities, technical provisions, other obligations and rights and corresponding assets,
and cash equivalent thereof, to a receiving institution. In the event of a transfer of part of a pension scheme, Member States shall require the
transferring and the receiving institution to have sufficient and appropriate assets to cover the technical provisions for the transferred part and
the remaining part of the scheme.
The transfer and its conditions shall be made subject to prior approval by a majority of members and a majority of the beneficiaries concerned
or, where applicable, by a majority of their representatives. Members stated that the application for authorisation of the transfer shall be
submitted by the receiving institution.
Duty of Care: where a cross-border transfer has been approved by members and beneficiaries of a pension scheme and where the
transferring institution provides cover against biometric risks or guarantees either an investment performance or a given level of benefits, the
European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) shall, at the request of the competent authorities of the home Member
State of the transferring institution, assess: (i) whether there could be any systemic risk to the Union financial system arising from the transfer
and, (ii) whether the long-term interests of members and beneficiaries are negatively affected if the scheme were to be operated in the home
Member State of the receiving institution.
System of governance: institutions shall establish and apply written policies in relation to risk management and internal audit. Those written
policies shall be subject to prior approval by the management or supervisory body of the institution and shall be reviewed at least every three
years.
Persons who effectively run the institution should collectively be fit and proper and persons who perform key functions should have adequate
professional qualifications, knowledge and experience. However, only the key function holders should be subject to notification requirements to
the competent authority.
Member States shall require institutions to establish and apply a sound remuneration policy for all those persons who effectively run the
institution, perform key functions and other categories of staff whose professional activities have a material impact on the risk profile of the
institution.
The remuneration policy is in line with the risk profile and the long-term interests of members and beneficiaries of pension schemes operated
by the institution.
Member States should be able to authorise the institution to conduct key functions through the same person or through an organisational unit
provided that no conflict of interest exists and the institution has adequate measures to address and prevent any conflict of interest.
Information to be given to prospective members, members and beneficiaries: in order to protect members and beneficiaries, institutions for
occupational retirement provision should limit their activities, and those arising therefrom, to those referred to in this Directive and provide clear
and relevant information to members and beneficiaries for the purpose of ensuring good governance and risk management.
Where prospective members do not have a choice and are automatically enrolled in a pension scheme, the institution should provide them
with the key relevant information about their membership immediately after enrolment.
Beneficiaries shall also be informed of any potential reduction in the level of benefits due, prior to any decision on such a potential reduction.
Member States shall ensure that members are sufficiently informed of the conditions of the pension scheme, in particular concerning the risks
borne by members and beneficiaries associated with the pension scheme.
Pension benefit statement: institutions shall be required to draw up a concise document containing key relevant information for each member.
The pension benefit statement should be clear and comprehensible and should contain relevant and appropriate information to facilitate the
understanding of pension entitlements over time and across schemes and serve labour mobility. The information contained in the pension
benefit statement shall be accurate, and updated and sent to each member, free of charge, at least annually.
Prudential supervision: Member States shall lay down rules on administrative penalties and other administrative measures applicable to all
infringements of the national provisions transposing this Directive.
The competent authority shall publish without undue delay any administrative penalty or other administrative measure that has been imposed
for an infringement of the national provisions transposing this Directive, and against which no appeal was lodged in time, including information
on the type and nature of the infringement and the identity of persons held responsible.
It is stipulated that Articles 66 (professional secrecy) and 67 (use of confidential information) shall be without prejudice to the powers of
investigation conferred on the European Parliament.
Closing the gender pension gap: taking into account that the gender pension gap in the Union is 39 % on average, the Commission should
study extensively the impact of different pillars, pensions systems and their structures on both women and men. Based on the results, the
Commission should propose actions and possible structural changes that are needed in order to ensure equal levels of pensions for women
and men across the Member States.

2014/0091(COD) - 24/11/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 512 to 70, with 40 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a directive of the European
Parliament and of the Council on the activities and supervision of institutions for occupational retirement provision (recast).
Parliaments position, adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Subject matter and scope: IORPs play an important role in the long-term financing of the Unions economy and in the provision of secure
retirement benefits. They are a vital part of the Union economy, holding assets worth EUR 2.5 trillion on behalf of around 75 million members
and beneficiaries.
In the internal market, institutions for occupational retirement provision (IORPs) should have the possibility to operate in other Member States
while ensuring a high level of protection and security for members and beneficiaries of occupational pension schemes.

This Directive is aimed at minimum harmonisation and therefore should not preclude Member States from maintaining or introducing further
provisions in order to protect members and beneficiaries of occupational pension schemes, provided that such provisions are consistent with
Member States' obligations under Union law. This Directive does not concern issues of national social, labour, tax or contract law, or the
adequacy of pension provision in Member States.
Registration or authorisation: Member States shall, in respect of every IORP, the main administration of which is located in their territories,
ensure that the IORP is registered in a national register, or authorised , by the competent authority. The location of the main administration
refers to the place where the main strategic decisions of an IORP are made.
Member States may provide that additional benefits such as the option of longevity and disability cover, provision for surviving dependants and
a guarantee of repayment of contributions are offered to members with the agreement of the employers and the employees or their respective
representatives.
Transfers of pension schemes:
in the case of a transfer of part of a pension scheme, the viability of both the transferred part and the remaining part of the pension
scheme should be ensured and the rights of all members and beneficiaries should be adequately protected after the transfer, by
requiring both the transferring and the receiving IORPs to have sufficient and appropriate assets to cover the technical provisions for
the transferred part and the remaining part of the scheme;
the transfer and its conditions should be subject to prior approval by a majority of the members and a majority of the beneficiaries
concerned or where applicable, by a majority of their representatives, such as the trustees of a trust-based scheme;
the transfer of all or a part of a pension scheme's liabilities, technical provisions, and other obligations and rights, as well as
corresponding assets or cash equivalent thereof, between transferring and receiving IORPs shall be subject to authorisation by the
competent authority of the home Member State of the receiving IORP after obtaining the prior consent of the competent authority of
the home Member State of the transferring IORP;
the transfer of all or a part of a pension scheme's liabilities, technical provisions, and other obligations and rights, as well as
corresponding assets or cash equivalent thereof, between transferring and receiving IORPs shall be subject to authorisation by the
competent authority of the home Member State of the receiving IORP after obtaining the prior consent of the competent authority of
the home Member State of the transferring IORP;
in the event of a whole or partial cross-border transfer of a pension scheme, where there is a disagreement between the competent
authorities concerned, it should be possible for the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority (EIOPA) to carry out
mediation.
Governance systems:
the system of governance shall include consideration of environmental, social and governance factors related to investment assets in
investment decisions, and shall be subject to regular internal review. Member States shall ensure that IORPs establish and apply
written policies in relation to risk management, internal audit and, where relevant, actuarial and outsourced activities;
persons who effectively run an IORP should collectively be fit and proper and persons who carry out key functions (the actuarial or
internal audits, etc) should have adequate knowledge and experience and, where applicable, adequate professional qualifications.
Remuneration policy: Member States shall require IORPs to establish and apply a sound remuneration policy for all those persons who
effectively run the IORP, carry out key functions and other categories of staff whose professional activities have a material impact on the risk
profile of the IORP in a manner that is proportionate to their size and internal organisation, as well as to the size, nature, scale and complexity
of their activities.
The remuneration policy shall comply with the following principles:
be in line with the long-term interests of members and beneficiaries of pension schemes operated by the IORP;
be consistent with sound and effective risk management and shall not encourage risk-taking which is inconsistent with the risk profiles;
it shall include measures aimed at avoiding conflicts of interest.
Outsourcing: IORPs should be allowed to entrust any activity, including key functions, in whole or in part, to service providers operating on
their behalf. IORPs should remain fully responsible for discharging all of their obligations under this Directive when they outsource key
functions or any other activities. IORPs should enter into a written agreement with the service provider when outsourcing any activity.
Information on the pension scheme: Member States shall, in respect of every IORP registered or authorised in their territories, ensure that
members and beneficiaries are sufficiently informed about the respective pension scheme operated by the IORP, in particular concerning:
information on the investment profile;
the nature of financial risks borne by the members and beneficiaries;
the conditions regarding full or partial guarantees under the pension scheme;
the mechanisms protecting accrued entitlements or the benefit reduction mechanisms;
where members bear investment risk or can take investment decisions, information on the past performance of investments related to
the pension scheme for a minimum of five years;
the options available to members and beneficiaries in receiving their retirement benefits;
further information about the arrangements relating to such a transfer.
Where prospective members do not have a choice and are automatically enrolled in a pension scheme, the IORP should provide them with the
key relevant information about their membership promptly after enrolment.
Pension Benefit Statement: the Pension Benefit Statement should be clear and comprehensive and should contain relevant and appropriate
information to facilitate the understanding of pension entitlements over time and across schemes and serve labour mobility.
The Statement should provide information on pension benefit projections based on the retirement age. If the pension benefit projections are
based on economic scenarios, that information shall also include a best estimate scenario and an unfavourable scenario, taking into
consideration the specific nature of the pension scheme.
Prudential supervision: Member States shall ensure that their competent authorities may impose administrative sanctions and other measures
applicable to all infringements of the national provisions implementing this Directive, and shall take all measures necessary to ensure that they

are implemented. Administrative sanctions and other measures are effective, proportionate and dissuasive.

2014/0091(COD) - 14/12/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to establish an EU legal framework for institutions for occupational retirement provision.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Directive (EU) 2016/2341 of the European Parliament and of the Council on the activities and supervision of institutions
for occupational retirement provision (IORPs).
CONTENT: this Directive is a recast of Directive 2003/41/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council on the activities and supervision
of institutions for occupational retirement provision. It lays down rules for the taking-up and pursuit of activities carried out by institutions for
occupational retirement provision (IORPs). They are a vital part of the Union economy, holding assets worth EUR 2.5 trillion on behalf of
around 75 million members and beneficiaries.
This Directive is aimed at minimum harmonisation and therefore should not preclude Member States from maintaining or introducing further
provisions in order to protect members and beneficiaries of occupational pension schemes.
Revising directive 2003/41/EC, the text has four specific objectives:
1. Clarifying procedures for cross-border activities: the Directive provides that Member States shall authorise IORPs registered or authorised in
their territory:
to engage in cross-border activity. An IORP intending to engage in cross-border activity should be subject to the prior approval of the
relevant competent authority of its home Member State;
to transfer pension schemes to other IORPs across borders within the Union in order to facilitate the organisation of occupational
retirement provision on a Union scale. Transfers should be subject to authorisation by the competent authority in the home Member
State of the receiving IORP after that competent authority has received the consent of the competent authority of the home Member
State of the IORP transferring the pension scheme.
Every IORP shall have: (i) sufficient and appropriate assets at all times to cover the technical provisions in respect of the total range of pension
schemes operated; (ii) an adequate available solvency margin in respect of its entire business at all times which is at least equal to the
requirements in this Directive in order to ensure long-term sustainability of occupational retirement provision.
2. Ensuring good governance and risk management: the IORPs shall:
put in place an effective system of governance which provides for sound and prudent management of their activities. The system of
governance shall include consideration of environmental, social and governance factors related to investment assets in investment
decisions;
ensure that all persons who manage IORPs have the adequate professional qualifications and requirements for fit and proper
management;
establish and apply a sound remuneration policy in line with the long-term interests of members and beneficiaries of pension schemes
operated by the IORP and shall include measures aimed at avoiding conflicts of interest and shall not encourage risk-taking which is
inconsistent with the risk profiles and rules of the IORP;
put in place a risk-management function, an internal audit function and, where applicable, an actuarial function;
in the case of an occupational pension scheme where members and beneficiaries fully bear the investment risk, the home Member
State may require the IORP to appoint one or more depositaries for the safe-keeping of assets and oversight duties.
3. Providing clear and relevant information to members and beneficiaries: the Directive places an obligation on IORPs to:
provide clear and adequate information to prospective members, members and beneficiaries including: (i) accrued pension
entitlements; (ii) information on the investment profile (iii) the nature of investment risks; (iv) the options available to members and
beneficiaries in receiving their retirement benefits;
provide, every twelve months, a pension benefit statement (PBS) for the individual in the clearest possible way, also as a basis to feed
information into a potential pension tracking service. The Pension Benefit Statement should be clear and comprehensive and should
contain relevant and appropriate information to facilitate the understanding of pension entitlements over time and across schemes and
serve labour mobility. It should provide information on pension benefit projections based on the retirement age.
4. Ensuring that supervisors have the necessary tools to effectively supervise IORPs: the Directive lays down that the competent authorities of
the home Member State shall be responsible for the prudential supervision of IORPs. Member States shall ensure that their competent
authorities may impose administrative sanctions and other measures applicable to all infringements of the national provisions implementing
this Directive. Supervision of IORPs shall be prospective and risk-based. It shall comprise an appropriate combination of off-site activities and
on-site inspections.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 12.1.2017.
TRANSPOSITION: 13.1.2019 at the latest.

