Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2014/0002(COD)

Procedure completed

European network of employment services (EURES), workers' access to
mobility services and further integration of labour markets
Amending Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 2010/0110(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1296/2013 2011/0270(COD)
Subject
2.30 Free movement of workers
2.40.02 Public services, of general interest, universal service
2.80 Cooperation between administrations
4.15.02 Employment: guidelines, actions, Funds
4.15.04 Workforce, occupational mobility, job conversion, working conditions

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL

Rapporteur

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
26/09/2014

BECKER Heinz K.
Shadow rapporteur

SIMON Siôn

ŽITŇANSKÁ Jana

DLABAJOVÁ Martina

LÓPEZ BERMEJO
Paloma

MESZERICS Tamás

AGEA Laura
Former committee responsible
EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

Committee for opinion
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

REGI

Regional Development

Rapporteur for opinion
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

23/07/2014
DĂNCILĂ Viorica

CULT

JURI

FEMM

Culture and Education

Legal Affairs

Women's Rights and Gender Equality

Former committee for opinion
IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

REGI

Regional Development

CULT

Culture and Education

JURI
FEMM

Legal Affairs

S&D CASTEX Françoise

11/02/2014

Women's Rights and Gender Equality

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

ANDOR László

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
17/01/2014

Legislative proposal published

03/02/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

19/06/2014

Debate in Council

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

11/12/2014

Debate in Council

23/06/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

23/06/2015

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

01/07/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

24/02/2016

Debate in Parliament

25/02/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

25/02/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/03/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

13/04/2016

Final act signed

13/04/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

22/04/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

COM(2014)0006

Summary

A8-0224/2015

Summary

T8-0055/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0002(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Amending Regulation (EU) No 492/2011 2010/0110(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1296/2013 2011/0270(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 046

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/8/00333

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2014)0006

17/01/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0009

17/01/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0010

17/01/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

N8-0033/2014
OJ C 222 12.07.2014, p. 0005

03/04/2014

EDPS

CES0518/2014

05/06/2014

ESC

Committee draft report

PE544.332

05/01/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE546.826

05/02/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE546.941

05/02/2015

EP

PE539.800

03/03/2015

EP

PE557.173

22/06/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0224/2015

01/07/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0055/2016

25/02/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)221

31/03/2016

Economic and Social Committee: opinion,
report

Committee opinion

REGI

Amendments tabled in committee

Summary

Summary

Additional information
European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2016/589
OJ L 107 22.04.2016, p. 0001 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

2014/0002(COD) - 17/01/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to reinforce the EURES network with the aim of enhancing access of workers to intra-EU labour mobility support services, thus
supporting fair mobility and increasing access to employment opportunities throughout the Union.
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the free movement of workers is a fundamental freedom of Union citizens and one of the pillars of the internal market in the
Union enshrined in Article 45 of the TFEU. Article 46 sets out the measures to bring about this freedom, in particular by ensuring close
cooperation between the Public Employment Services ('PES').
The free movement of workers is a key element to the development of a more integrated Union labour market which allows worker mobility

from high unemployment areas to areas characterised by labour shortages. It also contributes to finding the right skills for vacant positions and
overcoming bottlenecks in the labour market.
Only approximately 7.5 million of the European labour force of around 241 million (i.e. 3.1%) is economically active in another Member State.
At present, high unemployment rates in some Member States coexist with high numbers of open job vacancies in others. There are many
reasons why the potential for intra-EU labour mobility remains untapped and individual citizens do not realise their intentions to become mobile
workers. The most common practical difficulties expected or encountered are the lack of relevant language knowledge and the difficulties in
finding a job. The EU can contribute to addressing the latter by raising awareness on employment opportunities across the Union and
developing appropriate support services to encourage intra-EU recruitments.
The provisions of Regulation 492/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council on freedom of movement for workers within the Union
(codification) established mechanisms for clearance and for information exchange and the Commission Implementing Decision 2012/733/EU
has laid down provisions on the functioning of a network entitled EURES (European Employment Services) in accordance with that Regulation.
Whereas the functioning of the EURES network was subject to some changes at the initiative of the Commission through its 2012 Decision,
the Chapter II of Regulation 492/2011 which constitutes the European regulatory framework for the clearance and information exchange
between Member States on intra-EU labour mobility has not been amended since 1992.
This regulatory framework needs to be revised to reflect new mobility patterns, enhanced requirements for fair mobility, changes in the
technology for sharing job vacancy data, the use of a variety of recruitment channels by job seekers and employers and the increasing role of
other labour market brokers next to the Public Employment Services ('PES') in the provision of recruitment services.
A common framework for cooperation should be established between Member States and the Commission on labour mobility within the Union.
This framework should bring together job vacancies from across the Union and the possibility of applying for those job vacancies ('clearance'),
define the provision of related support services to workers and employers and provide for a common approach to share information necessary
to facilitate said co-operation.
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the Commission conducted an impact assessment of policy alternatives to address shortcomings:
Option 1: no new options,
Option 2: amending Regulation 492/2011 as regards the powers of the Commission on the implementation of its provisions
(Lisbonisation),
Option 3: introducing a new Regulation with new provisions altogether (modernisation of EURES) ,
Option 4: introducing a new Regulation with a specific Commission mandate to increase the co-operation between public and private
employment services.
Option 3 is the preferred option which should replace Regulation 492/2011 and the 2012 Decision with a stand-alone instrument combining the
provisions of the two instruments. Within this option, a number of specific alternatives were discarded as not being proportionate to the specific
objectives.
LEGAL BASIS: Article 46 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU).
CONTENT: the aim of this proposal is to enhance access of workers to intra-EU labour mobility support services, thus supporting fair mobility
and increasing access to employment opportunities throughout the Union. It replaces the provisions on the exchange of information on job
vacancies, job applications and CVs across Member States (clearance) found currently in Regulation 492/2011.
It also (re)establishes the European network of Employment Services, called EURES, the purpose of which will be to provide assistance with
job search and recruitment across Member States. A similar network is active today on the basis of the 2012 Commission Decision. Therefore,
upon adoption of this Regulation, the Commission will repeal the above Decision on the functioning of the current EURES network.
In this context, the Commission recently introduced a proposal to establish a network of PES to deepen cooperation and mutual learning. That
network will cover a wider range of objectives and initiatives in the form of incentives and is complementary to this proposal.
Objectives: the general objective is to make the EURES network an effective instrument for any job seeker or employer interested in intra-EU
labour mobility. Shortcomings have been identified in the functioning of the EURES network (such as an incomplete pool of job vacancies and
CVs; limited automated matching potential; insufficient support services and cross-border information on labour). The specific objectives of the
proposal address these shortcomings:
to achieve on the EURES portal a nearly complete supply of job vacancies, with job seekers all over Europe having instant access to
the same vacancies, in combination with an extensive pool of CVs available from which registered employers can recruit;
to enable the EURES portal to carry out a good automated matching between job vacancies and CVs across Member States,
translating in all EU languages and understanding skills, competences, qualifications and occupations acquired at national and
sectoral level;
to make available basic information about the EURES network throughout the Union to any job seeker or employer seeking client
services for recruitment and to consistently offer any person interested access to the EURES network;
to assist any such person interested with matching, placement and recruitment through the EURES network;
to support the functioning of the EURES network through information exchange on national labour shortages and surpluses and the
coordination of actions across Member States.
More specifically, the proposal seeks to:
integrate into a single framework the provisions of chapter II and Article 38 of Regulation 492/2011 and the Commission Decision
733/2012/EU on the EURES network. There may also be a possibility to extend the scope of the EURES network to cover
apprenticeships and traineeships;
re-establish the EURES network as well as laying down the new terms and conditions as regards its composition and membership. A
single governance body to facilitate practical co-operation between Commission and Member States for this Regulation shall be set
up;
introduce specific measures on transparency and automated matching;
introduce the specific measures on mainstreaming and support services. The proposal explicitly supports the extension of the delivery
of support services by organisations other than the PES, in principle through the voluntary participation in the EURES network by

EURES Partners. In addition, PES are encouraged to develop partnerships to promote a coherent service package to employers as
regards intra-EU labour mobility. One specific form of these support structures are cross-border partnerships;
reinforce the existing arrangements for sharing information in the EURES network where it benefits the quality of concrete collective
outputs or the coordination of policies of Member States.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATIONS: the proposal will not result in any specific budgetary impact for the EU budget. Any activities to be carried out
by the European Commission for the EURES network which will result in the need for human and/or financial resources fall under the scope of
the Regulation establishing the Programme for Employment and Social Innovation ("EaSI") (2014-2020) and will be covered within the annual
budgetary allocation of this programme. For the period 2014-2020, this EU programme will pay for horizontal measures such as the EURES
portal, the common training programme, targeted mobility schemes like Your first EURES Job and the development of the European
classification for skills/competences, qualifications and occupations (ESCO). For the same period, activities in Member States on intra-EU
labour mobility are eligible under the European Social Fund.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2014/0002(COD) - 03/04/2014 Document attached to the procedure
Executive Summary of the Opinion of the European Data Protection Supervisor (EDPS) on the Commission Proposal for a Regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on a European network of Employment Services, workers' access to mobility services and the further
integration of labour markets
On 17 January 2014, the Commission adopted a proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on a European
network of Employment Services, workers' access to mobility services and the further integration of labour markets. On the same day, the
Commission sent the Proposal to the EDPS for consultation.
Objective and scope of the proposal: the main objectives of the proposal are to help increase the number of job vacancies as well as the pool
of candidates available in EURES. The proposal also aims to increase the capabilities of the portal to automatically match job vacancies with
job applications. To this end the current system of direct registration of CVs and job vacancies will be replaced/complemented by a system
where public employment services and other authorised employment services ( EURES-partners) will make available via EURES a limited and
select set of matchable and codified data obtained from the CV and job vacancy databases they hold. These would include data categories
such as the occupation or skill concerned, level of academic achievement, language skills, driving licence, the number of years of work
experience, the nature of the contract (permanent or temporary) and the location of employment. Making these data available to EURES, on
the applicant side (data derived from CV data), will be subject to explicit consent of the individuals concerned.
The list of organisations systematically feeding data into the system will include not only public employment services of the Member States, but
also other authorised EURES partners. In other words, participation in the EURES network will be open to all employment services, whether
public or private.
Thanks to the matching tool, it is expected that the Regulation will enable the EURES portal to carry out a good automated matching between
job vacancies and CVs across Member States.
Main conclusions: the EDPS welcomes the fact that the Commission took due account of the rights of data subjects, including their right to
access and correct their data. In addition, the proposal does not specifically require or encourage web-crawling.
The EDPS does recommend certain further improvements as follows:
·

a recital could be added to explain what is meant by the granularity of consent under Article 14(3);

·

in Article 15(3) after the words job applications, and CVs made available on the EURES portal the words in accordance with Article
14 could be added;

·

Article 17(4) should refer to access to information rather than access to general information;

·

a specific substantive provision or a recital could be added, requiring that the principle of data protection by design be applied for the
development of the EURES portal. In addition, it could also be helpful to provide some further guidance in substantive provisions or
at least in recitals;

·

the Regulation should specify more clearly who can have access to the database and subject to what safeguards.

The EDPS also adds:
an applicant may choose to make his/her entire CV available on EURES;
an applicant can also add information in a free-text field to accompany the codified standard information that will appear in the results
when the matching tool is used;
there should also be further clarification in the text on how the automated matching works. In any event, the Regulation should specify
that unless a worker choses to make his/her entire CV available on EURES those searching the EURES portal will not have direct
access to the names, CVs or any other directly identifiable personal data of the applicants, only to the list of a limited and select set of
matchable and codified data obtained from the CV databases they hold;
the purpose of the processing and the acceptable range of further use of the data should be clearly specified in the proposed
Regulation.

2014/0002(COD) - 01/07/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted the report by Heinz K. BECKER (EPP, AT) on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on a European network of Employment Services, workers' access to mobility services and the further

integration of labour markets.
The committee recommended that the position of the European Parliament in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure should
amend the Commission proposal as follows:
Purpose: Members specified that the aim of the Regulation was not only to facilitate the exercise of the freedom of movement for workers
within the Union but also abolish any discrimination based on nationality between workers of Member States as regards employment,
remuneration and other conditions of work and employment within the Union.
Actions taken by Member States must aim to achieve a high level of quality and sustainable employment and ensure the functioning of a
European network of employment services (EURES), with the appropriate involvement of the social partners.
The Regulation also provided rules regarding:
services provided to job seekers in order to ensure fair mobility;
effective promotion of the EURES network at Union level by means of intensive communication measures taken by the Commission
and, in particular, the Member States.
Reorganisation and strengthening of EURES: apart from the European Coordination Office, through which the Commission was responsible
for assisting the EURES network, and the National Coordination Offices, the EURES network must include public employment services (PES)
designated by each Member State and the public or private organisations authorised by Member States to provide support services to workers
and employers at national, regional or local level, or a cross-border basis.
Objectives: the EURES network should contribute to the achievement of the following objectives, inter alia:
the implementation of the coordinated strategy for employment and particularly for promoting a skilled, trained and adaptable
workforce;
ensuring the functioning, cohesion and integration of the labour markets in the Union, including cross-border labour markets, ensuring
non-discriminatory access to job opportunities and applications and relevant labour market information;
increasing voluntary geographical and occupational mobility in the Union, particularly in cross-border regions, on a fair basis;
ensuring Union-wide social inclusion of persons excluded from the labour market, with a particular focus on the most vulnerable
groups and people in regions most affected by unemployment;
ensuring greater coherence between Union policies introduced for the purpose of tackling unemployment, in particular youth
unemployment and inequalities;
supporting a smooth transition from education to work in the Union labour market.
The EURES portal and related IT services must be made useable and accessible to all reaching all possible users, including providing a
barrier-free environment;
The European Coordination Office should provide the widest possible access of EURES services on a non-discriminatory basis. It must draw
on past experience and adapt this to specific local and regional characteristics, and issue an annual statement reporting the number of job
vacancies made available in each Member State, taking into account the population and the size of their economy.
Each National Coordination Office should be responsible for taking all necessary measures in order to ensure that all job applications and CVs
available nationally were made available to the EURES portal. It should ensure that there were sufficient numbers of trained EURES advisers
available and spread evenly over the whole territory in order to promote the EURES network and ultimately make it an indispensable tool for
the Union labour market.
In relation to the provision of tailor-made information to workers and employers by the EURES advisors, the National Coordination Office shall
disseminate in the official language(s) of the Member State, up-to-date information on:
living and working conditions, including social security contributions and tax payments;
administrative procedures regarding access to and take-up of employment
the rules applicable to workers, such as those laid down in collective agreements, recruitment rules, individual categories of
employment contracts and other relevant practical information;
the rules applicable to apprenticeships and traineeships in line with the Council Recommendation on a Quality Framework for
Traineeship;
the access to vocational education and training;
Access to basic information: Members considered that all jobseekers should be entitled to comprehensive information concerning conditions of
employment, such as pension rights, welfare insurance and health insurance, in the country and place in which the job was located . EURES
partners and members should provide information on terms of employment in the Member State and at the place of work, such as pension
entitlements, social security, taxation or health insurance.
Member States should ensure coordination between support services under the Regulation and services provided on health, social
security, unemployment insurance and taxation by the competent authorities at national, regional and local level and through cross-border
cooperation structures. Members also recommended further personalised services provided by the EURES advisors.
EURES cross-border partnerships: Members proposed that EURES cross-border partnerships and other specific support structures might be
set up in cross-border regions in order to facilitate cross-border labour mobility. The border partnerships should provide specific, multi-lingual
information on particular types of employment. That information should contain, inter alia, information on minimum standards in labour law,
employment and health protection and minimum wages.
Exchange of information between Member States: the committee suggested that Member States collect and analyse information on the needs
and tendencies of the labour market in order to create possible synergies between employers and universities or professional training institutes
to address the problem of mismatch between skills and vacancies.
Ex post evaluation: the Commission should submit ex-post evaluation on the operation and effects of the Regulation two years (rather than five
years) after entry into force of the Regulation.

2014/0002(COD) - 25/02/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 576 votes to 56, with 21 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on a European network of Employment Services, workers' access to mobility services and the further
integration of labour markets.
The European Parliaments position, adopted at first reading, following the ordinary legislative procedure, amended the Commission proposal
as follows.
Re-establishment, restoration and strengthening of the European network of employment services EURES: the proposed Regulation replaces
the regulatory framework on EURES as set out in Regulation (EU) No 492/2011. It establishes a framework for cooperation to facilitate the
exercise of the freedom of movement for workers within the Union. It lays down principles and rules on the organisation and promotion of the
EURES network.
The EURES network shall, within the areas of its activities, contribute to the following objectives:
facilitating the exercise of the rights conferred by Article 45 TFEU and by Regulation (EU) No 492/2011;
implementing the coordinated strategy for employment and, in particular, for promoting a skilled, trained and adaptable workforce as
referred to in Article 145 TFEU;
improving the functioning, cohesion and integration of the labour markets in the Union, including at cross-border level;
promoting voluntary geographical and occupational mobility in the Union, including in cross-border regions, on a fair basis and in
compliance with Union and national law and practice;
supporting transitions into the labour market, thereby promoting the social and employment objectives referred to in Article 3 TEU.
Services under this Regulation shall be available to all workers and employers across the Union and shall respect the principle of equal
treatment. Accessibility for persons with disabilities to the information provided on the EURES portal and to support services available at
national level shall be ensured.
Composition of the EURES network: other than the European Coordination Office which shall be established within the Commission and shall
be responsible for assisting the EURES network in carrying out its activities, a National Coordination Offices (NCOs) shall be responsible for
the application of this Regulation in the respective Member State, which shall be designated by the Member States and which may be their
Public Employment Service (PES); the EURES Members and Partners. Social partner organisations may become part of the EURES network
as EURES Members or Partners.
National Coordination Offices (NCOs): each NCO shall be responsible for: (i) the organisation of work relating to the EURES network in the
Member State, including ensuring a coordinated transfer to the EURES portal of information on job vacancies, job applications and CVs
through a single coordinated channel; (ii) providing the European Coordination Office with any available information on discrepancies between
the number of job vacancies notified and the total number of job vacancies at national level.
In the interest of workers and employers, each NCO shall make available, regularly update and disseminate in a timely manner, information
and guidance available at national level relating to the situation in the Member State concerning:
living and working conditions, including general information on social security and tax payments;
the relevant administrative procedures regarding employment, and the rules applicable to workers upon taking up employment;
its national regulatory framework for apprenticeships and traineeships and existing Union rules and instruments;
access to vocational education and training;
post-recruitment assistance in general and information about where to obtain such assistance within and, if such information is
available, outside the EURES network.
The NCOs shall facilitate the cooperation of the EURES network with the social partners at national level by ensuring a regular dialogue with
the social partners in accordance with national law and practice.
Common IT platform: in order to bring together job vacancies and job applications, each Member State shall make available to the EURES
portal all job vacancies as well as all job applications and CVs made publicly available through PES as well as those provided by the EURES
Members and, where relevant, the EURES Partners.
Member States should be able to exclude from clearance certain categories of apprenticeships and traineeships in order to ensure the
coherence and functioning of their educational systems and to take into account the need to design their active labour market policy measures
on the basis of the needs of the workers targeted by those measures.
Support services: upon request, the EURES Members and Partners shall:
assist, free of charge, workers and employers using their services with their registration on the EURES portal;
provide workers and employers with basic information concerning the EURES portal, including the job-application and CV database;
facilitate access to information on the rights relating to social security, active labour market measures, taxation, issues relating to work
contracts, pension entitlement and health insurance.
EURES cross-border partnership: Member States shall encourage close cooperation at cross-border level between regional, local and, where
relevant, national actors, such as practices and services delivered in the framework of EURES cross-border partnerships. Where, in
cross-border regions, the EURES Members or Partners participate in specific cooperation and service structures, such as cross-border
partnerships, they shall provide frontier workers and employers with information relating to the specific situation of frontier workers and of
relevance for employers in such regions.
Establishment of a coordination group: this should serve as a platform for the exchange of information and for the sharing of best practices, in
particular regarding the development and dissemination across the EURES network of appropriate information and guidance to workers,
including frontier workers, and employers.

2014/0002(COD) - 13/04/2016 Final act

PURPOSE: to strengthen the EURES network with the aim of enhancing access of workers to intra-EU labour mobility support services, thus
supporting fair mobility and increasing access to employment opportunities throughout the Union.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/589 of the European Parliament and of the Council on a European network of employment services
(EURES), workers' access to mobility services and the further integration of labour markets, and amending Regulations (EU) No 492/2011 and
(EU) No 1296/2013
CONTENT: the Regulation amends and replaces Regulation (EU) 492/2011 in order to establish a framework for cooperation to facilitate the
exercise of the freedom of movement for workers within the Union in accordance with Article 45 TFEU, by laying down principles and rules on:
·

the establishment, organisation and functioning of the EURES network;

·

cooperation between the Commission and the Member States on sharing relevant available data on job vacancies, job applications
and CVs;

·

actions by and between Member States to achieve a balance between supply and demand in the labour market, with a view to
achieving a high level of quality employment;

·

mobility support services related to the functioning of the EURES network to be provided to workers and employers, thereby also
promoting mobility on a fair basis;

·

promotion of the EURES network at Union level through effective communication measures taken by the Commission and the
Member States.

Services under the Regulation shall be available to all workers and employers across the Union and shall respect the principle of equal
treatment. Accessibility for persons with disabilities to the information provided on the EURES portal and to support services available at
national level shall be ensured.
Functioning of EURES and rules of cooperation with Partners: the Regulation sets out the framework for the functioning of EURES, including
its composition, which comprises the European Coordination Office and national coordination offices (NCOs).
The Regulation lays down the tasks of the NCOs, which are as follows:
·

the organisation of work relating to the EURES network in the Member State, including ensuring a coordinated transfer to the
EURES portal of information on job vacancies, job applications and CVs through a single coordinated channel;

·

providing the European Coordination Office with any available information on discrepancies between the number of job vacancies
notified and the total number of job vacancies at national level;

·

disseminate in a timely manner, information available at national level relating to the situation in the Member State concerning: (i)
living and working conditions, including general information on social security and tax payments; (ii) the relevant administrative
procedures regarding employment, and the rules applicable to workers upon taking up employment; (iii) its national regulatory
framework for apprenticeships and traineeships and existing Union rules and instruments; (iv) access to vocational education and
training; (v) post-recruitment assistance in general and information about where to obtain such assistance.

The Regulation also provides for methods for participation of public employment services (PES) in EURES. PES will benefit from this with
special status in the EURES network.
All EURES Members and Partners are brought together in a network, which contributes to making publicly available job vacancies and job
applications as well as CVs through a common platform and provides support services for employers and workers. Together, they bring about
freedom of movement for all workers through voluntary labour mobility within the Union on a fair basis.
Organisation of the common IT platform: in order to bring together job vacancies, each Member State shall make available to the EURES
portal all job vacancies and job applications, and CVs, made publicly available through PES as well as those provided by the EURES
Members and, where relevant, the EURES Partners.
Member States may allow employers to opt not to have a vacancy published on the EURES portal if the vacancies are open only to citizens of
a specific country, or relate to categories of apprenticeships and traineeships which, having mainly a learning component, are part of national
education systems or which are publicly funded.
The Regulation provides for technical measures with respect to access at national level to the common IT platform.
Support services: Member States shall ensure that workers and employers are able to gain access, without undue delay, whether online or
offline, to support services at national level.
The EURES Members and EURES Partners shall provide workers and employers with basic information, in an easily accessible and
user-friendly manner.
Other provisions are laid out regarding information for workers that request it, on certain employment opportunities, on general information on
living and working conditions in the country of destination, and on providing assistance with the drawing up of job applications and CVs to
ensure conformity with the European technical standards and formats.
In addition, the EURES Members and EURES Partners shall offer employers support services such as the formulation of individual job
requirements
At the cross-border level, the Regulation provides that Member States shall encourage close cooperation at cross-border level between
regional, local and, where relevant, national actors, such as practices and services delivered in the framework of EURES cross-border
partnerships.
Where, in cross-border regions, the EURES Members or Partners participate in cross-border partnerships, they shall provide frontier workers
and employers with information relating to the specific situation of frontier workers and of relevance for employers in such regions.
Exchange of information: the Commission and Member States shall monitor and make public labour-mobility flows and patterns in the Union

on the basis of Eurostat statistics and available national data. Member State shall, in particular, collect and analyse gender-disaggregated
information on EURES activities.
General provisions: the Regulation contains measures ensuring protection of personal data exchanged in the context f EURES, and
transitional measures ensuring the operational continuity of the EURES network established under Regulation (EU) 492/4011.
Evaluation: by 13 May 2021, the Commission shall submit an ex post evaluation report of the operation and effects of the Regulation. Every
two years, it shall submit a report on EURES activity to the European Parliament.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 12.5.2016. Certain provisions regarding the establishment of the common platform and access to job vacancies and
CVs of Members States will not apply until 13.5.2018.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission may adopt delegated acts in order to modify the areas of EURES activities for which the collection of
data is required by the Member States or to add other areas of EURES activities undertaken at national level. The power to adopt such acts is
conferred on the Commission for a period of 5 years from 12 May 2016 (which may be tacitly extended for the same period, unless Parliament
or Council oppose such extension three months before the end of such period). If Parliament or council raise objections, the delegated will not
come into force.

