Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2132(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2013 discharge: Artemis Joint Undertaking to implement a Joint Technology
Initiative in Embedded Computing Systems

Subject
8.70.03.03 2013 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

CONT

Appointed
03/07/2015

CZARNECKI Ryszard
Shadow rapporteur

MARINESCU
Marian-Jean

BALČYTIS Zigmantas

DLABAJOVÁ Martina

ŠOLTES Igor

VALLI Marco
Former committee responsible
Budgetary Control

CONT

26/09/2014
CZARNECKI Ryszard

Former committee for opinion
ITRE

European Commission

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
30/07/2014

Non-legislative basic document published

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

23/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

31/03/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

28/04/2015

Debate in Parliament

29/04/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

COM(2014)0510

Summary

A8-0103/2015

Summary

29/04/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

29/04/2015

Report referred back to committee

22/09/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

02/10/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

26/10/2015

Debate in Parliament

27/10/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/10/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

01/12/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

T8-0163/2015

Summary

A8-0283/2015

Summary

T8-0370/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2132(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/03531; CONT/8/01598

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2014)0510

30/07/2014

EC

Summary

N8-0002/2015
OJ C 452 16.12.2014, p. 0008

21/10/2014

CofA

Summary

Committee draft report

PE541.309

23/01/2015

EP

Document attached to the procedure

05306/2015

30/01/2015

CSL

Amendments tabled in committee

PE544.161

05/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0103/2015

31/03/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0163/2015

29/04/2015

EP

Summary

Committee draft report

PE557.303

06/07/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE565.166

04/09/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0283/2015

02/10/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0370/2015

27/10/2015

EP

Summary

Court of Auditors: opinion, report

Summary

Final act
Decision 2015/2208
OJ L 314 01.12.2015, p. 0027 Summary

2014/2132(DEC) - 30/07/2014 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2013, as part of

the 2013 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the Artemis Joint Undertaking.
CONTENT: this Commission document sets out the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2013 as
prepared on the basis of the information presented by the institutions, organisations and bodies of the EU, in accordance with Article 129 (2) of
the Financial Regulation applicable to the EU's General Budget, including the Artemis Joint Undertaking.
The document contains the figures on which the discharge procedure is based.
Discharge procedure of the EU Joint Undertakings: the EU Budget finances a wide range of policies and programmes throughout the EU. In
accordance with the priorities set by the European Parliament and the Council in the multi-annual financial framework (MFF), the European
Commission carries out specific programmes, activities and projects in the field with the technical support of some specialised agencies.
The consolidated annual accounts of the EU provide information on the activities of the institutions, agencies and other bodies of the EU from
a budgetary and accrual accounting perspective.
The consolidated reports on the implementation of the general budget of the EU include the budget implementation of all Institutions. Agencies
and Joint Undertakings (JUs) do not have a separate budget inside the EU budget ; and they are partially financed by a Commission budget
subsidy.
Each JU is subject to its own discharge procedure.
ARTEMIS: in 2013, the tasks and budget of the Joint Undertaking were as follows:
description of the tasks of the Joint Undertaking: the joint undertaking, which is located in Brussels, was set up in 2007 by Council
Regulation 74/2008/EC for a period of 10 years. The main objective of the Joint Undertaking is to implement a 'Research Agenda' for
the development of key technologies for Embedded Computing Systems across different application areas;
accounts of the JU: the maximum indicative contribution of the Commission amounts to EUR 420 million until 2017. The cumulative
unrecognised share of losses is EUR 9 million (94.57% ownership participation).
Please also consult Artemis Joint Undertakings final accounts.

2014/2132(DEC) - 21/10/2014 Court of Auditors: opinion, report
PURPOSE: presentation of the EU Court of Auditors report on the annual accounts of the Artemis Joint Undertaking for the financial year
2013, together with the Joint Undertakings reply.
CONTENT: in accordance with the tasks conferred on the Court of Auditors by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the Court
presents to the European Parliament and to the Council, in the context of the discharge procedure, a Statement of Assurance as to the
reliability of the annual accounts of each institution, body or agency of the EU, and the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying
them, on the basis of an independent external audit.
This audit concerned, amongst others, the annual accounts of the Artemis Joint Undertaking (Embedded Computing Systems).
Statement of assurance: pursuant to the provisions of Article 287 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the Court
has audited:
the annual accounts of the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking, which comprise the financial statements and the reports on the
implementation of the budget for the financial year ended 31 December 2013;
the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying those accounts.
Opinion on the reliability of the accounts: in the Courts opinion, the Joint Undertakings annual accounts present fairly, in all material respects,
its financial position as at 31 December 2013 and the results of its operations and its cash flows for the year then ended, in accordance with
the provisions of its financial rules and the accounting rules adopted by the Commissions accounting officer.
Basis for a qualified opinion on the legality and regularity of the transactions underlying the accounts: the Court considered that the
transactions underlying the annual accounts for the year ended 31 December 2013 are, in all material respects, legal and regular. However,
the Court noted that although the audit of project cost claims has been delegated to the NFAs, the administrative agreements signed with the
NFAs do not include practical arrangements for ex post audits. The Joint Undertaking received audit reports from the NFAs covering
approximately 46 % of the costs related to completed projects. However, the Joint Undertaking did not assess the quality of these audits. It
was therefore not in a position to assess whether ex post audits provide sufficient assurance as to the legality and regularity of the underlying
transactions.
Consequently, the Court considered that the information available on the implementation of the Joint Undertakings ex post audit strategy is not
sufficient for the Court to conclude whether this key control is functioning effectively. The Court considered that a qualified opinion was issued
for Artemis JU since there was insufficient appropriate audit evidence on which to base the opinion and the possible effects are considered
material but not pervasive.
The audit approach taken by the Court comprises analytical audit procedures, testing of transactions at the level of the Joint Undertaking and
an assessment of key controls of the supervisory and control systems. This is supplemented by evidence provided by the work of other
auditors and an analysis of management representations and of annual activity reports.
The 2013 audit placed special emphasis on ex post audits.
At the end of this audit, the Court concluded the following:
financial and budgetary management: the rate for payment appropriations was only 69%. The low budget implementation rate is
mainly due to the lengthy and complex process for the financial closure of projects; the current amount of appropriations committed for
the calls for proposals accounts for 49% of the total budget to cover operational expenditure during the entire duration of the existence

of the JU (10 years from 2007);
internal audit function: the report noted shortcomings in the audit function capacity of the JUs, weaknesses in the financial regulation
of the JUs, and confidentiality issues;
conflict of interest: the Joint Undertaking does not have a comprehensive written procedure to deal with conflicts of interest. According
to the Court, there is a need for a clear definition of what should be considered a conflict of interest , a database regularly updated to
include all information related to conflicts of interest, a procedure for managing them and a mechanism for dealing with breaches of
the policy.
Cross-cutting remarks for all the Joint undertakings: the prevention of conflicts of interest is addressed by most Joint Undertakings by the
adoption of specific rules and by the development of tools to document all related information. An Interim Evaluation was performed over 2013
assessing all Joint Undertakings in terms of relevance, efficiency, effectiveness and research quality. The reports, while positive, also
highlighted areas for further improvement.
Joint Undertakings replies: the Joint Undertaking replied point by point to all of the technical elements highlighted by the Court of Auditors.
ARTEMIS submitted a common action plan with ENIAC to mitigate this qualified opinion. Visits to National Funding Authorities (NFA) took
place already in Germany, Belgium and France, followed by additional documentation; the assessment reports are in the process of being
elaborated. The results may be found in the Court of Auditors report.
As regards the activities of the Joint Undertaking in 2013, the report refers to the Annual Activity Report 2013 which can be found at
http://www.artemis-ju.eu/reference_documents.
It should be noted that the budget for the Joint Undertaking for 2013 amounted to EUR 30 343 708 in commitment appropriations and EUR
30 000 000 in payment appropriations (operational).
Remark: the ARTEMIS and ENIAC Joint Undertakings were merged to create the Electronic Components and Systems for European
Leadership Joint Technology Initiative (ECSEL JTI). In addition to combining the ARTEMIS initiative on embedded systems and the ENIAC
initiative on nano-electronics, ECSEL JTI will incorporate research and innovation on smart systems. ECSEL JTI started in June 2014 and will
run for 10 years.

2014/2132(DEC) - 31/03/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Ryszard CZARNECKI (ECR, PL) on discharge in respect of the implementation of
the budget of the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
It called on the European Parliament to postpone its decision on granting the Executive Director of the ECSEL Joint Undertaking discharge in
respect of the implementation of the ARTEMIS Joint Undertakings budget for the financial year 2013.
Members postponed the closure of the accounts of the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013. At the same time, they made a
number of recommendations that needed to be taken into account when the discharge is granted, in addition to the general recommendations
that appear in the draft resolution on performance, financial management and control of EU agencies.
Budgetary and Financial Management: Members noted that payments made in 2013 relating to certificates of acceptance of costs
issued by the national funding authorities ("NFAs") of the Member States amounted to EUR 11 700 000, which accounted for 57 % of
the total operational payments. They were concerned that the Joint Undertaking did not assess the quality of those audits and that, by
the end of March 2014, it had not received information on the audit strategies of seven out of 23 NFAs. The JU was therefore not in a
position to assess whether ex post audits provide sufficient assurance as to the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions.
Whilst welcoming the action plan aiming to remedy the deficiencies identified by the Court in its qualified opinion, Members looked
forward to the successful implementation of the entire plan as well as to the Court's opinion on its outcome. They went on to note that
the utilisation rate of payment appropriations was only 69 %, while the utilisation rate for operational commitment appropriations was
99.4 %. Furthermore, they were concerned that there was poor information regarding the evaluation of the Member States' and
Research and Development organisations' contributions corresponding to the actual level of Union's payments. In line with the
information received, the contribution of the Member States was under the level of 1,8 as requested by the Joint Undertakings statute.
The committee called on the Joint Undertaking to submit a report to the discharge authority concerning the contributions of all
members other than the Commission, including the application of the evaluation rules, together with an assessment by the
Commission.
Internal audit: the committee was concerned that the Joint Undertaking had not set up an internal audit capability as required by its
establishing Regulation. It noted moreover that although the mission charter of the Commission's Internal Audit Service (IAS) was
adopted by the Governing Board on 25 November 2010, the financial rules of the Joint Undertaking had not been amended in order to
include the provision of the model financial regulation referring to the powers of the Commission's Internal Audit Service.
Members acknowledged that the Joint Undertaking, along with the Clean Sky, ENIAC, FCH and IMI Joint Undertakings had been the subject
of an IT risk assessment of their shared IT infrastructure performed by the IAS.
Members also made a series of observations on conflicts of interest at the JU and its legal framework.
Other observations: the committee ascertained that the Joint Undertaking had developed procedures in order to monitor the protection and
dissemination of their research results at different project stages but from the Court's report, this should be further developed in order to fully
meet the provisions of the Decision.
They called on the Joint Undertaking to submit a report to the discharge authority on the social-economic benefits of the already completed
projects, and for that report to be submitted to the discharge authority together with an assessment by the Commission.
Members recalled that the discharge authority had previously requested the Court to draw up a special report on the capacity of the joint
undertakings, together with their private partners, to ensure added value and efficient execution of Union research, technological development
and demonstration programmes.

2014/2132(DEC) - 29/04/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 455 votes to 232, with 6 abstentions, a decision to grant discharge to the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking
for the financial year 2013.
In parallel, Parliament postponed the closure of the accounts of the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
It also adopted by 633 votes to 42, with 6 abstentions, a series of general recommendations that appear in the resolution on performance,
financial management and control of EU agencies:
Budgetary and Financial Management: Parliament noted that payments made in 2013 relating to certificates of acceptance of costs
issued by the national funding authorities ("NFAs") of the Member States amounted to EUR 11 700 000, which accounted for 57 % of
the total operational payments. It was concerned that the Joint Undertaking did not assess the quality of those audits and that, by the
end of March 2014, it had not received information on the audit strategies of seven out of 23 NFAs. The JU was therefore not in a
position to assess whether ex post audits provide sufficient assurance as to the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions.
Whilst welcoming the action plan aiming to remedy the deficiencies identified by the Court in its qualified opinion, Parliament looked
forward to the successful implementation of the entire plan as well as to the Court's opinion on its outcome. It went on to note that the
utilisation rate of payment appropriations was only 69%, while the utilisation rate for operational commitment appropriations was
99.4%. Furthermore, Members were concerned that there was poor information regarding the evaluation of the Member States' and
Research and Development organisations' contributions corresponding to the actual level of Union's payments. In line with the
information received, the contribution of the Member States was under the level of 1.8 as requested by the Joint Undertakings statute.
Parliament called on the Joint Undertaking to submit a report to the discharge authority concerning the contributions of all members
other than the Commission, including the application of the evaluation rules, together with an assessment by the Commission.
Internal audit: Parliament was concerned that the Joint Undertaking had not set up an internal audit capability as required by its
establishing Regulation. It noted moreover that although the mission charter of the Commission's Internal Audit Service (IAS) was
adopted by the Governing Board on 25 November 2010, the financial rules of the Joint Undertaking had not been amended in order to
include the provision of the model financial regulation referring to the powers of the Commission's Internal Audit Service.
Members acknowledged that the Joint Undertaking, along with the Clean Sky, ENIAC, FCH and IMI Joint Undertakings had been the subject
of an IT risk assessment of their shared IT infrastructure performed by the IAS.
Parliament also made a series of observations on conflicts of interest at the JU and its legal framework. It called upon the Joint Undertaking to
adopt comprehensive policies for the management of conflict of interest situations such as divestment of the interest by the public official,
recusal of the public official from involvement in an affected decision-making process, restriction of access by the affected public official to
particular information, rearrangement of the public official's duties or resignation of the public official from their office.
Other observations: Parliament ascertained that the Joint Undertaking had developed procedures in order to monitor the protection and
dissemination of their research results at different project stages but from the Court's report, this should be further developed in order to fully
meet the provisions of the Decision.
It called on the Joint Undertaking to submit a report to the discharge authority on the social-economic benefits of the already completed
projects, and for that report to be submitted to the discharge authority together with an assessment by the Commission.
Parliament recalled that the discharge authority had previously requested the Court to draw up a special report on the capacity of the joint
undertakings, together with their private partners, to ensure added value and efficient execution of Union research, technological development
and demonstration programmes.

2014/2132(DEC) - 02/10/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the 2nd report by Ryszard CZARNECKI (ECR, PL) and called on the European Parliament to
grant discharge to the Executive Director of the ECSEL Joint Undertaking in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Artemis Joint
Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
Members called on Parliament to approve the closure of Artemiss accounts.
Budgetary and financial management: Members recalled that the Court of Auditors stated that the 2013 annual accounts of the Joint
Undertaking presented fairly, in all material respects, its financial position as of 31 December 2013 and the results of its operations and its
cash flows for the year-end.
They acknowledged from the Joint Undertaking that the practical arrangements for ex post audits concerning the administrative agreements
signed with the national funding authorities (NFAs) have been put in place. The Joint Undertaking stated that the 23 NFAs that shared
information on their audit strategies represented 95 % of the total grants awarded. Members acknowledged that Artemis had made progress in
implementing the action plan aimed at remedying the deficiencies identified by the Court in its qualified opinion.
At the same time, they noted that the Joint Undertaking developed a new methodology for residual error rate estimation, similar to the one
used by the Commission services in charge of co-managed funding.
Utilisation rate: Members recalled that the utilisation rate of payment appropriations after the end of year budget amendment was 69 %. The
Joint Undertaking stated that the delay in issuing payment certificates by the NFAs was one of the main reasons for the low utilisation rate as
the payments were executed without delay as soon as the national certificates were received.
Evaluation of Artemis: Members noted that the Commission would carry out an evaluation to assess the ARTEMIS activity up to the date of the
ECSEL JTI creation, as provided for in Council Regulation (EC) No 74/2008 setting up the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking, to be considered for
the discharge for the financial year 2014.
Prevention and management of conflicts of interests and transparency: the report noted that due to the merger with the ENIAC JU, the
Comprehensive policy for the prevention and management of conflicts of interests of the ENIAC JU was also applicable to the Joint

Undertaking. Furthermore, the procedures for managing situations of conflicts of interests, as well as the mechanism proceedings in the event
of a violation of the rules, were part of the adopted policy.
Monitoring and reporting of research results: lastly, Members recalled that the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) Decision established a
monitoring and reporting system related to the protection, dissemination and transfer of research results. They acknowledged from the Joint
Undertaking that 211.5 publications and 16.6 patents per EUR 10 million of Union grants showed a high productivity of its research results and
that it was compliant with all requests expressed so far by the FP7 coordinators.

2014/2132(DEC) - 27/10/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the Artemis Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
NON-LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU) 2015/2208 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of
the Artemis Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the Executive Director of the ECSEL in respect of the
implementation of the Artemis Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013. It approved the closure of the accounts of the Joint Undertaking in
a parallel decision (Decision (EU) 2015/2209).
This decision is in line with the second resolution by the European Parliament adopted on 27 October 2015 and comprises a series of
observations that form an integral part of the discharge decision (please refer to the summary of the opinion of 27 October 2015).
Amongst the main observations made, Parliament recalled that the Joint Undertaking received a qualified opinion from the Court of Auditors on
the legality and the regularity of the transactions underlying the annual accounts on the grounds that the Joint Undertaking was not in a
position to assess whether the ex post audit strategy provides sufficient assurance with respect to the legality and regularity of the underlying
transactions.
The resolution acknowledged from the Joint Undertaking that it made progress in implementing the action plan aimed at remedying the
deficiencies identified by the Court in its qualified opinion and that the rate of assessed grant coverage continues to rise.

2014/2132(DEC) - 27/10/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 553 votes to 110, with 23 abstentions, a decision to grant discharge to the Executive Director of the
ECSEL Joint Undertaking in respect of the implementation of the budget of the Artemis Joint Undertaking for the financial year 2013.
The vote on the discharge decision covers the closure of Artemiss accounts.
Budgetary and financial management: Parliament recalled that the Court of Auditors stated that the 2013 annual accounts of the Joint
Undertaking presented fairly, in all material respects, its financial position as of 31 December 2013 and the results of its operations and its
cash flows for the year-end.
It acknowledged from the Joint Undertaking that the practical arrangements for ex post audits concerning the administrative agreements
signed with the national funding authorities (NFAs) have been put in place. The Joint Undertaking stated that the 23 NFAs that shared
information on their audit strategies represented 95 % of the total grants awarded. Members acknowledged that Artemis had made progress in
implementing the action plan aimed at remedying the deficiencies identified by the Court in its qualified opinion.
At the same time, Parliament noted that the Joint Undertaking developed a new methodology for residual error rate estimation, similar to the
one used by the Commission services in charge of co-managed funding.
Utilisation rate: Parliament recalled that the utilisation rate of payment appropriations after the end of year budget amendment was 69 %. The
Joint Undertaking stated that the delay in issuing payment certificates by the NFAs was one of the main reasons for the low utilisation rate as
the payments were executed without delay as soon as the national certificates were received.
Commitments from the Member States: Parliament ascertains from the Joint Undertaking that the contributions committed by Member States
were at the level of 1.8 times the Union commitments. It acknowledged that the commitments by Member States had to be reduced below the
1.8 threshold when awarding the grants in order to comply with the limitations imposed by the State aid rules.
Evaluation of Artemis: Parliament noted that the Commission would carry out an evaluation to assess the ARTEMIS activity up to the date of
the ECSEL JTI creation, as provided for in Council Regulation (EC) No 74/2008 setting up the ARTEMIS Joint Undertaking, to be considered
for the discharge for the financial year 2014.
Prevention and management of conflicts of interests and transparency: the resolution noted that due to the merger with the ENIAC JU, the
Comprehensive policy for the prevention and management of conflicts of interests of the ENIAC JU was also applicable to the Joint
Undertaking. Furthermore, the procedures for managing situations of conflicts of interests, as well as the mechanism proceedings in the event
of a violation of the rules, were part of the adopted policy.
Monitoring and reporting of research results: lastly, Parliament recalled that the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) Decision established a
monitoring and reporting system related to the protection, dissemination and transfer of research results. It acknowledged from the Joint
Undertaking that 211.5 publications and 16.6 patents per EUR 10 million of Union grants showed a high productivity of its research results and
that it was compliant with all requests expressed so far by the FP7 coordinators.

