Procedure file
Basic information
RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

2014/2627(RSP)

Procedure completed

Resolution on the invasion of Ukraine by Russia

Subject
6.10.04 Third-country political situation, local and regional conflicts
Geographical area
Ukraine

Key players
European Parliament

Key events
03/03/2014

Resolution/conclusions adopted by
Council

12/03/2014

Debate in Parliament

13/03/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

13/03/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

Summary

T7-0248/2014

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2627(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Documentation gateway
Motion for a resolution

B7-0263/2014

11/03/2014

EP

Motion for a resolution

B7-0264/2014

11/03/2014

EP

Motion for a resolution

B7-0265/2014

11/03/2014

EP

Motion for a resolution

B7-0266/2014

11/03/2014

EP

Motion for a resolution

B7-0267/2014

11/03/2014

EP

Motion for a resolution

B7-0268/2014

11/03/2014

EP

RC-B7-0263/2014

11/03/2014

T7-0248/2014

13/03/2014

Joint motion for resolution
Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

2014/2627(RSP) - 03/03/2014 Resolution/conclusions adopted by Council

EP

Summary

The Council held an extraordinary meeting to discuss recent developments in Ukraine.
The EU strongly condemned the violation by Russia of Ukrainian sovereignty and territorial integrity. The Council urged Russia to immediately
withdraw its armed forces to the areas of their permanent stationing and called for a peaceful solution to the crisis, in full respect of the
principles and obligations laid down in international law.
The EU and those Member States who are participants of G8, have decided for the time being to suspend their participation in activities
associated with the preparations for the G8 Summit in Sochi in June. In the absence of de-escalating steps by Russia, the Council agreed to
decide about consequences, for instance, the suspension of bilateral talks on visa matters as well as on the New Agreement, and would
consider further targeted measures.
The European Union indicated that it stood by the efforts of the new Ukrainian Government to stabilise the situation and pursue the course of
reforms. The EU reaffirmed the necessity of further constitutional reform in Ukraine and holding free, fair and transparent Presidential elections
with OSCE-ODIHR observation.
The EU is ready to further pursue its efforts with the international community and international financial institutions, especially the IMF, to
assist Ukraine.
The Council has also agreed to swiftly work on the adoption of restrictive measures for the freezing and recovery of assets of persons
identified as responsible for the misappropriation of State funds, and the freezing of assets of persons responsible for human rights violations.
The Council reconfirmed its offer of the Association Agreement, including a Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area.
Finally, the EU would be willing to enhance people to people contacts between the EU and Ukraine, notably through the visa liberalisation
process.

2014/2627(RSP) - 13/03/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on the invasion of Ukraine by Russia.
The text adopted in plenary was tabled by the EPP, S&D, ALDE, Greens/EFA and ECR groups.
Parliament firmly condemned Russias act of aggression in invading Crimea , which is an inseparable part of Ukraine and recognised as such
by the Russian Federation and by the international community. It called for the immediate de-escalation of the crisis, with the immediate
withdrawal of all military forces present illegally on Ukrainian territory.
These actions are in clear breach of the UN Charter, the OSCE Helsinki Final Act, the Statute of the Council of Europe, the 1994 Budapest
Memorandum on Security Assurances and Russias other international obligations which pose a threat to the security of the EU. Members
called for a peaceful solution to the current crisis and full respect for the principles of, and obligations laid down under, international law and
that the situation must be contained and further de-escalated with a view to avoiding a military confrontation in Crimea.
Parliament pointed out that, according to the Ukrainian constitution, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea can only organise referendums on
local matters and not on modifying the internationally recognised borders of Ukraine. It stressed that a referendum on the issue of accession to
the Russian Federation will therefore be considered illegitimate and illegal.
Members rejected Russias stated objective of protecting the Russian-speaking population in Crimea as completely unfounded, as it has not
faced and does not face any discrimination whatsoever. Moreover, they strongly rejected the defamation of protesters against Yanukovychs
policy as fascists by Russian propaganda.
Parliament emphasised the need for the EU and its Member States to speak to Russia with one united voice and to support the right of a
united Ukraine to determine its future freely. Therefore, it strongly supported the joint statement of the extraordinary European Council of 6
March 2014 that condemned the Russian acts of aggression and supported the territorial integrity, unity, sovereignty and independence of
Ukraine.
Members welcomed the Councils decision to adopt sanctions focused on the freezing and recovery of misappropriated Ukrainian funds,
targeting 18 individuals, including Yanukovych. They also welcomed the European Councils decision on a first wave of targeted measures
towards Russia, such as the suspension of bilateral talks on visa matters and the New Agreement, as well as the decision by the Member
States and EU institutions to suspend their participation in the G8 Summit in Sochi.
However, Members considered that in the event of further escalation with the annexation of Crimea, the EU should quickly take appropriate
measures, which should include an arms and dual-use technology embargo, restrictions on visas, the freezing of assets, the application of
money laundering legislation against individuals involved in the decision-making process with respect to the invasion of Ukraine, and
measures against Russian companies and their subsidiaries, particularly in the energy sector, to fully comply with EU law.
Welcoming the commitment of the Ukrainian Government to an ambitious reform agenda, Parliament welcomed the Commissions decision to
provide Ukraine with a short- and medium-term financial aid and support package worth EUR 11 billion in order to help stabilise the countrys
economic and financial situation. It also welcomes the readiness of the 28 EU heads of state or government to sign the political chapters of the
Association Agreement and adopt unilateral measures, such as tariff cuts for Ukrainian exports to the EU.
Stressing the importance of secure, diversified and affordable energy supply for Ukraine, Parliament underlined the need to build up Ukraines
resistance against energy threats coming from Russia. It also called on the Council to immediately authorise the Commission to speed up visa
liberalisation with Ukraine, so as to advance along the path of introducing a visa-free regime, following the example of Moldova.
Lastly, Members stressed that the parliamentary cooperation established between the European Parliament and the Russian State Duma and
the Federation Council cannot be conducted along the lines of business as usual.

