Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2223(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

New EU forest strategy: for forests and the forest-based sector

Subject
3.10.11 Forestry policy
3.70.01 Protection of natural resources: fauna, flora, nature, wildlife,
countryside; biodiversity

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

AGRI Agriculture and Rural Development
(Associated committee)

Appointed
05/11/2014

KÖSTINGER Elisabeth
Shadow rapporteur

NOICHL Maria

MCINTYRE Anthea

MÜLLER Ulrike

VIEGAS Miguel

ERIKSSON Peter

D'AMATO Rosa
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

ENVI Environment, Public Health and Food Safety
(Associated committee)
ITRE

Appointed
12/11/2014

GAMBÚS Francesc

Industry, Research and Energy

07/11/2014
GRÓBARCZYK Marek
Józef

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Agriculture and Rural Development

HOGAN Phil

Key events
20/09/2013

Non-legislative basic document published

17/12/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

17/12/2014

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

24/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

07/04/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

COM(2013)0659

Summary

A8-0126/2015

Summary

27/04/2015

Debate in Parliament

28/04/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

28/04/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

28/04/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0109/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2223(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AGRI/8/02176

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2013)0659

20/09/2013

EC

Committee draft report

PE544.341

10/12/2014

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE546.840

30/01/2015

EP

Summary

Committee opinion

ENVI

PE544.461

25/02/2015

EP

Committee opinion

ITRE

PE544.346

26/02/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0126/2015

07/04/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0109/2015

28/04/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)461

22/09/2015

2014/2223(INI) - 20/09/2013 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to present a new EU Strategy for forests and the forest-based sector.
BACKGROUND: covering over 40% of the EUs land area, forests are an essential resource for improving the quality of life and creating
employment, particularly in rural areas, whilst protecting ecosystems and ensuring ecological gains for all.
While the Treaty on the Functioning the EU makes no reference to specific provisions for an EU forest policy, the EU has a long history of
contributing through its policies to implementing sustainable forest management and to Member States decisions on forests.
The current Strategy dates from 1998. Based on cooperation between EU and Member States, (subsidiarity and shared responsibility), it
established a framework for forest-related actions that support sustainable forest management. The Forest Action Plan 2007-2011 was an
important instrument for implementing the strategy.
Over the last 15 years, significant societal and political changes have influenced the way EU society looks at forests and forestry. The overall
situation is characterised by growing demands on and threats to forests.
A new framework is needed to:
·

ensure that the multifunctional potential of EU forests is managed in a sustainable and balanced way, enabling our forests vital
ecosystem services to function correctly ;

·

satisfy the growing demand for raw material for existing and new products (e.g. green chemicals or textile fibres) and for renewable
energy ;

·

respond to the challenges and opportunities that forest-based industries face ;

·

protect forests and biodiversity from the significant effects of storms and fires, increasingly scarce water resources, and pests.

CONTENT: the Commission presents a strategy aiming to put forests and the forest sector at the heart of the path towards a green economy
and to value the benefits that forests can sustainably deliver, while ensuring their protection.
The new strategy has been formulated by the Commission with close cooperation with Member States. It revolves around eight areas for
action :
·

support rural development, particularly through the use of rural development funds to ensure the sustainable management of forests ;

·

foster the competitiveness and sustainability of the EUs forest-based industries, bio-energy and the wider green economy ;

·

maintain and enhance the resilience of forests regarding climate change, including through fire prevention and other adaptive
solutions (e.g. appropriate species, plant varieties, etc.) ;

·

protect forests and enhance ecosystem services: the strategy supports the use of Forest Management Plans which are at the core of
both the EU 2020 Biodiversity Strategy and EU Rural Development funding;

·

improve the knowledge base on forests to better understand the complex environmental and societal challenges facing the forest
sector ;

·

stimulate innovation across the forest sector through EU framework programmes for research and development ;

·

work to manage forests coherently and better understand them through improving coordination with policies relating to forests,
cooperation regarding forest governance and communication with respect to the public;

·

ensure consistency between EU and Member State policies and commitments on forest-related issues at international level.

A review will be carried out by 2018 to assess progress in implementing the strategy.

2014/2223(INI) - 07/04/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted the own-initiative report by Elisabeth KÖSTINGER (PPE, AT) on A new EU
Forest Strategy: for forests and the forest-based sector.
The Committee on Environment, Public Health and Food Safety exercised its prerogative as an associated committee in line with Article 54 of
the Rules of Procedure of the Parliament, was also consulted for an opinion on this report.
Members welcomed the Commission communication on a new EU forest strategy and the accompanying working documents, and stressed
that an EU forest strategy must i) focus on the sustainable management of forests and their multifunctional role from the economic, social and
environmental viewpoints and ii) must ensure better coordination and communication of Community policies directly or indirectly linked to
forestry.
The parliamentary committee oppose any attempt to make forestry a matter of EU policy and demand that the sectors local and regional basis
and the competence of the Member States in this be respected.
The report stresses the important role of the sustainable production and use of timber for the development of sustainable economic models
and the creation of green jobs. It calls on the Commission to analyse the difficulties in the downstream supply chain related to increased
demand from third countries, particularly for roundwoods, and to support this sector.
Given that around 60% of the EUs forests are private, with about 16 million private forest owners, Members underline the importance of
ownership and property rights and supports all measures enabling stakeholder groups to participate in a dialogue on reinforcing and
implementing sustainable forest management and improve the exchange of information.
Resource efficiency timber as a sustainable raw material (sustainable forest management): the report stresses that both the use of timber as a
renewable raw material and sustainable forest management have an important role to play in the achievement of the EUs socio-political goals
such as the energy transition, climate mitigation and adaptation to it. Lack of active forest management would be inimical to these goals.
Members support the resource-efficient use of timber as a renewable, versatile raw material with limited availability, and oppose legally binding
rules for prioritising the uses of wood.
The report supports the Commissions intention to develop, together with the Member States and stakeholders, an ambitious, objective and
demonstrable set of criteria and indicators for the sustainable management of forests. They underline that these criteria should be aligned with
the requirements of Forest Europe towards a European Forest Convention as a binding framework for sustainable forest management and for
improving the balance of interests in forest policy. They call on the Member States and the Commission to make all necessary efforts to
resume these negotiations and drive them forward to a successful conclusion.
Members consider that forest management plans can be important strategic instruments for the implementation of sustainable forest
management in European forests. The Member States, in line with the subsidiarity and proportionality principles, are called on to monitor and
promote the implementation of the forest management plans without creating unnecessary administrative burdens . The forest management
plans and the management plans under Natura 2000 should remain separate.
Research and development education and training: the report stresses the significant role that the bioeconomy plays in terms of achieving the
Commissions new priorities of growth, employment and investment. The bioeconomy represented in 2009 a market estimated to be worth over
EUR 2 trillion, providing 20 million jobs and accounting for 9 % of total employment in the EU.
The Commission is called on: i) to assess, from the point of view of forestry and wood working priorities, the European R&D programmes
(Horizon 2020) and the programme for the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises (COSME); ii) to develop new instruments
for the forest-based sector; and iii) to promote targeted research into cost-effective solutions for new and innovative timber products to support
the development of the sustainable wood-based bioeconomy.
Members called on the Commission and the Member States to devise measures and, where possible, to use existing European instruments to
support generation renewal and compensate for the skilled workforce shortage in the forests .

In addition, they judge it important: i) to promote the sustainable use of forest products in the construction sector, including application to the
construction of more affordable houses built from sustainably sourced raw materials; ii) to encourage scientific research work oriented towards
rational use of biomass.
Global challenges - environment and climate change: the Commission and the Member States are called on to take specific action with a view
to achieving Aichi Target 5, under which the rate of loss of all natural habitats, including forests, should be at least halved by 2020 and where
feasible brought close to zero.
Members expressed serious concern at the pace of world deforestation, particularly in developing countries. They called on the Commission to
develop an action plan on deforestation and forest degradation. They take the view that certain issues affect the forestry industry at global
level, particularly illegal felling, and therefore calls on the Commission to reinforce support for the forestry industry among the associated
international bodies.

2014/2223(INI) - 28/04/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 566 votes to 66, with 45 abstentions, a resolution on a new EU Forest Strategy: for forests and the
forest-based sector.
The resolution welcomed the Commission communication on a new EU forest strategy and the accompanying working documents, and
stressed that an EU forest strategy must i) focus on the sustainable management of forests and their multifunctional role from the economic,
social and environmental viewpoints and ii) must ensure better coordination and communication of Community policies directly or indirectly
linked to forestry.
Recalling that the Member States decide policy approaches in this area, Parliament opposed to any attempt to make forestry a matter of EU
policy. It demands that the sectors local and regional basis and the competence of the Member States in this be respected.
The resolution stressed the important role of the sustainable production and use of timber for the development of sustainable economic
models and the creation of green jobs. It called on the Commission to analyse the difficulties in the downstream supply chain related to
increased demand from third countries, particularly for roundwoods, and to support this sector.
Parliament underlined the possibility for Member States and regions i) to use funding available in their respective rural development
programmes, ii) to support sustainable forest management and to stimulate agroforestry, iii) to provide public environmental goods such as the
production of oxygen, reducing the level of CO2 and the crop protection against the effects of climate change.
Given that around 60% of the EUs forests are private, with about 16 million private forest owners, Members underlined the importance of
ownership and property rights and supported all measures enabling stakeholder groups to participate in a dialogue on reinforcing and
implementing sustainable forest management and improve the exchange of information.
Resource efficiency timber as a sustainable raw material (sustainable forest management): the resolution stressed that both the use of timber
as a renewable raw material and sustainable forest management have an important role to play in the achievement of the EUs socio-political
goals such as the energy transition, climate mitigation and adaptation to it. Lack of active forest management would be inimical to these goals.
Parliament supported the Commissions intention to develop, together with the Member States and stakeholders, an ambitious, objective and
demonstrable set of criteria and indicators for the sustainable management of forests . In this context, they called on the Member States and
the Commission to make all necessary efforts to resume these negotiations (already well advanced) within the requirements of Forest Europe
towards a European Forest Convention as a binding framework for sustainable forest management and for improving the balance of interests
in forest policy.
In line with the subsidiarity and proportionality principles, the Member States are called on to monitor and promote the implementation of the
forest management plans without creating unnecessary administrative burdens.
Research and development education and training: Parliament stressed the significant role that the bioeconomy plays in terms of achieving
the Commissions new priorities of growth, employment and investment. The bioeconomy represented in 2009 a market estimated to be worth
over EUR 2 trillion, providing 20 million jobs and accounting for 9% of total employment in the EU.
The Commission is called on:
to assess, from the point of view of forestry and wood working priorities, the European R&D programmes (Horizon 2020) and the
programme for the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises (COSME);
to develop new instruments for the forest-based sector;
to promote targeted research into cost-effective solutions for new and innovative timber products to support the development of the
sustainable wood-based bioeconomy;
to devise measures and, where possible, to use existing European instruments to support generation renewal and compensate for the
skilled workforce shortage in the forests in developing programmes of training in particular those intended for young foresters.
Welcoming the efforts made by the Commission to set up a European information system on forests, Members recommended provision of
more sets of long-term data to help understand trends in forestry.
In addition, they judge it important: i) to promote the sustainable use of forest products in the construction sector, including application to the
construction of more affordable houses built from sustainably sourced raw materials; ii) to encourage scientific research work oriented towards
rational use of biomass.
Global challenges - environment and climate change: the Commission and the Member States are called on to take specific action with a view
to achieving Aichi Target 5, under which the rate of loss of all natural habitats, including forests, should be at least halved by 2020 and where
feasible brought close to zero.
Parliament called on the Commission to finalise the review of the efficiency of the EU Regulation on wood, which aims to combat illegal
logging and the placement of illegal timber on the EU market, to develop an action plan to prevent deforestation and degradation of forests and
to strengthen the support for the forest sector in related international bodies.

