Procedure file
Basic information
COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision
procedure)
Regulation

2014/0268(COD)

Procedure completed

Emission limits and type-approval for internal combustion engines for
non-road mobile machinery
Repealing Directive 97/68/EC 1995/0209(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 2010/0212(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1024/2012 2011/0226(COD)
Subject
2.10.03 Standardisation, EC/EU standards and trade mark, certification,
compliance
3.40.03 Motor industry, cycle and motorcycle, commercial and agricultural
vehicles
3.70.02 Atmospheric pollution, motor vehicle pollution

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
ENVI

Rapporteur

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

Appointed
10/02/2015

GARDINI Elisabetta
Shadow rapporteur

DANCE Seb

DUNCAN Ian

HUITEMA Jan

ECK Stefan

EICKHOUT Bas

EVI Eleonora
Committee for opinion
IMCO

Rapporteur for opinion

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

Appointed
05/11/2014

POSPÍŠIL Jiří

Council of the European Union
Commission DG
European Commission

Commissioner

Internal Market, Industry, Entrepreneurship and SMEs BIEŃKOWSKA Elżbieta

European Economic and
Social Committee

Key events
25/09/2014

Legislative proposal published

12/11/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
Vote in committee, 1st reading/single

COM(2014)0581

Summary

15/09/2015

reading

15/09/2015

Committee decision to open
interinstitutional negotiations with report
adopted in committee

30/09/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0276/2015

26/04/2016

Approval in committee of the text agreed
at 1st reading interinstitutional
negotiations

PE610.750
GEDA/A/(2017)007928

04/07/2016

Debate in Parliament

05/07/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

05/07/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

18/07/2016

Act adopted by Council after Parliament's
1st reading

14/09/2016

Final act signed

14/09/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

16/09/2016

Final act published in Official Journal

Summary

Summary

T8-0296/2016

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/0268(COD)

Procedure type

COD - Ordinary legislative procedure (ex-codecision procedure)

Procedure subtype

Legislation

Legislative instrument

Regulation
Repealing Directive 97/68/EC 1995/0209(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 2010/0212(COD)
Amending Regulation (EU) No 1024/2012 2011/0226(COD)

Legal basis

Treaty on the Functioning of the EU TFEU 114

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Mandatory consultation of other institutions

European Economic and Social Committee

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

ENVI/8/01933

Documentation gateway
Legislative proposal

COM(2014)0581

25/09/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0281

25/09/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0282

25/09/2014

EC

Committee draft report

PE557.123

07/05/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE557.137

10/06/2015

EP

PE549.464

24/06/2015

EP

PE564.906

03/07/2015

EP

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

IMCO

Summary

Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st
reading/single reading

A8-0276/2015

30/09/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

T8-0296/2016

05/07/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)657

12/10/2016

Coreper letter confirming interinstitutional
agreement

GEDA/A/(2017)007928

24/08/2017

CSL

Additional information
European Commission

EUR-Lex

Final act
Regulation 2016/1628
OJ L 252 16.09.2016, p. 0053 Summary
Final legislative act with provisions for delegated acts

Delegated acts
2016/3048(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2016/3049(DEA)

Examination of delegated act

2014/0268(COD) - 25/09/2014 Legislative proposal
PURPOSE: to protect human health and the environment, and ensure the proper functioning of the internal market for engines in non-road
mobile machinery (NRMM).
PROPOSED ACT: Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council.
ROLE OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT: the European Parliament decides in accordance with the ordinary legislative procedure and on an
equal footing with the Council.
BACKGROUND: the emissions limits for non-road mobile machinery (NRMM) are currently set out in Directive 97/68/EC. This Directive was
amended a number of times, but several technical reviews have concluded that the legislation in its current form has shortcomings.
Non-road mobile machinery (NRMM) covers a large variety of combustion engines installed in machines ranging from small handheld
equipment, construction machinery and generating sets, to railcars, locomotives and inland waterway vessels.
These engines contribute significantly to air pollution and are accountable for roughly 15% of the nitrogen oxide (NOx) and 5% of the
particulate matter (PM) emissions in the EU.
The proposal also ties in with the industrial policy update of 2012 and could make an important contribution to technical harmonisation in the
context of the EU-US trade negotiations (Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership - TTIP).
IMPACT ASSESSMENT: the impact assessment took into account in the analytical design that the preferred choice might be a combination of
elements from different options. Alongside the no-policy change scenario, these options are:
alignment with US standards in scope and limit values.
step towards road sector ambition levels, for the most relevant emission sources.
extended level of ambition through enhanced monitoring provisions.
CONTENT: the proposal significantly upgrades the NRMM engine type-approval system with respect to the technical requirements on
emissions by adopting stricter levels, as well as introducing the split-level approach which is already used in other pieces of legislation in the
area of EU type-approval of motor vehicles.
This approach foresees legislation in two steps:
first, the fundamental provisions will be laid down by the European Parliament and the Council in a Regulation based on the ordinary
legislative procedure;
secondly, the technical specifications implementing the fundamental provisions will be laid down in delegated acts adopted by the
Commission in accordance with Article 290 of the TFEU.
The draft proposal and its implementing and delegated acts will carry over and improve on the existing requirements laid down in Directive

97/68/EC. Compared to the existing act, the proposal for a regulation will:
introduce new emission limits reflecting technological progress and EU policies in the on-road sector, with a view to achieving EU air
quality targets;
extend the scope, with a view to improving market harmonisation (EU and international) and minimising the risk of market distortions;
introduce measures for simplifying administrative procedures and improving enforcement, including conditions for better market
surveillance.
In particular, the delegated acts adopted under this proposal will include, amongst others:
detailed technical requirements of the test cycles;
technical test and measurement procedures;
detailed arrangements and requirements for the exceptions granted under this Regulation;
detailed provisions for type-approval procedures.
The proposal also provides general and specific transitional periods in order to allow sufficient lead time for engine and machinery
manufacturers, as well as for administrations.
BUDGETARY IMPLICATION: the cost associated to setting up an electronic database for the exchange of type-approval information was
already assessed in a feasibility study commissioned by the UNECE in June 2006.
The study predicted one off start-up costs in the EUR 50 000 to EUR 150 000 range and operating costs of EUR 5 000 to EUR 15 000 per
month, depending on the length of the contract with the service provider. A similar monthly range is provided for operating a help desk service,
if required.
DELEGATED ACTS: the proposal contains provisions empowering the Commission to adopt delegated acts in accordance with Article 290 of
the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union.

2014/0268(COD) - 30/09/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, 1st reading/single reading
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety adopted the report by GARDINI (EPP, IT) on the proposal for a regulation
of the European Parliament and of the Council on requirements relating to emission limits and type-approval for internal combustion engines
for non-road mobile machinery.
The parliamentary committee recommended that the European Parliament's position adopted at first reading following the ordinary legislative
procedure amends the Commission proposal as follows.
Purpose: in addition to broadening the scope of Union legislation in the field of market harmonisation, while minimising market distortions,
Members consider that this Regulation should aim to simplify the current legal framework, including measures for simplifying administrative
procedures, and to improve the general conditions for enforcement, in particular by strengthening the rules on market surveillance.
Definition of "engine": Members clarified the definition in order to cover all engine technologies, in particular with a view to whether or not they
use electronic control unit(s) (ECUs) or after-treatment systems.
Retrofitting the engines already in service: given the long lifetimes of non-road mobile machinery, Members suggest that it is appropriate to
consider retrofitting the engines already in service. Such retrofitting should in particular target densely populated urban areas and those in
breach of Union air quality legislation.
Protection for persons working in the vicinity of machinery: Members stressed the necessity to keep the cumulative exposure of persons
working in the vicinity of several different items of mobile machinery and equipment as low as possible. They recommend in this regard that
state-of-the-art technologies should be used to minimise emissions.
Member States should have the power to prohibit the use of combustion engines for reasons of health and safety at work, in particular in poor
air quality hotspots.
Ultrafine particles: to ensure that emissions of ultrafine particulate pollutants (size of 0.1?m and below) are controlled, the Commission should
be empowered to adopt a number-based approach drawing on the results of the Particulate Measurement Programme (PMP) of the United
Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) and should achieve at least the level of protection afforded by the existing Union
legislation on road vehicles.
Agricultural vehicles: the Regulation should also apply to agricultural vehicles covered by the provisions of Regulation (EU) No 167/2013 of the
European Parliament and of the Council which replaces the repealed Directive 97/68/EC. In order to avoid unnecessary administrative
burdens, the engines of the phase IIIB should be able to benefit from the transitional provisions laid down in this regulation with regard to the
requirements for the application of the phase V.
Inland waterway vessels: an amendment to table I-6 in annex II expands the application of the same emission limit values as inland waterways
propulsion engines to inland waterways auxiliary engines from >560kW only to include all powers.
Members also introduced an amendment allowing alignment of the inland waterways propulsion engine reference power with the American
standard which does not impose a reference power greater than or equal to 37 kW.
Monitoring of emissions of the engines in service: Members have suggested that such testing shall be conducted under the responsibility of
the manufacturer or the entity entrusted with such testing and under the supervision of the national type approval authority.
The Commission should conduct monitoring programmes to determine to what extent, the emissions resulting from the test cycle and on which
the type -approval is based, correspond to the emissions measured in actual operation.
Certificate of conformity: MEPs felt that the formalities should evolve with the digital age and that it was appropriate to draw to reduce
administrative burdens and costs.

Thus, instead of delivering a certificate of conformity, the manufacturer may apply a mark of conformity to the engine. That conformity marking
shall include an electronic code readable with widely available information technology (IT) tools and allowing the retrieval of information on the
engine from the manufacturer's website.
The Commission should be empowered to adopt a template for the conformity marking and the retrievable information and to establish the
acceptable types of electronic codes used to access the information on the engine.
Exchange of data and information: in this field, Members considered that using the well-established Internal Market Information System (IMI)
would save costs and unnecessary administrative efforts as compared to the set-up of a new digital platform proposed by the Commission.
Financial support for retrofitting: Members proposed that the Member States may make provision for financial incentives that apply to the
retrofitting of in-use engines which do comply with this Regulation in order to meet the emission limit values set out in the Annex applicable to
the type of engine to be retrofitted.
Transitional measures: during the period between the repeal of Directive 97/68/EC and the mandatory dates for stage V, it should not only still
be possible to grant EU type-approvals under Directive 97/68/EC, but also the applicable exemptions.
In addition, for engines of the category NRE used in mobile cranes, Member States shall authorise an extension of the transition period by an
additional 12 months.
For a period not exceeding 10 years from the applicable date for the placing on the market of Stage V engines set out in Annex III, Member
States may authorise the placing on the market of engines of category RLL with a maximum net power greater than 2000 kW that do not
comply with the emission limits set out in Annex II, and which are to be installed in locomotives which only run on a technically isolated 1520
mm railway network.
Finally, Members underlined the possible synergies between the non-road mobile machinery sector and heavy-duty vehicles as the related
technologies are interlinked, and called on the Commission to consider further action in this area.

2014/0268(COD) - 05/07/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, 1st reading/single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 623 votes to 57 with 27 abstentions, a legislative resolution on the proposal for a regulation of the
European Parliament and of the Council on requirements relating to emission limits and type-approval for internal combustion engines for
non-road mobile machinery.
Parliaments position adopted in first reading following the ordinary legislative procedure amended the Commission proposal as follows:
Objective and scope of the regulation: the regulation aims to: (i) broaden the scope of Union legislation in the field of market harmonisation,
while minimising the risk of market distortions; (ii) simplify the current legal framework, and to improve the general conditions for enforcement
of such legislation, in particular by strengthening the rules on market surveillance.
The legislation will define the categories of internal combustion engines in non-road mobile machinery (NRMM), such as lawn mowers,
bulldozers, diesel locomotives and inland waterway vessels, which will be divided into sub-categories according to the power of the engine.
For each category, it sets emission limits for CO, HC, NOX and particulate matter (PM) and deadlines for implementing them, starting from
2018. The new emission limits will be applied to engines for non-road mobile machinery as well as for agricultural and forestry machinery.
Engines for export and for use by the armed forces should not be subject to the emission limits laid down in the regulation. However, in order
to distinguish such engines from engines that are subject to those emission limits, markings should be required in certain cases.
The new regulation also provides for (i) certain exemptions to the emission limit requirements in respect of engines to be used in potentially
explosive atmospheres and in lifeboat launch vehicles; (ii) certain exemptions and rules in respect of engines that incorporate new
technologies or new concepts.
Protection for persons working in the vicinity of machinery: Parliament stressed the need to keep the cumulative exposure of persons working
in the vicinity of several different items of mobile machinery and equipment as low as possible. It recommended that technology that is
currently available should be used to minimise emissions.
Member States are free to lay down such requirements as they may deem necessary to ensure that the public and workers are protected
whenever non-road mobile machinery is in use, provided that such requirements do not affect the placing on the market of engines for such
machinery.
Retrofitting of engines already in service: given the long lifetime of non-road mobile machinery, Members proposed considering the retrofitting
of engines already in service. Such retrofitting should, in particular, target densely populated urban areas as a means of helping Member
States to comply with Union air quality legislation.
Obligations of economic operators: manufacturers should keep the EU type-approval certificate with its attachments and, where applicable, a
copy of the statement of conformity at the disposal of the approval authorities for a period of 10 years after the placing on the market of an
engine. They should provide national authorities, upon reasoned request and via the approval authority, with a copy of the EU type-approval
certificate for an engine.
An importer that has reason to believe or considers that an engine is not in conformity with the regulation, and in particular that it does not
correspond to its EU type approval, should not place the engine on the market until it has been brought into conformity.
Engine types and engine families should be designed and fitted with emission control strategies in such a way as to prevent tampering to the
extent possible. The use of defeat strategies should be prohibited.
Monitoring of emissions of in-service engines: Members suggested that testing should be conducted under the responsibility of the
manufacturer and in compliance with the requirements of the approval authority.
The Commission shall conduct monitoring programmes for each engine category to determine to what extent the emissions measured from
the test cycle correspond to the emissions measured in actual operation. Those programmes and their results shall, on a yearly basis, be the

subject of a presentation to the Member States and, subsequently, of a communication to the public.
Statement of conformity: the statement of conformity shall specify the particular features and restrictions that are to apply to the engine. It may
also be delivered in the form of a secure electronic file.
The Commission may adopt implementing acts laying down the template for the statement of conformity, including the features aimed at
preventing forgery and allowing verification of the secure electronic file.
Exchange of data and information: national authorities should be required to cooperate efficiently with each other and with the Commission,
and to exchange data and information relating to EU type approvals by means of the Internal Market Information System (IMI). A module of IMI
specifically customised for non-road mobile machinery should be established. Manufacturers and technical services may use IMI for the
exchange of data and information on engines for non-road mobile machinery.
Transitional provisions: during the period between the repeal of Directive 97/68/EC and compulsory dates for Phase V, it should not only still
be possible to grant EU type-approvals under Directive 97/68/EC, but also the applicable exemptions. Transition engines may continue to be
placed on the market during the transition period provided that the machinery in which the transition engine is installed has a production date
not later than 18 months following the start of the transition period.
For engines of the category NRE used in mobile cranes, Member States shall authorise an extension of the transition period by an additional
12 months.
For a period not exceeding 10 years from the applicable date for the placing on the market of Stage V engines set out in Annex III, Member
States may authorise the placing on the market of engines of category RLL with a maximum net power greater than 2000 kW that do not
comply with the emission limits set out in Annex II, and which are to be installed in locomotives which only run on a technically isolated 1520
mm railway network.
Review: by 31 December 2018, the Commission shall submit a report regarding the assessment of the possibility of laying down harmonised
measures for the installation of retrofit emission control devices in engines in non-road mobile machinery that has already been placed on the
Union market. That report shall also address technical measures and financial incentive schemes as a means of helping Member States to
comply with Union air quality legislation, by assessing possible action against air pollution in densely populated areas, and with due respect for
the Union rules on state aid.

2014/0268(COD) - 14/09/2016 Final act
PURPOSE: to adopt stricter emission limits for internal combustion engines for non-road mobile machinery.
LEGISLATIVE ACT: Regulation (EU) 2016/1628 of the European Parliament and of the Council on requirements relating to gaseous and
particulate pollutant emission limits and type-approval for internal combustion engines for non-road mobile machinery, amending Regulations
(EU) No 1024/2012 and (EU) No 167/2013, and amending and repealing Directive 97/68/EC.
CONTENT: the Regulation updates the current legislation (Directive 97/68/EC) which no longer corresponds to the most recent technological
developments. It sets new requirements to reduce pollutant emissions from non-road mobile machinery engines. These requirements address
air pollution at source to protect the health of EU citizens and the environment.
This Regulation seeks to ensure the good functioning of the internal market and to strengthen market surveillance while protecting human
health and the environment. It also addresses competitiveness and compliance aspects, with the aim of removing obstacles to external trade
by reducing the regulatory barriers that result from diverging emission requirements
Scope: the Regulation shall apply to different categories of internal combustion engines in non-road mobile machinery (NRMM), such as lawn
mowers, bulldozers, diesel locomotives and inland waterway vessels, which will be divided into sub-categories according to the power of the
engine.
Emission limits: for each category, it sets emission limits for carbon monoxide (CO), total hydrocarbons (HC) and oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and
particulate matter (PM) and deadlines for implementing them, starting from 2018. The new emission limits will be applied to engines for
non-road mobile machinery as well as for agricultural and forestry machinery.
Engines intended for export to third countries and use by the armed forces are not subject to the emission limits laid down in the Regulation.
Certain exemptions from the emission limit requirements are also provided for engines for use in potentially explosive atmospheres and for
non-road mobile machinery that is exclusively used for the launch and recovery of lifeboats.
EU type-approval procedures: the Regulation lays down the requirements for EU type-approval. Only engines which are in compliance with the
requirements on emission limits and the type-approval procedures will be allowed on the market. Manufacturers shall keep
the EU type-approval certificate with its attachments and, where applicable, a copy of the statement of conformity at the disposal of the
approval authorities for a period of 10 years after the placing on the market of an engine.
Before an EU-type-approved motor is placed on the market, importers must ensure that the EU type-approval certificate is accompanied by its
attachments.
An importer that has reason to believe or considers that an engine is not in conformity with this Regulation, and in particular that it does not
correspond to its EU type-approval, shall not place the engine on the market until it has been brought into conformity.
Engine types and engine families shall be designed and fitted with emission control strategies in such a way as to prevent tampering to the
extent possible.
ENTRY INTO FORCE: 6.10.2016.
APPLICATION: from 1.1.2017.
DELEGATED ACTS: the Commission may adopt delegated acts in respect of the monitoring of in-service emission performance, technical
tests and measurement procedures, conformity of production, separate delivery of engine exhaust after-treatment systems, engines for

field-testing, engines for use in explosive atmospheres, equivalence of engine EU type-approvals. The powers to adopt such delegated acts is
conferred on the Commission for a period of five years (tacitly renewable) from 6 October 2016. The European Parliament or the Council shall
have the right to object to a delegated act with a period of two months (extendable two months) from the date of notification of the act.

