Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2231(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

EU's new approach to human rights and democracy ? evaluating the
activities of the European Endowment for Democracy (EED) since its
establishment

Subject
6.10.08 Fundamental freedoms, human rights, democracy in general

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/11/2014

GRZYB Andrzej
Shadow rapporteur

MARTIN David

DEMESMAEKER Mark

MICHEL Louis

COUSO PERMUY
Javier

BÜTIKOFER Reinhard

CORRAO Ignazio

Key events
15/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

26/05/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

03/06/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

09/07/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

09/07/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

09/07/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2231(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

A8-0177/2015

Summary

T8-0274/2015

Summary

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/02278

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE544.402

25/02/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE552.133

16/04/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0177/2015

03/06/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0274/2015

09/07/2015

EP

Summary

2014/2231(INI) - 03/06/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted an own-initiative report by Andrzej GRZYB (EPP, PL) on the EUs new approach to human rights
and democracy evaluating the activities of the European Endowment for Democracy (EED) since its establishment.
Recalling that the promotion of and support for democracy, the rule of law and respect for the universality and indivisibility of human rights and
fundamental freedoms are among the core objectives of the EUs foreign policy, Members welcomed the EEDs track record to date and
considered that it is fulfilling its main objective of fostering and encouraging democratisation and deep and sustainable democracy in countries
in political transition.
General evaluation: Members welcomed the EEDs consistent engagement in favour of freedom of expression and association, the
strengthening of the rule of law, the fight against corruption, and social and political pluralism to support the development of democratic
regimes in both the Eastern and Southern Neighbourhoods. The initiatives taken by the EED have demonstrated its unique capacity to bridge
or fill gaps in cases where it has been impossible to obtain financing from EU Member States or non-EU countries.
Financing: Members called on the EED founding parties, and especially on all the Member States and the Commission, to contribute, or
increase their contributions, to the EED in line with the commitments they have made. As at 26 April 2015, the following countries have
pledged and contributed to the EED: Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. They stressed that, in order to sustain and further
develop the effectiveness of the EED, it is vital to ensure long-term, sufficient, stable, transparent and predictable funding.
Members welcomed the financial contributions received by the EED from EU partners such as Switzerland and Canada.
Members also called for an end to earmarking of funds by donors for particular countries or project
Grants and beneficiaries: whilst welcoming the lifting of the initial geographical limitation of the EED, Members considered it crucial to ensure
sustainable funding for EED recipients in the long run by strengthening complementarity links with other bilateral donors and with European
external financing instruments, in particular the EIDHR, which where appropriate could take over medium-term financial support for mature
EED beneficiaries.
To this end, Members invited the Commission to:
set up a contact group with the goal of identifying the best way for EED beneficiaries to transition to EIDHR financial support;
come forward with specific proposals for mechanisms for programming interface and cooperation with the EED (in cooperation with
the European External Action Service (EEAS).
Further, they called on the EED to further actively engage in countries where the space for external support for civil society is severely
hampered.
They welcomed the EED grants offered to Ukrainian actors and the support offered to all pro-democracy activists engaged in the EUs
neighbourhood.
Members encouraged the EED to place stronger emphasis on groups suffering from social exclusion or political marginalisation (e.g. womens
movements LGBTI human rights activists, persecuted religious minorities and civic activists).
Cooperation with the European Parliament: Members called for effective links between the EED, the Democracy Support and Election
Coordination Group (DEG) and the relevant parliamentary committees. They called for the development of further cooperation between the
EED, its beneficiaries and the Sakharov Prize Network.
Whilst calling for enhanced policy coherence of actions financed by the EED, Members called for EED to continue to develop new innovative
means and instruments for democracy assistance, with particular regard to new media and grassroots initiatives in these countries.
Lastly, Members considered that further underlining the uniqueness and added value of the EED and communicating about the subject widely
and on a regular basis would increase the EEDs fundraising capacity.

2014/2231(INI) - 09/07/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 395 votes to 86, with 18 abstentions, a resolution on the EUs new approach to human rights and
democracy evaluating the activities of the European Endowment for Democracy (EED) since its establishment.
Recalling that the promotion of and support for democracy, the rule of law and respect for the universality and indivisibility of human rights and
fundamental freedoms are among the core objectives of the EUs foreign policy, Parliament welcomed the EEDs track record to date and
considered that it is fulfilling its main objective of fostering and encouraging democratisation and deep and sustainable democracy in countries
in political transition.
General evaluation: Parliament welcomed the EEDs consistent engagement in favour of freedom of expression and association, the
strengthening of the rule of law, the fight against corruption, and social and political pluralism to support the development of democratic
regimes in both the Eastern and Southern Neighbourhoods. The initiatives taken by the EED have demonstrated its unique capacity to bridge
or fill gaps in cases where it has been impossible to obtain financing from EU Member States or non-EU countries.
Financing: Parliament called on the EED founding parties, and especially on all the Member States and the Commission, to contribute, or
increase their contributions, to the EED in line with the commitments they have made. As at 26 April 2015, the following countries have
pledged and contributed to the EED: Belgium, Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Germany, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. It stressed that, in order to sustain and further
develop the effectiveness of the EED, it is vital to ensure long-term, sufficient, stable, transparent and predictable funding.
Parliament welcomed the financial contributions received by the EED from EU partners such as Switzerland and Canada and called for an end
to earmarking of funds by donors for particular countries or projects.
Grants and beneficiaries: whilst welcoming the lifting of the initial geographical limitation of the EED, Parliament considered it crucial to ensure
sustainable funding for EED recipients in the long run by strengthening complementarity links with other bilateral donors and with European
external financing instruments, in particular the EIDHR, which where appropriate could take over medium-term financial support for mature
EED beneficiaries.
To this end, the Commission is invited to:
set up a contact group with the goal of identifying the best way for EED beneficiaries to transition to EIDHR financial support;
come forward with specific proposals for mechanisms for programming interface and cooperation with the EED (in cooperation with
the European External Action Service (EEAS).
Further, it called on the EED to further actively engage in countries where the space for external support for civil society is severely hampered.
They welcomed the EED grants offered to Ukrainian actors, which set a good example of swift support for political and civic activists who then
become democratically elected representatives. It welcomed the EED support offered to all pro-democracy activists engaged in the EUs
neighbourhood, which is intended to sustain the development of consolidated democratic regimes.
Members encouraged the EED to place stronger emphasis on groups suffering from social exclusion or political marginalisation (e.g. womens
movements LGBTI human rights activists, persecuted religious minorities and civic activists). They recalled that the church has played a
crucial role in opposing communist regimes and in the democratic transformation processes in central and eastern Europe.
Cooperation with the European Parliament: Parliament called for effective links between the EED, the Democracy Support and Election
Coordination Group (DEG) and the relevant parliamentary committees. It called for the development of further cooperation between the EED,
its beneficiaries and the Sakharov Prize Network.
Whilst calling for enhanced policy coherence of actions financed by the EED, Parliament called for EED to continue to develop new innovative
means and instruments for democracy assistance, with particular regard to new media and grassroots initiatives in these countries.
Plenary called for the composition of the EED Board of Governors to represent political groups, on the basis of the DHondt system.
Lastly, Parliament considered that further underlining the uniqueness and added value of the EED and communicating about the subject
widely and on a regular basis would increase the EEDs fundraising capacity.
It should be noted that an alternative motion for a resolution, tabled by the GUE/NGL Group, was rejected in plenary.

