Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2816(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Conclusion of an EU/Georgia association agreement
See also 2014/0086(NLE)
Subject
6.20.03 Bilateral economic and trade agreements and relations
6.40.15 European neighbourhood policy
Geographical area
Georgia

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
09/07/2014

MAMIKINS Andrejs
Shadow rapporteur

JUREK Marek

NART Javier
Committee for opinion
INTA

Rapporteur for opinion

International Trade

Appointed
03/09/2014

REHN Olli
ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Key events
17/11/2014

Debate in Council

17/11/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

20/11/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

17/12/2014

Debate in Parliament

18/12/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

18/12/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

18/12/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2816(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure
See also 2014/0086(NLE)

A8-0042/2014

Summary

T8-0110/2014

Summary

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 099-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/01045

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE537.388

29/09/2014

EP

PE537.396

07/11/2014

EP

PE541.322

13/11/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0042/2014

20/11/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0110/2014

18/12/2014

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)102

31/03/2015

Committee opinion
Amendments tabled in committee

INTA

2014/2816(INI) - 20/11/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted an initiative report by Andrejs MAMIKINS (S&D, LV) containing a motion for a non-legislative
resolution on the draft Council decision on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Association Agreement between the
European Union and the European Atomic Energy Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Georgia, of the other part.
Members welcomed the signature of the Association Agreement as constituting a significant step forward in EU-Georgia relations and
embodying a commitment to the path of political association and economic integration. They stressed that the ratification of the Agreement is
not the final goal in itself and that full implementation thereof in as short a timeframe as possible is key.
European perspective of Georgia: Members stressed that Georgia like any other European state has a European perspective and may apply
to become a member of the Union provided that it adheres to the principles of democracy, respects fundamental freedoms and human and
minority rights, and ensures the rule of law. They stressed that the Agreement covers the entire internationally recognised territory of Georgia.
They called on Georgia to ensure that reforms are anchored and deeply rooted in the institutional framework in order to build a society
characterised by pluralism, non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men.
Financial assistance: Members welcomed the financial assistance granted to Georgia in 2014 in accordance with the principle of more funds
for more reform. They also welcomed the Association Agenda which creates a practical framework to achieve the overriding objectives of the
Agreement and should be the guiding framework for the development of EU-Georgia relations. They stressed that both Georgia and the EU
should be involved in the implementation of the Agenda, and that the priorities set out therein should receive appropriate technical and
financial support so that Georgia has the means to continue its democratic and economic reforms. They called on the Commission and the
Member States to coordinate their assistance and to use the priorities of the Agenda as guiding principles when programming financing for
Georgia.
Sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia: Members reaffirmed their support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia and
called for the applicability and benefits of the Agreement to the entire internationally recognised territory of Georgia to be ensured.
They called, in this connection, for the EU to continue to engage actively in conflict resolution, through the EU Special Representative for the
South Caucasus and the Crisis in Georgia, co-chairing the Geneva Talks, and through the EU Monitoring Mission (EUMM). They encouraged
more decisive efforts as regards the revision of the restrictive aspects of the law on occupied territories in order to maximise the benefits of the
Agreement and the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA).
For its part, Russia is invited to respect fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia, as well as the inviolability of its internationally
recognised borders, to reverse its recognition of the separation of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia and to end its occupation
thereof.
Priority judiciary reforms: whilst welcoming the recent reforms in this area, Members reiterated that justice-sector reform in Georgia remains a
priority for both Georgia and the European Union. All prosecutions must be transparent, proportionate and free from political motivation.
Members stressed the need for the Georgian authorities to seek to bring about national reconciliation and acknowledged that accusations of
cases of so-called selective justice have had a negative impact on the country. They called on the Georgian authorities to avoid
instrumentalising the justice system as a tool of political retribution and to take the utmost care to avoid accusations in the future, while
pursuing a serious fight to rule out corruption and the misuse of public office.
Fight against organised crime and corruption: Members called on the Georgian authorities to continue the fight against organised crime,
corruption, fraud, and money laundering at all levels and in all spheres of life. They stressed the importance of the depoliticisation of the public
administration in order to make it more efficient and free from political interference. They also highlighted the importance of antidiscrimination

legislation in securing equal rights and protection for all minorities, in particular for ethnic, religious and LGBT minorities. They deplored the
violent outbreaks of Islamophobia and homophobia that have taken place in the country and the failure of the prosecution services and the
judiciary to bring the perpetrators to justice in an effective way.
Reform the social sector and combat poverty: Members stressed the need for urgent reforms of the social protection system to reduce the
growing social inequalities that affect children in particular, as reflected by the increasing percentage of children who are living below the
national poverty line (27 % in 2013 compared to 25 % in 2011) and in extreme poverty (6 % vs 3.9 % among the general population), surviving
on less than USD 1.25 per day. They noted positively the adoption of the new labour code, and stressed the need to implement it and to
continue improving labour standards and social dialogue in order to comply with the labour rights and standards set out by the International
Labour Organization (ILO).
Free Trade Area: Members congratulated Georgia on having been able to sustain external pressure, inter alia from Russia, and redirect its
exports towards new markets, and encouraged Georgia to continue on this path also in the future; condemns the policy of economic pressure
employed by Russia against Georgia prior to and after the signature of the DCFTA in June 2014. They believe strongly that the DCFTA will
have a long-term beneficial effect on Georgias economy and will thus contribute to raising the quality of life of its citizens.
In this context, Members called on the Parliaments of the Member States to ratify the Association Agreement, including the DCFTA, as soon
as possible, so that all economic and trade provisions of the Agreement can enter into force in full without delay. They underlined the fact that
the success of the DCFTA will be dependent on the thorough implementation by both parties of the commitments set out in the Agreement.
They called, in this respect, for the EU to provide Georgia with all necessary assistance, also with a view to alleviating the short-term costs for
Georgia.
Secession: Members highlighted the essential role of the EU Special Representative for the South Caucasus and the Crisis in Georgia and of
the EU Monitoring Mission (EUMM) in contributing to security and stability in the areas adjacent to the regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia,
and called for the prolongation of its mandate beyond 2016. They called also for the EU to ensure that it is given an adequate budget to carry
out its mandate.
Members regretted the lack of substantial progress in the Geneva talks despite the efforts of the Georgian authorities to engage constructively
to address all security and humanitarian concerns in the conflict areas. They called for a more effective role for the EU in the process.
Members condemned the process of the so-called borderisation along the administrative border line with Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, which has led to the expansion of the area of occupied territories, to the detriment of Georgia.
They supported the positive steps taken by the Georgian Government towards the improvement of relations with Russia and called on Russia,
as an important actor in the region, to engage constructively in finding a peaceful resolution to the conflicts.
Russia must guarantee the EUMM full, unlimited access to the breakaway territories of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia.
South Caucasus: Members pointed out that the entry into force of the EU-Georgia Association Agreement, the likely inclusion of Armenia in
the Customs Union, and the fact that Azerbaijan remains outside the main economic blocs, including the WTO, could disrupt traditional
economic relations in the region.
Fully supportive of the progressive differentiation provided for within the Eastern Partnership framework, Members consider that a regional
approach is essential for the EU to contribute effectively to the stability and economic development of the South Caucasus. Therefore, they
called on the Commission to assist the countries of the region in dealing with the possible problems which may arise from such a situation and
help Georgia to make renewed efforts to promote new forms of cooperation in the South Caucasus.
In addition, Members reminded Georgia of Europes generous solidarity when Russia imposed trade and economic sanctions on the country .
They expect Georgia in consequence not to profit from the current Russian sanctions on the EU.
Environmental and energy issues: Members drew attention to the crucial position of Georgia as regards the development of the Southern
Corridor and the transit of oil and gas pipelines that could be of strategic importance for European energy security. They called, in this regard,
for EU environmental standards to be fully respected in the construction of energy infrastructure. They stressed, furthermore, the importance of
diversifying energy sources and called on the Commission to assist and monitor closely the Georgian authorities in their investment
programme for the construction, rehabilitation and reconstruction of hydropower plants, urging them to comply fully with EU standards and
norms.
Institutional cooperation: Members stressed the importance of its cooperation with the Parliament of Georgia as a way to monitor the
implementation of the Agreement and the Agenda. They believed that the entry into force of the Agreement and the creation of the new
institutional framework for cooperation calls for a similar upgrade of the situation at parliamentary level and that it is necessary to create a
specific EU-Georgia parliamentary association committee. They called on Georgia to provide comprehensive information related to the
Association Agreement and its implementation, including the territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

2014/2816(INI) - 18/12/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 491 votes to 84, with 63 abstentions, a non-legislative resolution on the draft Council decision on the
conclusion, on behalf of the European Union, of the Association Agreement between the European Union and the European Atomic Energy
Community and their Member States, of the one part, and Georgia, of the other part.
Parliament welcomed the signature of the Association Agreement as constituting a significant step forward in EU-Georgia relations and
embodying a commitment to the path of political association and economic integration. It stressed that the ratification of the Agreement is not
the final goal in itself and that full implementation thereof in as short a timeframe as possible is key.
European perspective of Georgia: Parliament stressed that Georgia like any other European state has a European perspective and may
apply to become a member of the Union provided that it adheres to the principles of democracy, respects fundamental freedoms and human
and minority rights, and ensures the rule of law. It stressed that the Agreement covers the entire internationally recognised territory of Georgia.
It called on Georgia to ensure that reforms are anchored and deeply rooted in the institutional framework in order to build a society
characterised by pluralism, non-discrimination, tolerance, justice, solidarity and equality between women and men.

Financial assistance: Parliament welcomed the financial assistance granted to Georgia in 2014 in accordance with the principle of more funds
for more reform. It also welcomed the Association Agenda which creates a practical framework to achieve the overriding objectives of the
Agreement and should be the guiding framework for the development of EU-Georgia relations. It stressed that both Georgia and the EU should
be involved in the implementation of the Agenda, and that the priorities set out therein should receive appropriate technical and financial
support so that Georgia has the means to continue its democratic and economic reforms. The resolution called on the Commission and the
Member States to coordinate their assistance and to use the priorities of the Agenda as guiding principles when programming financing for
Georgia.
Sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia: Parliament called on Russia to respect fully the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia,
as well as the inviolability of its internationally recognised borders, to reverse its recognition of the separation of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia and to end its occupation thereof, and to reciprocate the commitment to the non-use of force vis-à-vis Georgia. It
condemned, in this regard, the conclusion of the alliance and strategic partnership treaty between the occupied territory of Abkhazia and
Russia. It viewed this as a step taken by Russia to conclude the full annexation of Abkhazia. Parliament expressed further concern that a
similar treaty may be concluded with the occupied territory of Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia as well. In this regard, it called on the Russian
Federation to withdraw the so called treaty and comply with its obligations under the 12 August 2008 Ceasefire Agreement.
Parliament encouraged more decisive efforts as regards the revision of the restrictive aspects of the law on occupied territories in order to
maximise the benefits of the Agreement and the Deep and Comprehensive Free Trade Area (DCFTA).
Priority judiciary reforms: whilst welcoming the recent reforms in this area, Parliament reiterated that justice-sector reform in Georgia remains a
priority for both Georgia and the European Union. All prosecutions must be transparent, proportionate and free from political motivation.
Parliament stressed the need for the Georgian authorities to seek to bring about national reconciliation and acknowledged that accusations of
cases of so-called selective justice have had a negative impact on the country. It called on the Georgian authorities to avoid instrumentalising
the justice system as a tool of political retribution and to take the utmost care to avoid accusations in the future, while pursuing a serious fight
to rule out corruption and the misuse of public office.
Parliament acknowledged that accusations of cases of so-called selective justice have had a negative impact. It called on the Georgian
authorities to avoid instrumentalising the justice system as a tool of political retribution. In an oral amendment adopted in plenary, Parliament
welcomed the OSCE/ODIHR Trial Monitoring Report Georgia issued on 9 December 2014 and called on the Georgian government to seriously
undertake efforts to meet the shortcomings identified therein.
Fight against organised crime and corruption: Parliament called on the Georgian authorities to continue the fight against organised crime,
corruption, fraud, and money laundering at all levels and in all spheres of life. It stressed the importance of the depoliticisation of the public
administration in order to make it more efficient and free from political interference. Members also highlighted the importance of
antidiscrimination legislation in securing equal rights and protection for all minorities, in particular for ethnic, religious and LGBT minorities.
They deplored the violent outbreaks of Islamophobia and homophobia that have taken place in the country and the failure of the prosecution
services and the judiciary to bring the perpetrators to justice in an effective way. They also took note of the steps taken by Georgia against
Islamophobia and homophobia, in line with its international commitments.
Free Trade Area: Parliament congratulated Georgia on having been able to sustain external pressure, inter alia from Russia, and redirect its
exports towards new markets, and encouraged Georgia to continue on this path also in the future. It condemned the policy of economic
pressure employed by Russia against Georgia prior to and after the signature of the DCFTA in June 2014. It believed strongly that the DCFTA
will have a long-term beneficial effect on Georgias economy and will thus contribute to raising the quality of life of its citizens.
In this context, Parliament called on the Parliaments of the Member States to ratify the Association Agreement, including the DCFTA, as soon
as possible, so that all economic and trade provisions of the Agreement can enter into force in full without delay. It underlined the fact that the
success of the DCFTA will be dependent on the thorough implementation by both parties of the commitments set out in the Agreement. It
called, in this respect, for the EU to provide Georgia with all necessary assistance, also with a view to alleviating the short-term costs for
Georgia.
Secession: Members highlighted the essential role of the EU Special Representative for the South Caucasus and the Crisis in Georgia and of
the EU Monitoring Mission (EUMM) in contributing to security and stability in the areas adjacent to the regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia,
and called for the prolongation of its mandate beyond 2016. They called also for the EU to ensure that it is given an adequate budget to carry
out its mandate.
Parliament regretted the lack of substantial progress in the Geneva talks despite the efforts of the Georgian authorities to engage
constructively to address all security and humanitarian concerns in the conflict areas. It called for a more effective role for the EU in the
process. Members condemned the process of the so-called borderisation along the administrative border line with Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali
region/South Ossetia, which has led to the expansion of the area of occupied territories, to the detriment of Georgia. It supported the positive
steps taken by the Georgian Government towards the improvement of relations with Russia and called on Russia, as an important actor in the
region, to engage constructively in finding a peaceful resolution to the conflicts.
Russia must guarantee the EUMM full, unlimited access to the breakaway territories of Abkhazia and the Tskhinvali region/South Ossetia.
South Caucasus: Parliament pointed out that the entry into force of the EU-Georgia Association Agreement, the likely inclusion of Armenia in
the Customs Union, and the fact that Azerbaijan remains outside the main economic blocs, including the WTO, could disrupt traditional
economic relations in the region.
Fully supportive of the progressive differentiation provided for within the Eastern Partnership framework, Members considered that a regional
approach is essential for the EU to contribute effectively to the stability and economic development of the South Caucasus. Therefore, they
called on the Commission to assist the countries of the region in dealing with the possible problems which may arise from such a situation and
help Georgia to make renewed efforts to promote new forms of cooperation in the South Caucasus.
In addition, Parliament reminded Georgia of Europes generous solidarity when Russia imposed trade and economic sanctions on the country .
It expected Georgia in consequence not to profit from the current Russian sanctions on the EU.
Environmental and energy issues: Parliament drew attention to the crucial position of Georgia as regards the development of the Southern
Corridor and the transit of oil and gas pipelines that could be of strategic importance for European energy security. It called, in this regard, for
EU environmental standards to be fully respected in the construction of energy infrastructure. It stressed, furthermore, the importance of
diversifying energy sources with regard, in particular, to renewables, and of aligning climate-change policies and targets with those of the EU.

Institutional cooperation: Parliament stressed the importance of its cooperation with the Parliament of Georgia as a way to monitor the
implementation of the Agreement and the Agenda. It believed that the entry into force of the Agreement and the creation of the new
institutional framework for cooperation calls for a similar upgrade of the situation at parliamentary level and that it is necessary to create a
specific EU-Georgia parliamentary association committee. It called on Georgia to provide comprehensive information related to the Association
Agreement and its implementation, including the territories of Abkhazia and South Ossetia.

