Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2952(RSP)

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 2014 progress report on Bosnia and Herzegovina

Subject
8.20 Enlargement of the Union
Geographical area
Bosnia and Herzegovina

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AFET

Rapporteur

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
27/11/2014

PREDA Cristian Dan
Shadow rapporteur

KHAN Afzal

DZHAMBAZKI Angel

RADOŠ Jozo

COUSO PERMUY
Javier

ŠOLTES Igor

European Commission

Commission DG

Commissioner

Neighbourhood and Enlargement Negotiations

HAHN Johannes

Key events
16/12/2014

Debate in Council

14/04/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

29/04/2015

Debate in Parliament

30/04/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

30/04/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

30/04/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

T8-0182/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2952(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Summary

Procedure subtype

Resolution on statement

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AFET/8/02008

Documentation gateway
Amendments tabled in committee

PE549.245

09/03/2015

EP

Motion for a resolution

B8-0359/2015

27/04/2015

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0182/2015

30/04/2015

EP

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2015)461

22/09/2015

Summary

2014/2952(RSP) - 30/04/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on the 2014 Progress Report on Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Members recalled that the EU has repeatedly stated its unequivocal commitment to BiHs European perspective and to its territorial integrity,
sovereignty and unity. It urged the new BiH leaders to commit fully to carrying out the necessary institutional, economic and social reforms in
order to improve the lives of BiH citizens and enable progress on the path to EU membership.
Reforms: Members strongly supported the European integration of BiH and believed that the EUs reinforced engagement should focus, inter
alia, on socio-economic issues, the business environment, the institutional framework, the rule of law and governance, law enforcement policy,
an independent judiciary, the fight against corruption, public administration reform, civil society and youth. They invited the new leaders of BiH
to agree with the EU on a concrete roadmap for a broad and inclusive reform agenda to advance the country on its path towards the EU.
Enhanced democracy: Parliament considered it crucial to continue, in parallel, with political reforms and democratisation of the political
system. It underlined the fact that economic prosperity is only possible if it is based on a democratic and inclusive society and state. According
to the Parliament, BiH will not be a successful candidate for EU membership until appropriate institutional conditions have been established.
Members are seriously concerned that the public administration, which is supposed to help BiH advance towards EU membership and improve
living conditions for its citizens, continues to be fragmented, politicised and dysfunctional.
Fight against corruption: Parliament urged the authorities to make the fight against corruption an absolute priority, given that it has not yet
resulted in satisfactory improvements and that corruption affects all sectors, including health and education, and in particular the judicial
system.
War crimes: Parliament called for steps to be taken to strengthen the protection of victims and improve the work of the BiH Prosecutors Office
by reviewing the processing of Category II war crimes cases. It noted with concern that there are still 84 500 internally displaced persons
(IDPs) and 6 853 refugees in BiH. It is concerned at the violation of the rights of returnees in the Republic of Serbia.
Fight against terrorism: Parliament urged the authorities to amend the Criminal Code in order to strengthen the criminalisation of the financing
of terrorism. It welcomed the amendment to the Criminal Code seeking to ban and punish membership of foreign paramilitary groups, in order
to prevent religious radicalisation.
It noted that BiH remains a country of origin, transit and destination for the trafficking of human beings. It recommended that the authorities
take effective measures, including legislative measures, to combat trafficking in drugs and human beings and provide protection for the victims
of human trafficking.
LGBTI people and Roms: Parliament considered it essential to foster an inclusive and tolerant society in BiH, protecting and promoting
minorities and vulnerable groups. It encouraged the authorities to implement awareness-raising actions on the rights of LGBTI people among
the judiciary, law enforcement agencies and the general public. It commended the progress made with regard to the housing needs of Roma
and called for further steps to be taken to improve their living conditions by improving access to employment, health and education.
Economic development: Parliament considered that BiH has made little progress towards becoming a functioning market economy. It is
concerned that considerable weaknesses in the business environment continue to negatively affect private-sector development and foreign
direct investment. It highlighted the fact that economic prosperity and job prospects, especially for young people, are essential to the
development of the country. It called on the governments to implement labour market reforms in order to tackle the very high unemployment
rate.
Regional cooperation: lastly, Parliament welcomed BiHs constructive and proactive stance in promoting regional cooperation. It stresses the
crucial importance of good neighbourly relations and invited the new leaders to continue and enhance efforts to resolve outstanding border
and property issues with neighbouring countries.

