Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2236(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Social entrepreneurship and social innovation in combatting unemployment

Subject
4.15 Employment policy, action to combat unemployment

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
EMPL

Rapporteur

Employment and Social Affairs

Appointed
05/01/2015

LOPE FONTAGNÉ
Verónica
Shadow rapporteur

BENIFEI Brando

KRASNODĘBSKI
Zdzisław

HARKIN Marian

SYLIKIOTIS Neoklis

DELLI Karima

AGEA Laura
Committee for opinion
ITRE

European Commission

Industry, Research and Energy

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Employment, Social Affairs and Inclusion

THYSSEN Marianne

Key events
15/01/2015

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

15/07/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

30/07/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

09/09/2015

Debate in Parliament

10/09/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

10/09/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

10/09/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0247/2015

Summary

T8-0320/2015

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2236(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

EMPL/8/01437

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report

PE554.751

15/04/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE557.256

26/05/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE560.697

14/07/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading

A8-0247/2015

30/07/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0320/2015

10/09/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

SP(2015)748

24/02/2016

2014/2236(INI) - 30/07/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs adopted a report by Verónica LOPE FONTAGNÉ (EPP, ES) on Social Entrepreneurship
and Social Innovation in combating unemployment.
Members recalled that the social and solidarity-based economy provides employment for more than 14 million people, representing around
6.5% of workers in the EU and that there are 2 million social and solidarity-based economy enterprises in the EU, representing 10% of
undertakings in the Union.
Definition of social economy enterprises: Members noted that that social and solidarity-based economy enterprises, which do not necessarily
have to be non-profit organisations, are enterprises whose purpose is to achieve their social goal, which may be to create jobs for vulnerable
groups, provide services for their members, or more generally create a positive social and environmental impact, and which reinvest their
profits primarily in order to achieve those objectives.
The social and solidarity-based economy enterprises are characterised by their commitment to upholding the following values:
the primacy of individual and social goals over the interests of capital;
democratic governance by members;
the conjunction of the interests of members and users with the general interest;
the safeguarding and application of the principles of solidarity and responsibility;
the reinvestment of surplus funds in long-term development objectives, or in the provision of services of interest to members or of
services of general interest;
voluntary and open membership;
autonomous management independent of the public authorities.
In this context, Members considered that the Commission should:
recognise the diversity of social enterprises and ensure that actions are taken at EU level to support social and solidarity-based
enterprises of all types;
implement all the measures set out in the 2012 Social Business Initiative so as to broaden and deepen its scope to the key players in
the social and solidarity-based economy;
recognise and support the role of not-for-profit social service providers, both politically and financially.
Members noted that the social and solidarity-based economy cannot replace the welfare state and public services. They welcomed the fact
that four EU Member States (Spain, France, Portugal and Belgium) have national legislation concerning the social and solidarity-based
economy, while Poland has launched a strategy to develop the social and solidarity-based economy and Romania is discussing the adoption
of legislation to regulate the social and solidarity-based economy.
Europe 2020strategy: Members recognised that the EU remains far from achieving the targets set in the Europe 2020 strategy, particularly
those relating to employment, innovation and the reduction of poverty and social exclusion. They emphasised that, given its social and
inclusive nature, the social and solidarity-based economy offers jobs to the groups most often excluded from the open labour market. They
called therefore on the Member States to better integrate social and solidarity-based economy enterprises into action plans for employment
and social integration.

Public procurement: Members pointed out that social and solidarity-based economy enterprises face difficulties in accessing public
procurement, such as barriers related to size and financial capability. calls for the swift and effective implementation of the new public
procurement and concession directives (Directives 2014/24/EU, 2014/25/EU and 2014/23/EU) in order to achieve greater participation by
social and solidarity-based economy enterprises in tendering procedures for public contracts. The Member States are also called on to
implement these procurement principles properly in all tendering and selection procedures, with wide use of the Most Economically
Advantageous Tender (MEAT), in compliance with environmental, social and labour law obligations.
Members also regretted that the Commission Digital Single Market strategy for Europe fails to mention social and solidarity-based economy
enterprises and their potential contribution to the achievement of the Union's goals.
Financing: Members regretted that social and solidarity-based economy enterprises encounter even more difficulties than traditional
enterprises in securing financing, whether through public or private channels. They therefore called for public authorities and financial service
providers to develop a wide range of appropriate financial instruments. They also called on the Commission to review the ceiling for loans to
social enterprises laid down under EaSI, and to determine whether this reflects market conditions.
In general, they highlighted the need to support social and solidarity-based economy enterprises with sufficient financial resources at local,
regional, national and EU level, creating synergies among the various types of enterprises. They considered it necessary, therefore, to improve
access to financing for the social and solidarity-based economy by various means, such as European funds, risk capital funds, microcredit and
crowdfunding.
Members called on the Commission to propose a new exception to the legal definition of SME, similar to those which already apply to public
investment corporations, venture capital firms and non-profit-making universities and research centres, so that a training and placement
enterprise can be classified as an autonomous enterprise, even if another enterprise holds, alone or jointly with other enterprises, more than
25% of its capital or of the voting rights on its administrative board.
Training: Members pointed out that the social and solidarity-based economy could help considerably to reduce youth unemployment in the EU.
They called on the Member States to develop training programmes targeted on and specifically tailored to entrepreneurs in the social sector,
with particular reference to groups with lower employment rates such as women, young or disadvantaged workers. They pointed out that
sectors with a wide margin for growth and job creation, such as the white and green sectors, are those in which the social and solidarity-based
economy is very much present. They urged the Member States, accordingly, to promote education and training in those sectors.
Support and promotion: Members deeply regretted the low level of recognition of the social and solidarity-based economy at European level .
They are in favour of creating a multilingual digital platform for exchanging information aimed at social enterprises, business incubators,
business clusters and investors in social enterprises.
They call on the Commission to:
carry out a comparative analysis of national certification and labelling systems for the social and solidarity-based economy;
to promote the creation of business incubators for social and solidarity-based economy enterprises, and to implement and effectively
promote the internet platform for data exchange between social investors and social entrepreneurs (the Social Innovation Europe
Platform), details of which have been agreed on.
They equally supported the idea that social and solidarity-based economy enterprises could form a specific company category with its own
legal status, defined as having other objectives than simply profit for shareholders.
Lastly, Members called on the Commission to come forward with a legal framework for such enterprises, to be achieved by means of the
European statute for cooperative societies, associations, foundations and mutual societies.

2014/2236(INI) - 10/09/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 494 votes to 91 with 23 abstentions, a resolution on Social Entrepreneurship and Social Innovation in
combating unemployment.
Parliament recalled that the social and solidarity-based economy provided employment for more than 14 million people , representing around
6.5% of workers in the EU and that there were 2 million social and solidarity-based economy enterprises in the EU, representing 10% of
undertakings in the Union.
Definition of social economy enterprises: Parliament noted that that social and solidarity-based economy enterprises, which did not necessarily
have to be non-profit organisations, were enterprises whose purpose was to achieve their social goal, which might be to create jobs for
vulnerable groups, provide services for their members, or more generally create a positive social and environmental impact, and which
reinvested their profits primarily in order to achieve those objectives.
The social and solidarity-based economy enterprises were characterised by their commitment to upholding the following values:
the primacy of individual and social goals over the interests of capital;
democratic governance by members;
the conjunction of the interests of members and users with the general interest;
the safeguarding and application of the principles of solidarity and responsibility;
the reinvestment of surplus funds in long-term development objectives, or in the provision of services of interest to members or of
services of general interest;
voluntary and open membership;
autonomous management independent of the public authorities.
In this context, Members considered that the Commission should:
recognise the diversity of social enterprises and ensure that actions are taken at EU level to support social and solidarity-based
enterprises of all types;
implement all the measures set out in the 2012 Social Business Initiative so as to broaden and deepen its scope to the key players in

the social and solidarity-based economy;
recognise and support the role of not-for-profit social service providers, both politically and financially.
Parliament noted that the social and solidarity-based economy cannot replace the welfare state and public services. It welcomed the fact that
four EU Member States (Spain, France, Portugal and Belgium) have national legislation concerning the social and solidarity-based economy,
while Poland has launched a strategy to develop the social and solidarity-based economy and Romania is discussing the adoption of
legislation to regulate the social and solidarity-based economy.
Europe 2020 strategy: Parliament recognised that the EU remains far from achieving the targets set in the Europe 2020 strategy, particularly
those relating to employment, innovation and the reduction of poverty and social exclusion. It emphasised that, given its social and inclusive
nature, the social and solidarity-based economy offers jobs to the groups most often excluded from the open labour market. It called therefore
on Member States to better integrate social and solidarity-based economy enterprises into action plans for employment and social integration.
It welcomed the fact that the pre-financing budget for the Youth Employment Initiative had been increased to 30 %. Parliament called on the
Commission and Member States to encourage social entrepreneurship and innovation in the ESF's national Operational Programmes and
urged that the Youth Guarantee schemes be implemented effectively.
Public procurement: Parliament pointed out that social and solidarity-based economy enterprises face difficulties in accessing public
procurement, such as barriers related to size and financial capability. It calls for the swift and effective implementation of the new public
procurement and concession directives (Directives 2014/24/EU, 2014/25/EU and 2014/23/EU) in order to achieve greater participation by
social and solidarity-based economy enterprises in tendering procedures for public contracts. Member States were also called on to implement
these procurement principles properly in all tendering and selection procedures, with wide use of the Most Economically Advantageous Tender
(MEAT), in compliance with environmental, social and labour law obligations.
Parliament welcomed the reform of the public procurement and concession directives, which includes social clauses and criteria in order to
promote social inclusion and social innovation and contracts earmarked to foster the employment of the most disadvantaged people on the
labour market.
It regretted that the Commission Digital Single Market strategy for Europe fails to mention social and solidarity-based economy enterprises and
their potential contribution to the achievement of the Union's goals.
Financing: Parliament regretted that social and solidarity-based economy enterprises encounter even more difficulties than traditional
enterprises in securing financing, whether through public or private channels. It therefore called for public authorities and financial service
providers to develop a wide range of appropriate financial instruments. It also called on the Commission to review the ceiling for loans to social
enterprises laid down under EaSI, and to determine whether this reflects market conditions.
Parliament welcomed the fact that part of the funding for the EaSI programme is earmarked to help provide access to finance for social and
solidarity-based economy enterprises. It called on the Member States to establish national contact points or one-stop shops to help social and
solidarity-based economy actors access the EU´s funding schemes.
In general, Parliament highlighted the need to support social and solidarity-based economy enterprises with sufficient financial resources at
local, regional, national and EU level, creating synergies among the various types of enterprises. It considered it necessary, therefore, to
improve access to financing for the social and solidarity-based economy by various means, such as European funds, risk capital funds,
microcredit and crowdfunding.
It called on the Commission to propose a new exception to the legal definition of SME, similar to those which already apply to public
investment corporations, venture capital firms and non-profit-making universities and research centres, so that a training and placement
enterprise can be classified as an autonomous enterprise, even if another enterprise holds, alone or jointly with other enterprises, more than
25% of its capital or of the voting rights on its administrative board.
Parliament pointed out that the state aid rules should not constitute an impediment for public funding to social and solidarity-based economy
enterprises and social services.
Training: Parliament pointed out that the social and solidarity-based economy could help considerably to reduce youth unemployment in the
EU. It called on the Member States to develop training programmes targeted on and specifically tailored to entrepreneurs in the social sector,
with particular reference to groups with lower employment rates such as women, young or disadvantaged workers. It pointed out that sectors
with a wide margin for growth and job creation, such as the white and green sectors, are those in which the social and solidarity-based
economy is very much present. It urged the Member States, accordingly, to promote education and training in those sectors.
Support and promotion: Parliament deeply regretted the low level of recognition of the social and solidarity-based economy at European level.
It was in favour of creating a multilingual digital platform for exchanging information aimed at social enterprises, business incubators, business
clusters and investors in social enterprises.
It called on the Commission to:
carry out a comparative analysis of national certification and labelling systems for the social and solidarity-based economy;
promote the creation of business incubators for social and solidarity-based economy enterprises, and to implement and effectively
promote the internet platform for data exchange between social investors and social entrepreneurs (the Social Innovation Europe
Platform), details of which have been agreed on.
Parliament equally supported the idea that social and solidarity-based economy enterprises could form a specific company category with its
own legal status, defined as having other objectives than simply profit for shareholders.
Lastly, Parliament called on the Commission to come forward with a legal framework for such enterprises, to be achieved by means of the
European statute for cooperative societies, associations, foundations and mutual societies.

