Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2147(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Fruit and vegetables sector since the 2007 reform

Subject
3.10.06.01 Fruit, citrus fruits
3.10.06.02 Vegetables

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
AGRI

Rapporteur

Agriculture and Rural Development

Appointed
06/10/2014

MELO Nuno
Shadow rapporteur

CAPUTO Nicola

MCINTYRE Anthea

HUITEMA Jan

VIEGAS Miguel

SEBASTIA TALAVERA
Jordi Vicent

ZULLO Marco
Committee for opinion

Rapporteur for opinion

DEVE

Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

BUDG

Budgets

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

CONT

Budgetary Control

Appointed

02/12/2014
PITERA Julia

REGI

European Commission

Regional Development

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Agriculture and Rural Development

HOGAN Phil

Key events
04/03/2014

Non-legislative basic document published

24/11/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

05/05/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

19/05/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,

COM(2014)0112

Summary

A8-0170/2015

Summary

single reading
06/07/2015

Debate in Parliament

07/07/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

07/07/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

07/07/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0251/2015

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2147(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

AGRI/8/01721

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2014)0112

04/03/2014

EC

Committee draft report

PE546.720

29/01/2015

EP

Amendments tabled in committee

PE549.240

05/03/2015

EP

PE544.264

11/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0170/2015

19/05/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0251/2015

07/07/2015

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2015)575

01/12/2015

Committee opinion

CONT

Summary

2014/2147(INI) - 04/03/2014 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation of the Commission report on the fruit and vegetables scheme since the 2007 reform.
BACKGROUND: producer organisations (POs) became the cornerstone of the EU regime for the fruit and vegetables (F&V) sector in the 1996
reform. The 2007 reform aimed to strengthen the producer organisations (POs) further. A wider range of tools was made available to enable
them to prevent and manage market crises.
For the first time, Member States had to establish a national strategy for sustainable operational programmes, integrating a specific
environmental framework.
23 Member States established national strategies for sustainable operational programmes (NSs), which include a national framework for
environmental actions (NEF). All NEFs have taken on board amendments required by the Commission.
In 2003-2010 there was a gradual, slight decline in the total EU area cropped with F&V (-6%) and a sharper fall in the number of holdings with
F&V crops (-39.1%).
In 2004-2010, there was also a small fall in the volume of F&V production in the EU (a -3% decrease in average F&V production in 2008-2010
as compared to 2004-2006).
Market crises emerged in 2009 (e.g. peaches and nectarines, tomatoes) and in 2011 (E. coli crisis followed by a new market crisis for peaches
and nectarines). In addition, in several Member States, the 2008 financial and economic crisis may have affected domestic F&V consumption
(resulting in lower demand).
CONTENT: in accordance with Council Regulation (EC) No 1234/2007, the Council presented a report on the implementation of the provisions
concerning producer organisations, operational funds and operational programmes in the fruit and vegetables sector since the 2007 reform.

The report is based primarily on information Member States provided on the implementation of the EU fruit and vegetables scheme on their
territory and, in particular, on information in the annual reports and evaluation reports sent to the Commission. These are mainly based on data
for 2008-2010.
In 2008-2010, at EU level, there were positive trends regarding the organisation rate of the F&V sector, the share of total F&V producers who
are members of POs and the number of POs members of APOs.
The annual reports and the 2012 evaluation reports also offer a more contrasting picture:
Low number of producer organisations: in 2010, there were 1599 recognised POs in 23 Member States. In 2010, the organisation rate was
about 43.0 % (43.9% if producer groups are also included). The share of total F&V producers that are member of POs has continued to
increase (from 10.4 % in 2004 to 16.5 % in 2010).
A crucial issue is the persistently low degree or lack of organisation in some Member States. This needs careful analysis with a view to
identifying, where appropriate, additional measures to encourage not only: (i) a further rise in the degree of organisation of producers in the
whole EU but also; (ii) a decrease of the imbalance of F&V producers' organisation within the EU.
A low degree or lack of organisation also means that most F&V producers do not belong to a PO, so they do not directly benefit from specific
EU aid for the sector. This proportion is highest in some southern Member States and some MSs that joined the EU in 2004 and later. Those
producers, frequently the smallest, cannot even benefit from the services that POs could provide, have very weak bargaining power within the
supply chain and are more exposed to the risks linked to market globalisation and climate change.
Increasing the rate of organisation of the F&V sector remains crucial especially in Member States where the organisation is still very low. In
this respect, there is also the need to explore measures to stimulate forms of cooperation to help PO's and non-organised producers to better
deal with those challenges.
Contribute more to key objectives: operational programmes could contribute more to key objectives such as improving attractiveness of POs,
boosting products commercial value, optimising production costs, and stabilising producer prices.
Crisis prevention and management instruments: between 2008-2010, the annual expenditure for operational programmes (EUR 1 252.1m on
average) mainly concerned actions to improve marketing (24.0 % of the total) and environmental actions (23.8%), followed by actions to plan
production (22.2 %) and to improve or maintain product quality (20.3%).
The use of crisis prevention and management instruments was very low (EUR 35.6m; 2.8% of total average annual expenditure). These
instruments should be improved.
Weaknesses in the setting-up of national strategies: the reports have identified two important weaknesses in the national strategies of some
Member States: (i) too wide a range of objectives was adopted, instead of focus on a few priorities; (ii) precise pre-defined targets were lacking
for the different objectives set.
In most Member States, expenditure for strategic measures, such as research and experimental production, remains negligible. Therefore, it
could be relevant to reinforce the application of the resources available on certain priority measures, which have a stronger impact on
competitiveness, income stability and market demand.
Complexity of rules and lack of legal certainty: these elements have also been indicated as weaknesses of the current regime. Simplification
and securing the legal framework need to be a priority in a future revision, also for reducing the red tape for farmers and managing authorities.
Introduction of new measures for the sector: these might require the reallocation of some financial resources without increasing the overall
amounts available for the sector in order to ensure the budget neutrality within market measures in pillar 1.
To address the above-mentioned shortcomings, the current EU F&V regime needs to be reviewed to ensure that support for producer
organisations is better focused so that it can achieve the overall objectives set for the 2007 reform and CAP 2020 in all Member States.
The Commission could build upon the results of this report and the upcoming debate to present at a later stage legislative proposals to revise
the Union aid scheme for the fruit and vegetables sector.

2014/2147(INI) - 19/05/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development adopted an own-initiative report by Nuno MELO (EPP, PT) on the Commission report
on the fruit and vegetables sector since the 2007 reform.
The 2007 reform aimed to strengthen the fruit and vegetable producer organisations (POs) by providing a wider range of tools to make it
possible, among other measures, to prevent and manage market risks, as well as enhancing and concentrating supply, improving quality and
competitiveness, adapting supply to match the market, and providing technical support for environment-friendly production.
Improve the degree of organisation of the sector: Members noted that the degree of organisation of the sector, as measured by the share of
the total value of F&V production marketed by POs, has steadily increased in recent years in the Union as a whole, but that this increase can
be attributed to only some of the Member State. However, despite this increase, the degree of organisation among producers remains low on
average, and considerably below the EU average in certain Member States.
Members considered it essential for the future of the F&V regime to alleviate significant regional imbalances. There is a low level of
organisation which is not helped by the complexity of PO rules. This has resulted in the suspension and de-recognition of POs in some
Member States. The Commission is called upon to reverse this decline by simplifying the schemes rules to make POs more attractive to join.
Members asked the Commission, also with the aim of increasing the systems legal certainty, to rationalise the controls and focus them on
monitoring the actual execution of each action or measure that is approved as part of the operational programme as well as the cost allocated
to them, clearly establishing what is being controlled and who is responsible for carrying out the control. They considered it vital in this context

to clarify the European legislation on the recognition of POs in order to guarantee the legal security of the regime and prevent uncertainty
among producers. They urged the Commission to clarify the rules for the establishment of transnational (associations of) POs and in particular
the rules regarding responsibility and liability, in order to create legal certainty for the national administrations and POs involved.
Increase support to POs: the report stressed that it is important to increase the overall level of support to POs and to provide stronger
incentives both for the merging of existing POs in APOs and the creation of new ones in both a national and international context. It is
essential to provide benefits for POs that decide to take young members.
Crisis management instrument: Members considered it vital to contemplate putting instruments in place for managing crises, and the
successful initiatives launched by certain POs in that respect need to be clearly identifiable so that they can be replicated elsewhere whenever
it is possible. To this end, they called on the Commission to:
always to use preference for local products as the first crisis management measurement in order to promote and protect the single
European market and the consumption of Europes own products;
devise a better coordinated mechanism for market withdrawals in crisis situations, in order to prevent market crises from turning into
serious and lengthy disturbances resulting in significant falls in income for F&V farmers;
consider making contributions to mutual funds eligible as CPM measures in order to provide better protection for farmers in case of
market crises which cause substantial drops in income.
Associations of producer organisations (APOs): Members considered that associations of producer organisations (AOPs) could play an
important role in increasing the bargaining power of farmers. They urged the Commission to reinforce incentives for setting up APOs, at both
national and European levels, strengthening their capacity to act from a legal perspective, and provide for the possibility of bringing producers
who are not members of POs under their umbrella, in order to envisage a greater role for them in the future.
Improve the management of POs: stressing that the competitiveness of POs depends greatly on their management, the report urged the
Commission to develop existing actions or set up new ones, including training measures and initiatives for the exchange of good practices,
which can improve the management of POs and their competitive position in the food supply chain.
POs should be managed by people with marketing skills who are capable of dealing with crisis situations in the agricultural sector.
Unfair trading practices: the report called on the Commission to intensify efforts to tackle unfair trading practices (UTPs) in the food supply
chain which negatively impact producer returns, depress incomes and threaten the viability and sustainability of the sector. Members
considered that unfair trading practices and the pressure exerted on producers, whether or not they are associated, by the large retail chains,
are the main obstacle to F&V farmers earning a decent income.
Facilitate access to third-country producers: the Commission is called upon to increase its efforts to support exporters of fruit and vegetables to
overcome the increasing number of non-tariff barriers, such as some third-country phytosanitary standards that make export from the EU
difficult, if not impossible.

2014/2147(INI) - 07/07/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 598 votes to 53, with 41 abstentions, a resolution on the Commission report on the fruit and vegetables
sector since the 2007 reform.
The 2007 reform aimed to strengthen the fruit and vegetable producer organisations (POs) by providing a wider range of tools to make it
possible, among other measures, to prevent and manage market risks, as well as enhancing and concentrating supply, improving quality and
competitiveness, adapting supply to match the market, and providing technical support for environment-friendly production.
Parliament stressed the need to support the fruit and vegetable sector throughout the entire territory of the Union, given its importance in terms
of added value and employment, and given the health benefits that it presents through healthy and balanced diets. Union support for POs and
for associations of producer organisations (APOs) is aimed at strengthening the competitiveness of the sector, supporting innovation,
increasing productivity, enhancing promotion, improving the bargaining position of farmers and restoring balance in the food supply chain.
Against this background, Parliament made the following recommendations:
Improve the degree of organisation of the sector: Parliament noted that the degree of organisation of the sector, as measured by the share of
the total value of F&V production marketed by POs, has steadily increased in recent years in the Union as a whole. The share of the total
value of EU fruit and vegetable production marketed by POs and APOs in 2010 being about 43 % (34 % in 2004). However, despite this
increase, the degree of organisation among producers remains low on average, and considerably below the EU average in certain Member
States.
Members considered it essential for the future of the F&V regime to alleviate significant regional imbalances. There is a low level of
organisation which is not helped by the complexity of PO rules. This has resulted in the suspension and de-recognition of POs in some
Member States. The Commission is called upon to reverse this decline by simplifying the schemes rules to make POs more attractive to join.
Parliament asked the Commission, also with the aim of increasing the systems legal certainty, to rationalise the controls and focus them on
monitoring the actual execution of each action or measure that is approved as part of the operational programme as well as the cost allocated
to them, clearly establishing what is being controlled and who is responsible for carrying out the control. It considered it vital in this context to
clarify the European legislation on the recognition of POs in order to guarantee the legal security of the regime and prevent uncertainty among
producers. It urged the Commission to clarify the rules for the establishment of transnational (associations of) POs and in particular the rules
regarding responsibility and liability, in order to create legal certainty for the national administrations and POs involved.
Increase support to POs: Parliament stressed that it is important to increase the overall level of support to POs and to provide stronger
incentives both for the merging of existing POs in APOs and the creation of new ones in both a national and international context. It is
essential to provide benefits for POs that decide to take young members.
Crisis management instrument: Parliament considered it vital to contemplate putting instruments in place for managing crises, and the
successful initiatives launched by certain POs in that respect need to be clearly identifiable so that they can be replicated elsewhere whenever

it is possible. To this end, it called on the Commission to:
always to use preference for local products as the first crisis management measurement in order to promote and protect the single
European market and the consumption of Europes own products;
devise a better coordinated mechanism for market withdrawals in crisis situations, in order to prevent market crises from turning into
serious and lengthy disturbances resulting in significant falls in income for F&V farmers;
review of crisis management measures including by: (i) increasing the percentage of Union financial assistance,(ii) adjusting the
withdrawal prices, (iii) taking into account the production costs, (iv) increasing the volumes that can be withdrawn, and (v) improving
the support, in terms of transportation and packaging, for the free distribution of fruits and vegetables with a view to providing the
flexibility to adapt support to the form and severity of each crisis;
consider making contributions to mutual funds eligible as CPM measures in order to provide better protection for farmers in case of
market crises which cause substantial drops in income.
Associations of producer organisations (APOs): Parliament considered that associations of producer organisations (AOPs) could play an
important role in increasing the bargaining power of farmers. It urged the Commission to reinforce incentives for setting up APOs, at both
national and European levels, strengthening their capacity to act from a legal perspective, and provide for the possibility of bringing producers
who are not members of POs under their umbrella, in order to envisage a greater role for them in the future.
Improve the management of POs: stressing that the competitiveness of POs depends greatly on their management, the resolution urged the
Commission to develop existing actions or set up new ones, including training measures and initiatives for the exchange of good practices,
which can improve the management of POs and their competitive position in the food supply chain.
POs should be managed by people with marketing skills who are capable of dealing with crisis situations in the agricultural sector.
Unfair trading practices: Parliament called on the Commission to intensify efforts to tackle unfair trading practices (UTPs) in the food supply
chain which negatively impact producer returns, depress incomes and threaten the viability and sustainability of the sector. Members
considered that unfair trading practices and the pressure exerted on producers, whether or not they are associated, by the large retail chains,
are the main obstacle to F&V farmers earning a decent income.
Facilitate access to third-country producers: the Commission is called upon to increase its efforts to support exporters of fruit and vegetables to
overcome the increasing number of non-tariff barriers, such as some third-country phytosanitary standards that make export from the EU
difficult, if not impossible.

