Procedure file
Basic information
RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

2014/2919(RSP)

Procedure completed

Resolution on the 25th anniversary of the UN Convention on the Rights of
the Child

Subject
4.10.03 Child protection, children's rights

Key players
European Parliament

Key events
26/11/2014

Debate in Parliament

27/11/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

27/11/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

27/11/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

Summary

T8-0070/2014

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2919(RSP)

Procedure type

RSP - Resolutions on topical subjects

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 123-p2

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Documentation gateway
Motion for a resolution

B8-0285/2014

24/11/2014

EP

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0070/2014

27/11/2014

EP

SP(2015)64

10/03/2015

Commission response to text adopted in plenary

Summary

2014/2919(RSP) - 27/11/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted a resolution on the 25th anniversary of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The resolution adopted in plenary was tabled on behalf of the EPP, S&D, ECR, ALDE, GUE/NGL, Greens/EFA and EFDD groups.
Parliament welcomed the EUs commitment under the Stockholm programme to develop an integrated EU strategy for effectively promoting
and safeguarding the rights of the child in the EUs internal and external policies and to support the Member States efforts in this area.
It called on the Commission to monitor and report on the implementation of its recommendation entitled Investing in Children: breaking the
cycle of disadvantage in the Member States and to ensure access to quality services and participation of children; calls on those Member
States with above-average rates of child poverty to set national targets and prioritise investments aimed at reducing poverty and social
exclusion among children and young people.
The Commission is invited to:
integrate an explicit child and youth focus in the European Semester and in the Annual Growth Survey;

ensure increased coordination within its different services with a view to effectively mainstreaming childrens rights in all EU legislative
proposals, policies and financial decisions and monitoring their full compliance with the EU acquis on children and with obligations
under the UN Convention of the Rights of the Child;
seize the opportunity afforded by the mid-term review of the multiannual financial framework to ensure that EU funds benefit the most
disadvantaged and vulnerable children;
explicitly consider children as a priority when programming and implementing regional and cohesion policies, in particular Roma
children.
Best interests of the child: Member States are called upon to ensure that the principle of the best interests of the child is respected in all
legislation, in decisions taken by government representatives at all levels and in all court decisions.
Members called on the Commission to assess the impact of detention policies and criminal justice systems on children, pointing out that an
estimated 800 000 children in the EU are separated from an imprisoned parent each year, which impacts on the rights of children in multiple
ways. They called on the business community and stakeholders to refrain from aggressive and misleading advertising to children. Childrens
personal data online must be duly protected. Online profiling of children should be prohibited.
Protect children against sexual abuse: Parliament called on the Member States to implement Directive 2011/36/EU on preventing and
combating trafficking in human beings, and to take measures to combat the illicit transfer of children. It called on the Member States to
implement Directive 2011/93/EU on combating the sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children, and child pornography, and tackle all
forms of cyber predation and cyber bullying.
Improve education: Members called on the EU and its Member States to invest in public services for children, including childcare, education
and health, and particularly in extending the public network of kindergartens and nurseries. Member States are called upon to provide free
compulsory secondary education for all and to adopt laws to safeguard and strengthen maternity and paternity rights in order to provide a
healthy, stable environment for children in the first months of their lives.
End the detention of migrant children: Parliament called on the Member States to fully implement the Common European Asylum System
package in order to improve the condition of unaccompanied minors in the EU. It called, in particular, for action to be taken to end the
detention of migrant children across the EU. It recalled that an unaccompanied minor is above all a child who is potentially in danger and that
child protection, rather than immigration policies, must be the leading principle for Member States and the EU when dealing with
unaccompanied minors, thus respecting the core principle of the best interests of the child.
Parliament called on all the Member States to facilitate family reunification in a positive, humane and expeditious manner, in line with Article 10
of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Missing children: Parliament stressed the need for a more coordinated approach to finding missing children in the EU. It called on the Member
States to increase police and judicial cooperation in cross-border cases involving missing children and to develop hotlines to search for
missing children and support victims of child abuse. It called on the Member States to facilitate the smooth accession of Morocco, Singapore,
the Russian Federation, Albania, Andorra, Seychelles, Gabon and Armenia to the 1980 Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International
Child Abduction.
Child abduction between parents: Parliament called on the Commission, in revising Regulation (EC) No 2201/2003 concerning jurisdiction and
the recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility, to take serious note of the best
interests of the child, in view of the loopholes in the implementation and enforcement of this regulation in the Member States as regards
parental and custody rights.
Combating violence against: Parliament condemned any form of violence against children, physical, sexual and verbal abuse, forced
marriages, child labour, prostitution, trafficking, torture, honour killing, female genital mutilation, the use of child soldiers and of children as
human shields, etc. Moreover, it condemned the use of children for military and terrorist activities or purposes . It called on the Vice-President
of the Commission / High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy (VP/HR) to support the UN campaign Children,
not soldiers, aimed at ending the recruitment and use of child soldiers by national security forces by 2016 .
EP Intergroup on childrens rights: Parliament expressed the will to establish an intergroup within the European Parliament on childrens rights
and well-being. Therefore, it supported the initiative of appointing focal points for childrens rights within each parliamentary committee to
ensure the mainstreaming of childrens rights in every policy and legislative text adopted. Parliament insisted on the Commission, the Member
States and local authorities to explore ways and means of increasing childrens and adolescents involvement in the decision-making process.
International instruments: Parliament called on the Member States to ratify without delay all the optional protocols to the UN Convention on the
Rights of the Child. It called on the Commission and the VP/HR to explore ways and means for the EU to accede unilaterally to the UN
Convention on the Rights of the Child. Lastly, it encouraged the USA, Somalia and South Sudan to ratify the Convention on the Rights of the
Child in order to achieve universal ratification.

