Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2150(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Regulatory fitness and performance programme (REFIT): state of play and
outlook

Subject
8.50.02 Legislative simplification, coordination, codification

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
JURI

Rapporteur

Legal Affairs

Appointed
10/11/2014

KAUFMANN
Sylvia-Yvonne
Shadow rapporteur

NIEBLER Angelika

KARIM Sajjad

MARINHO E PINTO
António

MAŠTÁLKA Jiří

HAUTALA Heidi

FERRARA Laura
Committee for opinion
ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

Rapporteur for opinion

Appointed

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
22/10/2014
MCINTYRE Anthea

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

24/09/2014
LA VIA Giovanni

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

17/07/2014
KARAS Othmar

TRAN

European Commission

Transport and Tourism

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Secretariat-General

TIMMERMANS Frans

Key events
18/06/2014

Non-legislative basic document published

24/11/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

COM(2014)0368

Summary

04/12/2014

Debate in Council

16/06/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

24/06/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

11/04/2016

Debate in Parliament

12/04/2016

Results of vote in Parliament

12/04/2016

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

12/04/2016

End of procedure in Parliament

A8-0208/2015

Summary

T8-0104/2016

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2150(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

JURI/8/01740

Documentation gateway
Non-legislative basic document

COM(2014)0368

18/06/2014

EC

PE541.631

18/03/2015

EP

PE551.792

23/03/2015

EP

PE546.616

30/03/2015

EP

PE554.972

26/05/2015

EP

PE549.312

29/05/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0208/2015

24/06/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0104/2016

12/04/2016

EP

Summary

Commission response to text adopted in
plenary

SP(2016)484

20/09/2016

Committee opinion

IMCO

Committee draft report
Committee opinion

ENVI

Amendments tabled in committee
Committee opinion

EMPL

Summary

2014/2150(INI) - 18/06/2014 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: to report state of play in implementing the Regulatory Fitness and Performance Programme (REFIT) programme and identifies
new actions.
BACKGROUND: the Regulatory Fitness and Performance Programme (REFIT) aims to offer a simple, clear and predictable regulatory
framework for business workers and citizens. It seeks to cut red tape, remove regulatory burdens, simplify and improve the design and quality
of legislation.
Under REFIT, the Commission is screening the entire stock of EU legislation on an ongoing and systematic basis to identify burdens,
inconsistencies and ineffective measures and identified corrective actions.
In the October 2013 Communication on REFIT, the Commission set out an ambitious agenda. It identified areas where initiatives foreseen
would not be taken forward. It withdrew a number of proposals that had been long blocked in the legislature and repealed a number of pieces

of legislation. In total, over 100 actions were identified, half of which were new proposals aimed to simplify and reduce regulatory burden in
existing legislation.
CONTENT: following on from its October 2013 Communication, the present Communication reports on the state of play in implementing the
REFIT programme and identifies new actions. It indicates how the Commission is further strengthening its horizontal regulatory tools impact
assessment, evaluation and stakeholder consultations. It also looks at how EU institutions, Member States and stakeholders in business and
civil society are playing their part in exercising this shared responsibility for Regulatory Fitness.
Future REFIT initiatives: the Commission considers that new initiatives for simplification and burden reduction are warranted in several areas.
These initiatives include the simplification of EU legislation on identity and travel documents, the development of a new comprehensive
architecture for business statistics, the extension of the one-stop shop in the area of VAT to all business to consumer supplies together with
the development of an EU VAT Web portal to inform businesses about national and EU VAT rules and the codification of legislation on third
country listings for visa requirements.
The Commission will prepare repeals of legislation in further areas: (i) energy labelling, (ii) transport rates and conditions, (iii) the Common
Agricultural Policy; (iv) standardized reporting in the area of environment. In addition, the Commission is also screening the acquis in respect
of police cooperation and judicial cooperation in criminal matters to identify acts which could be repealed in the context of the expiry of the
transitional period set out in the Treaties.
A close scrutiny of all pending proposals before the legislator has resulted in the identification of further proposals which are either outdated or
without support by the legislator and should therefore be suggested for withdrawal. These include proposals on investor compensation
schemes, aviation security charges, pregnant workers, a compensation fund for oil pollution damage and exempting micro companies from
certain food hygiene provisions, even though the latter would have brought significant benefits for smaller businesses.
In other key areas where wider policy reviews are in preparation such as the Digital Single Market, it will be important to identify the remaining
barriers and assess the regulatory framework for costs and simplification potential.
The Commission considers that a continued effort is needed at EU, Member State and stakeholder levels to further facilitate the
implementation of legislation on chemicals, notably REACH, and to reflect on specific areas where rules can be simplified and burdens
reduced.
Horizontal actions: the Commission is determined to further strengthen its horizontal regulatory tools impact assessment, evaluation and
stakeholder consultations and other horizontal actions, notably by putting more emphasis on the assessment of costs and benefits of
regulation and the reduction of administrative obligations, such as reporting requirements.
Conclusions drawn from the experience: the Commission has drawn several lessons can be drawn from the experience in implementing
REFIT thus far.
(1) smart regulation and regulatory fitness require a firm political commitment and related adjustment of policies and processes at all levels within the Commission, between the European institutions and within the Member States;
(2) there is a need for scrutiny of the regulatory processes. The Impact Assessment Board has provided an essential quality control function;
(3) experience shows that quantification looking at costs and benefits - is a necessary part of regulatory assessment;
(4) transition costs of legislative changes have to be carefully weighed against the costs of inaction;
(5) the detection of unnecessary burden and cost by those directly affected by legislation can be an important complement to quantitative
assessment. Consultation and debate are therefore essential in this regard.
Taking these observations into account, and looking to the future, the Commission will continue to give priority to and keep up the momentum
on regulatory fitness. It will continue to focus on areas of significant EU value added respecting the principles of subsidiarity and
proportionality.
The Commission will continue to work closely with Parliament and Council to ensure that benefits in simplification and burden reduction are
confirmed in the legislative process. It invites input, data and evidence from social partners and stakeholders on the state of play and outlook
on REFIT presented in this Communication.

2014/2150(INI) - 24/06/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Legal Affairs adopted the own-initiative report by Sylvia-Yvonne KAUFMANN (S&D, DE) on Regulatory Fitness and
Performance Programme (REFIT): state of play and outlook.
Better regulation: whilst noting the decision of Commission President Juncker to entrust the First Vice-President of the Commission with the
portfolio of better regulation, Members underlined that the Commission should prioritise the development of certain measures and should focus
on the quality of legislation and better enforcement of existing legislation rather than on the number of legislative acts.
The REFIT programme must not be used to undermine sustainability or any social, labour, environmental or consumer standards.
Better regulation should simplify legislation, and should include the implementation and application of Union acts at European level, as well as
at national, regional and local level, in order to ensure good administration and Europe-friendly conduct at all levels.
The report suggested that the Commission took the introduction of sunset clauses into consideration in time-limited legislative initiatives, on
condition that this did not lead to legal uncertainty, and include if appropriate review clauses in legislative measures.
Members welcomed the package of measures of 19 May 2015 aimed at better regulation and supported the continued commitment shown by
the Commission to the better law-making agenda. They noted the Commissions commitment to negotiate a new Interinstitutional agreement
on better law-making.
Pointing out that during the previous parliamentary term, the choice between implementing acts and delegated acts caused numerous
Interinstitutional disputes, Members considered it important for specific guidelines to be drawn up.

Transparency and stakeholder consultations: Members welcomed the Commissions intention of making the legislative process more
transparent and its affirmation that dialogue with citizens, the social partners and stakeholders must contribute to the process . The
Commission was asked to conduct a balanced and transparent assessment of the positions of, and feedback from, all participants in the
consultation procedure.
The report also welcomed the Commissions decision in future to conduct four-week public consultation exercises on draft delegated acts and
major implementing acts before Member States voted on their position in the committee responsible.
Members took the view that the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions could contribute to the purposes of better
legislation if they were properly consulted on specific issues sufficiently well in advance.
Impact assessments and European added value: whilst noting that impact assessments constituted an important tool for supporting
decision-making, Members called on the Commission and Member States to be more rigorous in fulfilling their commitments and in assessing
the impact of future and existing legislation. They underlined, however, that such assessments were not a substitute for political assessments
and decisions and that the freedom of Members of the European Parliament to carry out their political work must not be restricted in any way.
Members considered that:
a competitiveness assessment should form a significant part of the impact assessment process;
better regulation principles should apply to decisions on secondary legislation as well as primary legislation; the Commission, where
appropriate, should accompany delegated and implementing acts with an impact assessment;
impact assessments must be comprehensive, and contain a balanced evaluation of economic, social and environmental
consequences, as well as an assessment of the impact on the fundamental rights of citizens and equality between women and men.
Parliaments specialist committees were asked to make more consistent use of in-house impact assessment instrument.
SMEs and Think Small First: Members welcomed the Commission's commitment to give consideration to more flexible rules for SMEs,
including an outright exemption for microbusinesses, provided it was appropriate and feasible. They called on the Commission: (i) not to
abandon its ambitious targets of reducing the administrative burden on SMEs and (ii) ensure that objectives concerning the public interest
including user-friendly, ecological, social, health and safety and gender-equality standards were not compromised.
The reduction of administrative burdens must not lead to a reduction in employment standards or an increase in precarious employment
contracts
Ex-post evaluations: the report:
underscored the importance of ex-post assessment and policy performance appraisal for an evaluation of the implementation and
efficiency of EU legislation and EU policies in the light of the legislative authority's intended outcomes;
encouraged the Commission and the Member States to intensify the exchange of best practices in the implementation and application
of EU directives, Notes that, one third of the regulatory and administrative burden of EU legislation follows from transposition
measures undertaken by the Member States.
Withdrawal of pending legislative proposals: the report pointed out that the Court of Justice affirmed in its judgment of 14 April 2015 that the
Commission might at any time in the course of the adoption of a Union act under the ordinary legislative procedure withdraw a proposal as
long as the Council had not acted. It called on the Commission, in the event of withdrawal, to first consult Parliament, especially after the first
reading, and to duly take into account its position.

2014/2150(INI) - 12/04/2016 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 537 votes to 94, with 80 abstentions, a resolution on Regulatory Fitness and Performance Programme
(REFIT): state of play and outlook.
Better regulation: Parliament approved the package of measures of 19 May 2015 aimed at better regulation and supported the continued
commitment shown by the Commission to the better law-making agenda. They noted the Commissions commitment to negotiate a new
Interinstitutional agreement on better law-making. According to Members, the work foreseen in the REFIT Communication should be seen as
an ongoing process, ensuring that the legislation in force at European level is fit for purpose, achieves the shared objective of the legislators
and meets the expectations of citizens, in particular employees, businesses, and other stakeholders.
Parliament made the following recommendations:
·

the Commission should prioritise the development of certain measures and should focus on the quality of legislation and better
enforcement of existing legislation rather than on the number of legislative acts;

·

the REFIT programme must not be used to undermine sustainability or any social, labour, environmental or consumer standards;

·

better regulation should simplify legislation, and should include the implementation and application of Union acts at European level,
as well as at national, regional and local level, in order to ensure good administration and Europe-friendly conduct at all levels;

·

the Commission should introduce sunset clauses in time-limited legislative initiatives, on condition that this does not lead to legal
uncertainty, and include if appropriate review clauses in legislative measures;

·

the choice between implementing acts and delegated acts caused numerous Interinstitutional disputes, it is important for specific
guidelines to be drawn up.

Transparency and stakeholder consultations: Parliament welcomed the Commissions intention of making the legislative process more
transparent and its affirmation that dialogue with citizens, the social partners and stakeholders must contribute to the process . The
Commission was asked to conduct a balanced and transparent assessment of the positions of, and feedback from, all participants in the
consultation procedure.

The resolution also welcomed the Commissions decision in future to conduct four-week public consultation exercises on draft delegated acts
and major implementing acts before Member States voted on their position in the committee responsible.
Members took the view that the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions could contribute to the purposes of better
legislation if they were properly consulted on specific issues sufficiently well in advance.
Impact assessments and European added value: whilst noting that impact assessments constituted an important tool for supporting
decision-making, Parliament called on the Commission and Member States to be more rigorous in fulfilling their commitments and in assessing
the impact of future and existing legislation. It underlined, however, that such assessments were not a substitute for political assessments and
decisions and that the freedom of Members of the European Parliament to carry out their political work must not be restricted in any way.
Members considered that:
·

a competitiveness assessment should form a significant part of the impact assessment process;

·

better regulation principles should apply to decisions on secondary legislation as well as primary legislation; the Commission, where
appropriate, should accompany delegated and implementing acts with an impact assessment;

·

impact assessments must be comprehensive, and contain a balanced evaluation of economic, social and environmental
consequences, as well as an assessment of the impact on the fundamental rights of citizens and equality between women and men.

Parliament took note of the conversion of the Commissions Impact Assessment Board (IAB) into an independent Regulatory Scrutiny Board
(RSB) and expected that the inclusion of independent experts will have an advantageous effect on the impact assessment process within the
Commission. It insisted that the Regulatory Scrutiny Board has only an exclusively advisory role and must not issue binding opinions.
Parliaments specialist committees were asked to make more consistent use of in-house impact assessment instrument.
SMEs and Think Small First: Parliament welcomed the Commission's commitment to give consideration to more flexible rules for SMEs,
including an outright exemption for microbusinesses, provided it was appropriate and feasible. It called on the Commission: (i) not to abandon
its ambitious targets of reducing the administrative burden on SMEs and (ii) ensure that objectives concerning the public interest including
user-friendly, ecological, social, health and safety and gender-equality standards were not compromised.
The reduction of administrative burdens must not lead to a reduction in employment standards or an increase in precarious employment
contracts.
Ex-post evaluations: the resolution:
underscored the importance of ex-post assessment and policy performance appraisal for an evaluation of the implementation and
efficiency of EU legislation and EU policies in the light of the legislative authority's intended outcomes;
encouraged the Commission and the Member States to intensify the exchange of best practices in the implementation and application
of EU directives, Notes that, one third of the regulatory and administrative burden of EU legislation follows from transposition
measures undertaken by the Member States.
Withdrawal of pending legislative proposals: Parliament pointed out that the Court of Justice affirmed in its judgment of 14 April 2015 that the
Commission might at any time in the course of the adoption of a Union act under the ordinary legislative procedure withdraw a proposal as
long as the Council had not acted. It called on the Commission, in the event of withdrawal, to first consult Parliament, especially after the first
reading, and to duly take into account its position.

