Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2075(DEC)

DEC - Discharge procedure

Procedure completed

2013 discharge: EU general budget, European Commission and executive
agencies

Subject
8.70.03.03 2013 discharge

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible
CONT

Rapporteur

Budgetary Control

Appointed
26/09/2014

GRÄSSLE Ingeborg
Shadow rapporteur

LIBERADZKI Bogusław

KÖLMEL Bernd

VISTISEN Anders
Primdahl

THEURER Michael

DE JONG Dennis

STAES Bart

VALLI Marco
NI ALIOT Louis
Committee for opinion
AFET

Rapporteur for opinion

Foreign Affairs

Appointed
20/10/2014

JÄÄTTEENMÄKI Anneli
DEVE

Development

18/11/2014
MCAVAN Linda

INTA

International Trade

07/10/2014
BÖGE Reimer

BUDG

Budgets

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

ECON

Economic and Monetary Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

03/11/2014
HARKIN Marian

ENVI

Environment, Public Health and Food Safety

13/10/2014
LA VIA Giovanni

ITRE

Industry, Research and Energy

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

IMCO

Internal Market and Consumer Protection

TRAN

Transport and Tourism

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
18/11/2014
PIRINSKI Georgi

REGI

Regional Development

04/11/2014
MIHAYLOVA Iskra

AGRI

Agriculture and Rural Development

06/10/2014
JAHR Peter

Fisheries

PECH

16/10/2014
CADEC Alain

Culture and Education

CULT

06/10/2014
MAURA
BARANDIARÁN Fernando

JURI

Legal Affairs

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

10/11/2014
GUILLAUME Sylvie

AFCO

Constitutional Affairs

FEMM

Women?s Rights and Gender Equality

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.
03/09/2014
GARCÍA PÉREZ Iratxe

PETI

European Commission

Petitions

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

GEORGIEVA Kristalina

Key events
30/07/2014

Non-legislative basic document published

20/10/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

17/02/2015

Debate in Council

24/03/2015

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

31/03/2015

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

28/04/2015

Debate in Parliament

28/04/2015

Debate in Parliament

29/04/2015

Results of vote in Parliament

29/04/2015

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

29/04/2015

End of procedure in Parliament

30/09/2015

Final act published in Official Journal

COM(2014)0510

Summary

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2075(DEC)

Procedure type

DEC - Discharge procedure

A8-0101/2015

Summary

T8-0118/2015

Summary

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

CONT/8/01216

Documentation gateway
Supplementary non-legislative basic
document

COM(2014)0486

17/07/2014

EC

Summary

Non-legislative basic document

COM(2014)0510

30/07/2014

EC

Summary

Document attached to the procedure

COM(2014)0607

26/09/2014

EC

Summary

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0285

26/09/2014

EC

Summary

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0286

26/09/2014

EC

Summary

Document attached to the procedure

COM(2014)0615

03/10/2014

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2014)0293

03/10/2014

EC

Committee opinion

REGI

PE541.658

20/01/2015

EP

Committee opinion

DEVE

PE541.411

21/01/2015

EP

Committee opinion

FEMM

PE541.590

21/01/2015

EP

Committee opinion

AGRI

PE539.853

23/01/2015

EP

Committee opinion

INTA

PE541.644

23/01/2015

EP

Committee opinion

CULT

PE541.300

26/01/2015

EP

Supplementary non-legislative basic
document

05303/2015

30/01/2015

CSL

Summary

Supplementary non-legislative basic
document

05305/2015

30/01/2015

CSL

Summary

Committee opinion

EMPL

PE541.520

30/01/2015

EP

Committee opinion

ENVI

PE541.527

02/02/2015

EP

Committee opinion

LIBE

PE541.395

06/02/2015

EP

Committee opinion

AFET

PE541.332

10/02/2015

EP

PE539.748

12/02/2015

EP

Committee draft report
Committee opinion

PECH

PE541.680

25/02/2015

EP

Committee opinion

TRAN

PE544.386

25/02/2015

EP

Document attached to the procedure

COM(2015)0089

26/02/2015

EC

Document attached to the procedure

SWD(2015)0018

26/02/2015

EC

PE539.819

09/03/2015

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A8-0101/2015

31/03/2015

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T8-0118/2015

29/04/2015

EP

Summary

Amendments tabled in committee

Final act
Budget 2015/1616
OJ L 255 30.09.2015, p. 0025 Summary

Summary

2014/2075(DEC) - 17/07/2014 Supplementary non-legislative basic document
Pursuant to Title VII of the Financial Regulation, the Commission presented a paper on the certification of the accounts of the European Union
for the financial year 2013.
The paper proposes a consolidated overview of the financial statements of the EU budget with indicative tables outlining heading by heading
expenditure as well as indicative and explanatory notes to the consolidated accounts.
The document presents in particular:
the budget sheet (assets - liabilities);
a statement of financial performance;
cashflow statement;
the statement of changes in net assets of the budget.
The second part of the paper focuses on the implementation of the budget, in particular a detailed overview of the implementation of EU
expenditure by policy, highlighting the link between the budget resources and the actual expenditure.
Financial Framework 2007-2013: the document states that 2013 was the seventh and last year of the 2007-2013 financial framework.
The total level of commitments for 2013 was EUR 152.502 billion, representing 1.15% of Member States' GNI.
The total level of payments for 2013 was EUR 144.285 billion, ie 1.08% of Member States' GNI.
Recalling the objectives of each of the budget headings identified in the financial framework, the Commission document stresses the
importance of the use of Activity Based Management (ABM).
ABB involves a budget structure where budget titles correspond to policy areas and budget chapters to activities. ABB aims to provide a clear
framework for translating the Commission's policy objectives into action, either through legislative, financial or any other public policy means.
By structuring the Commission's work in terms of activities, a clear picture is obtained of the Commission's undertakings and simultaneously a
common framework is established for priority setting. Resources are allocated to priorities during the budget procedure, using the activities as
the building blocks for budgeting purposes.
In conclusion, by establishing such a link between activities and the resources allocated to them, ABB aims to increase efficiency and
effectiveness in the use of resources in the Commission.

2014/2075(DEC) - 30/07/2014 Non-legislative basic document
PURPOSE: presentation by the Commission of the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the financial year 2013, as part of
the 2013 discharge procedure.
Analysis of the accounts of the EU Institutions: Section III - European Commission.
Legal reminder: the consolidated annual accounts of the European Union for the year 2013 have been prepared on the basis of the
information presented by the institutions and bodies under Article 148(2) of the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the
European Union as well as in accordance with Title IX of this Financial Regulation.
(1) Purpose: the document helps to bring insight into the EU budget mechanism and the way in which the budget has been managed and
spent in 2013. In this regard, the document recalls the EU's operational expenditure covers the various headings of the financial framework
and takes different forms, depending on how the money is paid out and managed.
For the 2013 accounts, the Commission classifies its expenditure as follows:
direct centralised management: this is where the budget is implemented directly by the Commission services;
indirect centralised management: this refers to cases where the Commission confers tasks of implementation of the budget to bodies
of EU law or national law, such as the EU agencies;
decentralised management: these are the cases where the Commission delegates certain tasks for implementation of the budget to
third countries;
shared management: under this method of management budget implementation tasks are delegated to Member States. The majority
of the expenditure falls under this mode covering such areas as agricultural spending and structural actions;
joint management: under this method, the Commission entrusts certain implementation tasks to an international organisation.
The document also presents the different financial actors involved in the budget process (accounting officers, internal officers and authorising
officers) and recalls their respective roles in the context of the tasks of sound financial management.
Amongst the other legal elements relating to the implementation of the EU budget presented in this document, the paper focuses on the
following issues:
accounting principles applicable to the management of EU spending (business continuity, consistency of accounting methods,
comparability of information ...);
consolidation methods of figures for all major controlled entities (the consolidated financial statements of the EU comprise all
significant controlled entities institutions, organisations and agencies);
the recognition of financial assets in the EU (tangible and intangible assets, financial assets and other miscellaneous investments);

the way in which EU public expenditure is committed and spent, including pre-financing (cash advances intended for the benefit of an
EU organ);
the means of recovery following irregularities detected;
the modus operandi of the accounting system;
the audit process followed by the European Parliament's granting of the discharge.
To recap, the final control is the discharge of the budget for a given financial year. The discharge represents the political aspect of the external
control of budget implementation and is the decision by which the European Parliament, acting on a Council recommendation, "releases" the
Commission from its responsibility for management of a given budget by marking the end of that budget's existence. When granting discharge,
Parliament may make observations which it considers important and often recommend that the Commission take action concerning these
matters.
The document also details specific expenditure of the institutions, in particular: (i) pensions of former Members and officials of institutions; (ii)
joint sickness insurance scheme and (iii) buildings.
The document also presents a series of tables and detailed technical indicators on (i) the balance sheet; (ii) the economic outturn account; (iii)
cashflow tables; (iv) technical annexes concerning the financial statements.
(2) Balance sheet of financial implementation: achievements and difficulties in implementation: in addition to legal aspects regarding the way in
which the Unions expenditures are implemented, the document highlights the difficulties relating to the management and execution of certain
of the Unions expenditures:
(a) Amounts to be called from Member States: the total amounts to be called from Members States at 31.12.2013 are approximately EUR 50
billion. This amount represents that part of the expenses already incurred by the Commission up to 31 December 2013 that must be funded by
future budgets. The inclusion in the accounts of these liabilities coupled with the fact that the corresponding amounts are financed from future
budgets, results in liabilities greatly exceeding assets at the year-end. The most significant amounts to be highlighted are the EAGF activities.
The document states that the above has no effect on the budget result budget revenue should always equal or exceed budget expenditure
and any excess of revenue is returned to Member States.
(b) Financial correction and recoveries: the document provides an overview of the correction of errors and irregularities discovered, in
particular in the part of the EUs budget that is implemented by means of shared management (i.e. some 80% of the total budget). In the
context of shared management, the Commission relies on Member States for the implementation of EU programmes i.e. the EU contribution is
paid to the Member States, generally to a specific paying agency, which is then responsible for the payments made to beneficiaries. As a
result, Member States are the primary party responsible for the prevention, detection and correction of errors and irregularities committed by
the beneficiaries, while the European Commission ensures an overall supervisory role (i.e. verifying the effective functioning of Member States
management and control systems).
The total amount of financial corrections and recoveries implemented in 2013 decreased by 25% compared to 2012. The increase of
recoveries implemented in 2013 by 27% was offset by the decrease of financial corrections implemented in 2013 by 34%. This reduction is
due to a significant case related to the implementation, and therefore recognition, in 2012 of a financial correction of EUR 1.8 billion
concerning Cohesion programmes 2000-2006 in Spain (representing 49% of the total amount of financial corrections implemented in 2012).
Out of the amount of EUR 1 759 million that concerned Cohesion policy, EUR 693 million related to the 2007-2013 programming period, EUR
889 million related to the 2000-2006 programming period, and the remaining amount of EUR 177 million related to the 1994-1999
programming period.
(c) Pre-financing: pre-financing is a payment intended to provide the beneficiary with a cash advance, i.e. a float. If the beneficiary does not
incur eligible expenditures, he has the obligation to return the pre-financing advance to the European Union. At 31.12.2013, total long-term
pre-financings amounted to EUR 38.072 billion compared with EUR 44.505 million at the end of 2012. Pre-financing represents a large portion
of the EUs total assets, and thus receives proper and regular attention. It should be noted that the level of pre-financing amounts in the various
programmes must be sufficient to ensure the necessary float for the beneficiary to start the project, while also safeguarding the financial
interests of the EU. The most significant non-current pre-financing amounts relate to Structural Actions for the 2007-2013 programming period :
the regional development fund (ERDF) and the cohesion fund (CF) EUR 19.6 billion, the social fund (ESF) EUR 5.6 billion, the agricultural fund
for rural development (EAFRD) EUR 5.2 billion and the fisheries fund (EFF) EUR 600 million.
(d) RAL (budgetary commitments made, payments still pending): the budgetary RAL ("Reste à Liquider")) is an amount representing the open
commitments for which payments and/or de-commitments have not yet been made. At 31 December 2013, the budgetary RAL amounted to
EUR 222.41 billion (2012: EUR 217.81 billion).
(e) Borrowing and lending activities of the EU: the document provides information on the EUs borrowing and lending activities - the European
Financial Stability Facility (EFSF - not guaranteed by the EU budget and the amounts of which are not consolidated in the EU accounts) and
the European stability Mechanism (ESM which entered into force on 1 July 2013 and is the only permanent mechanism that responds to
requests for financial assistance from the Member States of the euro area. It must also be noted that the EU budget will not guarantee ESM
borrowings. As this mechanism has its own legal personality and is funded directly by the Eurozone Member States, it is not an EU body and it
has no impact on either the EU accounts or the EU budget. The document also highlights the level of risk that macro-financial assistance
granted to third countries has for the EU.
(3) Implementation of the budget for the 2013 financial year: the document also comprises a series of annexes containing figures, the most
important of which relates to budgetary implementation:
(a) table on the implementation of commitment appropriations by heading and rate of implementation:
Sustainable growth: EUR 72.69 billion; rate of implementation: 96.84%;
Preservation and management of natural resources: EUR 61.46 billion; 98.28%;
Citizenship, freedom, security and justice: EUR 2.78 billion; 97.59%;
EU as a global player: EUR 9.79 billion; 97.78%;
Administration: EUR 8.87 billion; 95.57%;
Compensations: EUR 75 million; 100%.
Total commitments: EUR 155.66 billion; 97.4%.

(b) table on the execution of payment appropriations by heading and rate of implementation:
Sustainable growth: EUR 71.24 billion; rate of implementation: 96.89%;
Preservation and management of natural resources: EUR 59.52 billion; 98.54%;
Citizenship, freedom, security and justice: EUR 1.88 billion; 85.71%;
EU as a global player: EUR 7.05 billion; 97.99%;
Administration: EUR 8.69 billion; 86.44%;
Compensations: EUR 75 million; 100%.
Total payments: EUR 148.47 billion; 96.75%.
(c) budget implementation conclusions: lastly, the document provides details on the implementation of the budget in more political terms. The
year 2013 was the last year of the programming period 2007-2013. The initial budget for all institutions set commitment appropriations at EUR
150 898 million, representing an increase of 1.7% compared to the final 2012 budget. Payment appropriations were finally set at EUR 132 837
million, after a cut of EUR 4.96 billion to the Draft Budget 2013. This meant a decrease of 2.2% compared to the final budget for 2012. The
initial level of payment appropriations in 2013 corresponded to 0.99% of the Union's GNI and left a margin of EUR 11.24 billion below the
financial framework ceiling.
For commitments, the final budget appropriations, and hence the political targets set, were fully implemented (99.7% excluding the
un-mobilised reserves). The most notable adjustments by means of amending budgets during the year concerned the amounts necessary to
accommodate the accession of Croatia (EUR 655 million), the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund (EUR 415 million),
unforeseeable expenditure by its very nature, and additional commitments under heading 1b for France, Italy and Spain (EUR 150 million),
arising from an agreement by the European Council to increase their allocation under the structural funds. The total implementation of EUR
151 080 million left EUR 1 011 million unused.
Payment claims and outstanding claims: the total increases to the initial budgeted payment appropriations, introduced via amending budgets
amounted to EUR 11.6 billion. Confronted with the heavy pressure of payment claims and the backlog of outstanding claims from 2012, the
Budget Authority adopted increases of EUR 11.2 billion in payment appropriations. This brought the level of payment appropriations up to that
of the ceiling of the financial framework, helping to reduce the growth of outstanding commitments (RAL).
The total implementation of final budget payment appropriations was EUR 142 883 million, being 98.9%. This is EUR 8 billion more than in
2012 but also EUR 7 billion more than the financial framework ceiling for 2014. Nevertheless the backlog of unpaid payment claims at
year-end increased further to EUR 26.2 billion. Once account is taken of the carryover of payment appropriations to 2014, a total of EUR 238
million lapses. More than half of lapsing Commissions appropriations arise from the rejection by the Councils refusal to transfer appropriations
related to the salary adjustment. From payment appropriations carried forward from 2012, an amount of EUR 97 million was cancelled.

2014/2075(DEC) - 26/09/2014 Document attached to the procedure
FOLLOW-UP TO THE 2012 COMMISSION DISCHARGE: FOLLOW-UP ON THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT AND COUNCIL
RECOMMENDATIONS
Preliminary comment: this document is the Commission's report to the European Parliament (EP) and the Council on the follow-up to the
discharge for the 2012 financial year, pursuant to Article 319(3) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. The Commissions
replies to the key requests from the EP and the Council are available in two Commission Staff Working Documents (SEC(2014)285 and
SEC(2014)286 attached to this procedure file). These documents contain replies to 353 EP and 77 (79 in total, but 2 are addressed to the
Court of Auditors) Council specific discharge observations (8 from EP) and requests.
This report summarise the Commissions responses to the main requests of the European Parliament and the Council.
CONTENT: the report focuses on the binding commitments highlighted by the European Parliament in its general discharge resolutions.
The Commission agrees to start new actions on 142 requests (108 from the EP and 34 from the Council). It considers that for 240 requests
(199 from the EP and 41 from the Council), the required action has already been taken or is on-going, though in some cases the results of the
actions will need to be assessed.
Finally, for reasons related to the existing legal and budgetary framework or its institutional role or prerogatives, the Commission cannot accept
40 requests (38 from the EP and 2 from the Council).
The Commissions replies to requests from the Parliament and the Council may be summarised as follows:
Binding commitments: Parliament specifically highlights a large number of binding commitment of legal, audit, institutional, accountability and
financial nature. The Commission showed its formal commitment to implement fully and timely a series of actions and measures related to the
issues identified by these commitments.
Amongst these actions, on notes the following salient measures:
Reservations expressed in the annual activity reports (AARs) of several DGs: Parliament considers a priority that the Commission proves that
it has taken the necessary measures to overcome the concerns relating to reservations. The Commission has already taken a series of
fundamental measures. The Commission reports the serious weaknesses identified in the execution of the EU budget through reservations in
the AARs of the Commission's Directors-General and discloses the resulting risk for the EU budget. A reservation always goes hand in hand
with a clear action plan to tackle the problem identified in the management of EU funds and, if the regulatory conditions are met, the
Commission may interrupt or suspend the respective payments. The Commission follows up these reservations and the corresponding action
plans by monitoring the progress of the underlying work to implement them. A reservation will be lifted only once the Commission has obtained
reliable evidence that the weaknesses have been addressed through the implementation of appropriate actions by the Member State, the
adequate correction procedures have been launched, and the new system has proved its reliability in practice. AARs show in a transparent
way how the Commission fulfils its responsibility in this area in particular as regards DG AGRI and REGIO.
Better definition and application of rules by Member States: the Commission has adopted delegated acts governing areas under shared

management under the new Multiannual Financial Framework (MFF) 2014-2020. The delegated act based on the Common Provisions
Regulation (CPR) provides detailed rules to enable the mechanism of financial corrections (FC) to work effectively by defining clearly the
criteria for determining "serious deficiencies" which trigger the procedure for net financial corrections (NFC).
The European Parliament asked for the application of progressively increasing payment reductions and administrative sanctions where
eligibility criteria have not been respected by the final beneficiary receiving direct payments or rural development support and recurrent Land
Parcel Identification System LPIS shortcomings. This type of system of progressively increasing reductions and exclusions of payments is now
provided under the European legislation. Member States should apply these provisions without prejudice to financial corrections that the
Commission may impose at the level of the Member States. In the area of Agriculture, payments will be suspended in all cases where national
remedial actions to address identified serious deficiencies are not carried out in a proper and timely manner.
Step up Member Statess first-level checks and render them more stringent: this request is addressed to Member States. The Commission
constantly encourages the Member States to strengthen their controls. The set of regulations adopted for the programming period 2014-2020
contains some provisions which should lead to improving the effectiveness of control checks at national level, including the introduction of net
financial corrections that aims at creating an incentive for Member States to implement effective management and control systems, and the
strengthened use of simplification, in particular concerning simplified cost options, which should result in a reduction of errors. Specific
measures are also provided as regards agriculture in terms of clawing back amounts made to France and Portugal in 2006 and 2008.
To resolve the problems occurring in paying agencies whose residual risk of error lies above the materiality threshold of 2% with special focus
on France, Bulgaria, Romania, Portugal and Latvia. Under shared management, it is the MS that has to assume the primary responsibility for
ensuring that actions financed by the budget are implemented correctly in accordance with the rules. The role of the Commission consists
rather in an overall supervision by verifying the effective functioning of Member States's management and control systems through conformity
clearance procedures and applying NFC to protect the EU budget. In its 2013 AAR, for PAs with an adjusted residual error rate between 2%
and 5%, DG AGRI assessed paying agencies with an adjusted residual error rate between 2% and 5%.
Paying agencies with an adjusted residual error rate above 5% were automatically subject to a reservation. DG AGRI made 62 reservations. In
addition, DG AGRI audit activities are driven by a central risk analysis covering all CAP expenditure in all Member States. Member States,
measures and programmes affected by higher risks will be audited as a matter of priority .
Lastly, the report stressed the need to continue to improve the Annual Activity Reports (AAR) of the different DGs and to strengthen the
budgets protection measures. In this respect, the report states that the use of interruptions, suspensions, financial corrections, and recoveries
will be detailed in the next annual report on the protection of the Union budget, as well as the results of the Member States corrective work.
It should be noted that the report mentions the state of play of the procedure against OLAF and the former European Commissioner Mr Dalli.

2014/2075(DEC) - 26/09/2014 Document attached to the procedure
FOLLOW-UP TO THE COMMISSION DISCHARGE DETAILED REPLIES TO REQUESTS BY THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
This Commission Staff Working Paper completes the Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the
Follow-up to the 2012 Discharge.
An overview of these replies may be found in the summary of COM(2014)0607 (please refer to the summary of the document in question).
This working document presents in detail the answers to 353 specific requests made by the European Parliament in its Resolutions forming an
integral part of its Decision on the 2012 Discharge.
Many of these requests have been classed under the following headings:
Agriculture and Regional Policy: deficiencies in the Commissions and the Member States management
Commission reserves
Binding commitments
The Court of Auditors Statement of Assurance
Revenue
Agriculture
Regional policy, energy and transport
Commission Task Force for Greece
Employment and Social Affairs
External Relations
Research and other internal policies
OLAF
Tobacco smuggling
Lack of progress in Bulgaria
Roma issue
Information and Telecommunication Policy
Studies and advice/consultation from external providers.
For each of these chapters, the Commission replies point by point to the Parliaments requests and proposes a framework of appropriate
measures where necessary.
Improve the implementation of the Community budget: Members asked the Commission to ensure that the budget meets the main objectives
of the Union.
The Commission states that in general the reporting policy is already heading towards strengthening fiscal performance. Thus, each of the
budget heading gives a detailed view, through its relevant programmes, the following:
1. the results of financial programmes in line with the Europe 2020 strategy;

2. an overview of the performance results where they are available;
3. a detailed view of the operational aspects of this performance.
These aspects were further strengthened in the context of the 2014-2020 financial framework and the related financial programmes, as
adopted by the co-legislators.

2014/2075(DEC) - 26/09/2014 Document attached to the procedure
FOLLOW-UP TO 2012 COMMISSION DISCHARGE - REPLIES TO REQUESTS FROM THE COUNCIL
This Commission Staff Working Paper completes the Report from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on the
Follow-up to the 2012 Discharge.
An overview of these replies may be found in the summary of COM(2014)0607 (please refer to the summary of the document in question).
This working document presents in detail the answers to 79 specific requests made by the Council in the comments accompanying its
Recommendation on the 2012 Discharge.
Many of these requests have been classed under the following headings:
Chapter 1 - The Statement of Assurance and Supporting Information
Chapter 2 - Revenue
Chapter 3 - Agriculture: Market and Direct Support
Chapter 4 - Rural Development, Environment, Fisheries and Health
Chapter 5 - Regional Policy, Energy and Transport
Chapter 6 - Employment and Social Affairs
Chapter 7 - External Relations, Aid and Enlargement
Chapter 8 - Research and Other Internal Policies
Chapter 9 - Administrative and Other Expenditure
For each of these chapters, the Commission replies point by point to the Councils requests and proposes a framework of appropriate
measures where necessary.
Financial framework 2014-2020 and consistency with the Councils requests: the Council calls on all actors in the Commission, the Court and
Member States to take advantage of the new legal framework and to pursue efforts towards developing a performance framework as to ensure
that expected results and impacts laid down in the sector-specific regulations are achieved. This includes, among others, a consistent
application of SMART objectives, using milestones and suitable indicators to evaluate on an annual basis the performance of multiannual
programmes and to ensure that the financial resources have been spent correctly.
The Commission has been working for several years to strengthen its performance framework through a step-by-step approach. It has:
1. ensured that the legal bases of the 2014-2020 spending programmes include a more coherent framework for monitoring, evaluation
and reporting on their performance;
2. incorporated the performance framework into the Directorates-General (DGs) 2014 management plans.
This approach is clearly laid down in the New Financial Regulation.
Lastly, the Commission recalls that the co-legislators were closely involved in the setting of the programme objectives and performance
indicators.

2014/2075(DEC) - 30/01/2015 Supplementary non-legislative basic document
In accordance with Article 319(1) of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union (TFEU), the
Council approved a recommendation concerning granting discharge to the Commission in respect of the
implementation of the budget of the European Union for the financial year 2013.
Detailed analysis of revenue and expenditure:
revenue amounted to EUR 149 503 658 993.56;
expenditure disbursed from appropriations amounted to -EUR 147 566 887 878.68;
cancelled payment appropriations (including earmarked revenue) carried over from year n-1
amounted to EUR 436 586 912.65;
appropriations for payments carried over to year n+1 amounted to -EUR 1 325 132 086.83;
the positive budget balance amounted to EUR 1 001 850 135.62;
cancelled payment appropriations for the financial year amounted to EUR 33 747 914.67;
EUR 902 060 168.60 (96.39%) of the EUR 935 808 083.27 in appropriations for payments carried
over to year n have been used.
Based on the observations in the report by the Court of Auditors for the financial year 2013, the Council
recommended the European Parliament to give a discharge to the Commission in respect of the

implementation of the budget of the European Union for the financial year 2013. However, the Council has
issued a series of comments in regard to budgetary implementation which will need to be fully taken into
account when granting the discharge.
DAS: the Council welcomes the Court's Statement of Assurance (DAS) on the implementation of the
budget for the financial year 2013. It noted that the consolidated accounts of the European Union for the
financial year 2013, were free from material error and present fairly, in all material aspects, the financial
position of the Union and the results of its operations and its cash flows. It also noted with satisfaction that
revenue and commitments underlying the accounts for the financial year 2013 were legal and regular in all
material aspects.
The Council remained concerned that the Court's estimate for the most likely error rate for expenditure as
a whole in 2013 is 4.7%, thereby payments from the budget continued to be materially affected by
error. Moreover, the fact that supervisory and control systems audited by the Court were only partially
effective in ensuring the legality and regularity of transactions is also a cause of concern for the Council. It
recalled that better spending and sound financial management of EU funds is of particular importance
for the public perception of actions financed from the EU budget. Thus, the Council firmly supported
the recommendations presented by the Court in its annual report.
Management of EU Funds: the Council noted the relative stability in the overall error rate for payments
compared to the previous year, although it regretted that the error rate is still well above the Court's
materiality threshold of 2% for all policy areas, except administration. Although the error rate is not as such
a measure of fraud, inefficiency or waste of funds, the Council called for the improvement of the
management and control systems for EU funds and programmes.
Shared management: the Council noted that policies under shared management remain more affected by
error. Notwithstanding the continuous efforts made by the Commission and Member States to improve the
management and control systems, the error rate still remains above the materiality threshold. The
Council is aware that the complex and multiannual nature of some programmes can lead to difficulties in
managing them. It called upon the Commission and Member States to undertake further actions aiming at
strengthening the quality of the management and control systems and making them more efficient,
including the first level verifications. It also regretted the fact that an important part of the transactions
under shared management were affected by error, national authorities had sufficient information to detect
and correct the errors concerned. It calls upon the Commission to continue executing in full its supervisory
role in order to ensure the maximum protection of the EU budget.
Eligibility errors: the Council noted with concern that eligibility errors contributed the most to the overall
estimated error rate in 2013 and urged the Commission to identify the root causes of the reported
irregularities. It noted with concern that breaches of public procurement rules - non-compliance with EU
and/or national rules - continued to contribute to the overall error rate for the EU budget as a whole. It
encouraged the Member States to simplify and streamline national rules, so that the so-called "gold-plating"
does not add complexity and further administrative burden.
Simplification of administrative rules: the Council considered that a simplification of the rules is of
paramount importance in achieving an unqualified audit opinion. Simplification of rules, including in
delegated and implementing acts, and improved guidance not only reduces the administrative burden on the
beneficiaries and respective authorities and thereby reduces the risk of error, but also allows for more
efficient and less costly controls. Furthermore, the Council emphasised that the balance between risk of
error and cost of control and audit, as well as the potential additional administrative burden (be it for
beneficiaries, national administrations or the Commission) has to be carefully evaluated, focusing on better
controls rather than on more controls.
Corrections and recoveries: the Council noted that in 2013 the Commission reported financial corrections
and recoveries for an amount of EUR 3.3 billion implemented as a result of the Commission's supervisory
role. The Council is aware of the multiannual nature of financial corrections and assessed its overall impact
on the protection of the EU budget in that context. The Council is also aware of the different approaches of
the Court and of the Commission in evaluating the impact of financial corrections on the error rate.
Although the two institutions fulfil different roles, the Council invited the Commission and the Court to
reflect on how to provide comparable data in the future, including as regards corrective mechanisms.
RAL: the Council noted with concern the Court's assessment as regards the high amount of outstanding
commitments (RAL) at the end of 2013. It called on the Commission to continue monitoring the evolution
of the amounts of RAL, and to settle or decommit them in a timely manner and in line with the relevant
rules. In this context, the Council invited the Commission to accompany any proposal modifying the agreed
level of commitment appropriations with information on the corresponding impact on payment
appropriations over the programming period.
The Council made the following comments as regards the DAS and the supporting information:
Reliability of the accounts: the Council welcomed the favourable opinion given by the Court on the

reliability of the accounts for the financial year 2013. It noted with satisfaction the Court's statement
that the accounts present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Union as at 31
December 2013.
Legality and regularity of the underlying transactions: the Council is concerned that an important
share of spending continued to be affected by a material level of error and that the estimated error rate
for payments as a whole slightly decreased to 4.7% in 2013. It reiterated its wish to see year-on-year
improvements in the financial management systems and in the error rates across all policy areas, with
a view to obtaining an unqualified opinion from the Court.
Control systems: the Council regretted the Court's conclusion that overall the supervisory and
control systems examined by the Court were only partially effective in ensuring the legality and
regularity of payments underlying the accounts, and that payments relating to the other policy groups
remained affected by material error. It encouraged the Commission to further reinforce supervision
and control structures, to further strengthen its cooperation with Member States.
Revenue: the Council noted with satisfaction the Court's conclusion that the revenue part of the budget is
not affected by material error, that the underlying transactions were considered free from error and that the
control systems were assessed as being overall effective. It welcomed the progress recently made in lifting
long-outstanding reservations regarding GNI-based own resources and called on the Commission to pursue
its work in ensuring a high level of exhaustiveness of the GNI data in the GNI-verification process.
The Council analysed each budget area and made the following comments:
Agriculture - direct support: the Council is disappointed that the most likely error rate was
estimated by the Court at 3.6% according to estimates. Overall, it urged the Commission and
Member States to continue the efforts to improve their supervisory and control systems given that
61% of the audited sample of transactions were affected by error. It also noted that most of the
quantifiable errors detected by the Court relate to the accuracy or eligibility of aid payments, in
particular the over-declaration of land. The Council also noted that the Court included
cross-compliance errors in its estimate of the error rate for this policy group and that they had an
impact of 0.5% on the overall level of error.
Rural development, environment, fisheries and health: the Council regretted that the most likely
error rate for this policy group remained high at 6.7%. It acknowledged that rural development
remains a particularly error prone spending area of the EU budget due to the inherent complexity of
the programmes and eligibility conditions, as a consequence of the ambitious objectives of the rural
development policy. It called on the Commission to further enhance its work towards
simplification, guidance and training activities to address the shortcomings identified by the Court.
It expected that the simplification measures adopted in the 2014-2020 programmes, such as
simplified cost options for the reimbursement of payments, will be used more widely to contribute to
a more efficient and correct use of funds.
Regional policy, transport and energy: the Council regretted that the most likely error rate for
payments in this policy group remained high at 6.9%. It recognised the complexity of spending and
control structures under this policy group and is concerned about the risk identified by the Court in
this policy group resulting from pressure to spend funds, in particular towards the end of the
eligibility period. It noted that as in previous years, failures to comply with public procurement rules
and the declaration of ineligible costs were the most common sources of error identified by the Court
for this policy group. The Council encouraged the Commission to continue concentrating its available
audit resources on the most risk-prone areas and focussing in particular on preventive measures, in
order to better protect the EU budget.
Employment and social affairs: the Council noted that the error rate estimated by the Court for this
policy group remained almost unchanged at 3.1%. It acknowledged the fact that the diversity of the
activities financed under this policy group and the involvement of multiple, often small-scale partners
increase the risk of non-compliance with the existing legislation, and results in ineligible costs being
accepted or in calculation errors affecting the accuracy of claims, as highlighted by the Court. The
Council, however, called on the Commission and Member States to further strengthen the checks at
all levels and to provide increased and comprehensive guidance to beneficiaries. It pointed out that
the main sources of error in this policy group continued to be the declaration of ineligible projects,
the reimbursement of ineligible or inaccurately declared costs, and failures to respect public
procurement rules. It invited the Commission and Member States to consider and take advantage of
all other existing simplification opportunities, whenever possible and appropriate.
External aid and enlargement: the Council is encouraged that the most likely error rate for this
policy group has decreased by 0.7% to 2.6%. It encouraged the Commission to pursue its efforts to
reduce the error rate in a cost-effective manner. It is nevertheless concerned about the Court's
conclusion that the audited supervisory and control systems in the Directorate-General for

Development and Cooperation (EuropeAid) were only partially effective in ensuring the legality
and regularity of payments. It urged the Commission to take the necessary measures to correct the
weaknesses identified in its control mechanism.
Research and other internal policies: the Council regretted that the estimated error rate increased
significantly to 4.6% in 2013. The Council is aware that this policy group is prone to errors due to
a high number of beneficiaries, of which SMEs are a significant proportion. These beneficiaries
have limited experience and administrative capacity, they are often new to the programme and less
familiar with the rules and procedures. The Council urged the Commission to address the deficiencies
identified by the Court and to give priority to risk-based checks in its approach, and to provide
well-targeted guidance to the beneficiaries. As regards the failure to comply with public procurement
procedures, the Council acknowledged that only a limited number of transactions in this policy group
are subject to public procurement rules. Nevertheless, the Council invites the Commission to remain
vigilant in ensuring that these rules are applied correctly.
Administrative and related expenditure: the Council welcomed the fact that, as in previous years,
the administrative and related expenditure of the institutions and bodies of the European Union
remained free from material error and that their examined control systems were assessed as effective.
However, it pointed out that the estimated error rate of this policy group increased from 0% to 1%.
Conclusion: the Council regretted that the implementation of the programming period 2007-2013
focused primarily on the disbursement of EU funds in line with the rules, and not on performance.
The new legislative acts adopted for the 2014-2020 programming period include new measures focusing on
getting results from the EU budget. Therefore, the Council called on the Commission and Member States to
take advantage of the opportunities provided by the 2014-2020 multiannual financial framework (MFF) to
make efforts towards a more result-oriented approach, based on an objective assessment of the needs,
and to develop a performance framework in order to achieve the results and impacts that were laid down in
the sector-specific regulations.
Whilst welcoming the Courts findings regarding the achievement of results from the EU budget, the
Council considered that progress still needs to be made to establish a proper performance framework
within the EU. The Council considered that providing EU added value is of paramount importance for any
EU funding and, in order to achieve this, EU funding should deliver synergies and economies of scale at EU
level.
2014/2075(DEC) - 30/01/2015 Supplementary non-legislative basic document
Having regard to Council Regulation (EC) No 58/2003 laying down the statute for executive agencies to be
entrusted with certain tasks in the management of Community programmes and in particular Article 14(3)
thereof, and to Commission Regulation (EC) No 1653/2004 on a standard financial regulation for the
executive agencies, the Council addressed the following recommendations to the European Parliament as
regards the discharge to the given to the executive agencies.
At its meeting on 30 January 2015, the Budget Committee examined the six specific annual reports of the
European Court of Auditors related to executive agencies.
Having examined the revenue and expenditure accounts for the financial year 2013 and the balance sheet at
31 December 2013 as well as the report by the Court of Auditors on the annual accounts of the Executive
Agencies, accompanied by the Executive Agency's replies, the Council hereby recommended the European
Parliament to give a discharge to each of the Directors of the Executive Agencies in respect of the
implementation of the budget for the financial year 2013.
The Council considered that a certain number of observations should be taken into account when granting
discharge.
The Council Recommendations may be summarised as follows:
Education, Audiovisual and Culture Executive Agency: the Council noted that a high level of
commitment appropriations was still carried over to 2014. It invited the Executive Agency to
continue improving its financial management by systematically scrutinising carry-overs of
appropriations to the following budgetary year and by limiting them to the minimum necessary.
Executive Agency for Competitiveness and Innovation: the Council urged the Executive Agency
to take actions to improve its budget planning and monitoring of the budget implementation, in order
to reduce the level of commitments carried over and the amounts cancelled at the end of the
following year to the strict minimum.
Executive Agency for Health and Consumers: the Council regretted the weaknesses detected by the
Court in relation to budget planning. It called to improve its financial programming and monitoring of
the budget implementation, in order to reduce the level of appropriations cancelled at the end of the

following year to the minimum necessary.
Trans-European Transport Network Executive Agency: the Council invited the Executive Agency
to gather supporting documents and strengthen the ex-ante verification on the charges for its
premises. Moreover, the Council regretted the shortcomings detected by the Court in field of
exemption from indirect taxes. The Council urged the Executive Agency to continue to improve its
financial programming and monitoring of the budget implementation, in order to reduce the level of
commitments carried over to the next financial year to the strict minimum.
As regards the Research Executive Agency and the European Research Council Executive Agency, no
particular comments were made by the Council.
2014/2075(DEC) - 17/02/2015 Debate in Council
At the Economic and Financial Affairs Committee on 17 February 2015, the Council recommended the European Parliament to give a
discharge to the Commission for implementation of the 2013 EU budget. This recommendation was prepared on the basis of the Court of
Auditors' annual report.
Main findings: the Council noted that the error rate for payments in 2013 remained relatively stable compared to the previous year. However, it
regretted that the EU budget continues to be affected by an error rate above the materiality threshold of 2%. At the same time, the Council
recalled that the error rate is not a measure of fraud, inefficiency or waste of funds.
The Council recognised the efforts made by the Commission and member states to implement the Court of Auditors' recommendations of
previous years to improve the management and control of EU funds.
It noted that policies for which management is shared by the Commission and the Member States remain more affected by error than policies
directly managed by the Commission. The Council regretted that for an important part of the transactions under shared management affected
by error, national authorities had enough information to detect and correct the errors concerned. It called on the Commission to continue
exercising its supervisory role and to provide guidance to Member States in order to ensure that spending is in line with the rules.
Funds directly managed by the Commission: the Council regretted the recurrent increase in the error rate for most policies. It urged the
Commission to continue improving its control system.
Lastly, some delegations emphasised the importance of Member States taking full responsibility for maintaining - and where necessary
improving - effective and efficient control mechanisms to manage EU funds at national level.

2014/2075(DEC) - 26/02/2015 Document attached to the procedure
This report contains the Member States replies to the European Court of Auditors 2013 Annual Report.
Follow-up to the Courts audit: this report is an analysis of the Member States' replies to the European Court of Auditors' annual report for
budgetary year 2013. It fulfils the obligations defined in Article 162 (5) of the Financial Regulation.
The Court's annual report for 2013 stated that the consolidated accounts were free of material misstatements and that revenue and
commitments taken as a whole were legal and regular. The Court's audit also concluded that overall, payments were materially affected by
error and that the supervisory and control systems were in general, partially effective.
The audit results showed that overall the estimated error rate was 4.7%, down by 0.1 percentage points on last year's rate, but still above the
materiality level. The Court also pointed out that a significant positive factor in 2013 was the increased impact of corrective measures applied
by the Member States and the Commission. In addition, the Court's audit also revealed that for a large proportion of transactions affected by
error in the shared management areas, authorities in Member States had sufficient information available to have detected and corrected the
errors before claiming reimbursement from the Commission.
Policy areas rural development, environment, fisheries and health as well as regional policy, energy and transport had the highest estimated
error rate - 6.7% and 6.9% respectively.
During its 2013 audit the Court identified specific categories of quantifiable errors in shared management which contributed significantly to the
most likely error rate for the policy areas concerned:
·

in the policy area "Agriculture: market and direct support": overstated number of eligible hectares or animals and ineligible
beneficiary/ activity/expenditure together contributed 80% to the most likely error rate ;

·

in Regional Policy, transport and energy: serious errors in public procurement accounted for 45% of all quantifiable errors and made
up approximately 39% of the estimated error rate for the policy domain;

·

in the policy area Employment and Social affairs: errors related to public procurement breaches accounted for 7% of all errors, which
shows that the risk of non-compliance with public procurement is still relevant.

Control systems: the Court reported on the systematic weaknesses in the Land Parcel Identification System (LPIS) stemming from incorrect
assessment of the eligible land in LPIS databases. Member States were asked whether they were in a position to state that their control
system had addressed the recurrent deficiencies identified by the Court in relation to specific sectors. The Member States concerned stated
that they had addressed all or nearly all the identified recurrent deficiencies.
Regarding the question on public procurement breaches, nearly half of all Member States responded that they had identified systemic issues
related to public procurement and that they have taken preventive measures in this context.

Accountability: the report examined replies to questions on Member State accountability with the focus on management and national
declarations, management verifications and the role and importance of the Court's assessments.
76 % of Member States stated that mandatory management declarations could have a positive impact on the prevention, detection and
correction of errors by Member States. A sizable proportion of Member States (86 %) regarded the results of the Court's assessments as
useful and contributing to their own assurance of the legal and regular use of EU funds. On the subject of the usefulness of national
declarations, just over half of all Member States responded favourably.
Performance: the Court found that for the 2007-2013 programming generally the focus was more on the need to spend EU funds in
compliance with rules and that the focus on performance was limited. In the 2013 questionnaire, Member States were asked how they
ensured that performance was a key element in the use of EU funds and what measures had been put in place to monitor programme and
project performance. A significant majority of Member States stated that the use of criteria, indicators and evaluations are the means by which
many countries ensure performance is a key element. In terms of monitoring of performance, progress reports, control measures, evaluations
and tracking of indicators are among some of the more common measures used by Member States.

2014/2075(DEC) - 31/03/2015 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgetary Control adopted the report by Ingeborg GRÄßLE (EPP, DE) and recommended that Parliament grant the
Commission discharge in respect of the implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2013, and also
grant discharge to the Directors of the Education, Audiovisual and Culture Executive Agency, the Executive Agency for Small and
Medium-sized Enterprises (formerly the Executive Agency for Competitiveness and Innovation), the Consumers, Health, Agriculture and Food
Executive Agency, and European Research Council Executive Agency in respect of the implementation of their respective Agencies budgets
for the financial year 2013.
The committee recommended that Parliament close the accounts of the general budget of the Union for 2013.
Strengthening the Commissions monitoring role: recalling that for the twentieth year in a row, the Court of Auditors was not in a position to give
a Statement of Assurance, Members believed it was unacceptable that payments remained materially affected by error.
1. The Court of Auditors' Statement of Assurance:
·

Accounts and legality and regularity of revenue clean opinions: Members noted that the annual accounts of the Union for the
financial year 2013 presented fairly, and in all material respects, the position of the Union as of 31 December 2013 and revenue
underlying the accounts for the year ended 31 December 2013 was legal and regular in all material respects.

·

Legality and regularity of payments adverse opinion: Members regretted, however, the fact that the most likely error rate for
payments was estimated at 4.8 %, being above the materiality threshold of 2% . They drew attention to the need for the continuous
improvement of the management and control systems in Member States in order to guarantee the better financial management of
Union funds and a decrease in the error rate in the respective policy sectors in the course of the programming period 2014-2020.

Reservations in agriculture and rural development, regional policy and employment and social affairs: in the general context, Members put a
series of reservations on some major EU expenditure, in the areas of agriculture, regional policy and employment and social affairs.
Financial corrections and recoveries: Members noted that the financial corrections reported as implemented dropped to EUR 2.5 billion in
2013, compensated by an increase of 27 % of recoveries implemented in 2013 (from EUR 0.7 billion to EUR 0.9 billion). They reminded the
Commission and the Member States that they have a duty to take corrective measures to protect the Union budget in cases of ineffective
control systems or irregular expenditures. They stressed that the Court of Auditors found that in a number of transactions affected by error,
especially in the shared management areas, authorities had sufficient information available to detect and correct the errors . Members
demanded that the Court of Auditors therefore estimated in its future annual reports the level of error in the event that all corrective measures
had been taken. They regretted, furthermore, the fact that those measures had still a limited financial impact on the Union budget since more
than 40 % of the financial corrections implemented in 2013 were not considered as assigned revenue, but might be used by the same Member
States having caused these corrections in cohesion policy, thus undermining the preventive effect of financial corrections.
Unacceptable pressure on the EU budget: the committee was concerned by the fact that due to the unacceptable position of the Council
during the negotiations of the annual Union budget and despite the high level of payments, the accounts showed that outstanding financial
commitments stood at EUR 322 billion and the figure is likely to rise in 2014, which was at odds with Treaty provisions. It stressed that in times
of economic crisis, financial resources were scarce and that the way funds were absorbed by Member States often became the main policy
objective (use it or lose it). It called on the Commission and Member States to promote a shift from spending to a performance culture
focussing on the results achieved.
On the matter of certain EU financial instruments, Members regretted their complexity and the lack of democratic accountability involved in
their use. They called on the Commission to be more transparent and to give a full overview of the number of projects financed under each of
the financial engineering instruments.
Shared management: again, Members recalled the fact that in accordance with Article 317 TFEU, the Commission was ultimately responsible
for the implementation of the Union budget , but that where the Commission implemented the budget under shared management,
implementation tasks were delegated to Member States, thereby engaging their political and financial responsibility. Therefore Member States
should act strictly in accordance with the principle of sound financial management and should not undermine their own responsibility in
managing Union funds. Members called therefore on the Commission and the Council to take concrete and meaningful steps to enable the
necessary progress in sound financial management, including the increased use of the instrument of national declarations, which in practice
did not require much extra effort. They called on the Commission and the Member States to publish not only the national declarations but also
the annual summaries and management declarations in order to give more insight in and achieve a real improvement of the financial
management.
The committee also pointed out the figures provided by the Court of Auditors as regards the amounts and percentage of funds at risk as to the
European Regional Development Funds, the European Social Funds and the Cohesion Funds, Slovakia, the United Kingdom and Spain had

the highest error rates. The figures provided by the Court of Auditors as regards the amounts and percentage of funds at risk as to the
European Agricultural Guarantee Funds and the European Agricultural Funds for Regional Development show that Romania, Bulgaria an
Portugal had the highest error rates.
II. Budgetary implementation by policy area measures to be taken: Members discussed budgetary implementation and made the following
observations:
Revenue: the committee noted that the Court of Auditors audit did not find any substantial error in the Commissions calculation of Member
States contributions and their payment, most of which are based on forecast Gross National Income (GNI) data for 2013. They regretted that
the Council had not been able to make any progress so far on the reform of the own resources system on the basis of those legislative
proposals, despite a proposed global reform of the own resources system that was welcomed by Parliament. Measures in this matter were
needed.
Agriculture: the committee regretted that the most likely error rate at the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF) payments were
estimated at 3.6 % (3.8% in 2012). It was worried about the fact that the error rate with regards to agricultural market measures stood at
7.44%, with reservations on the restructuring of vineyards in Spain. Members wanted to see recovery and corrective action.
Rural development, environment, fisheries and health: Members noted that the payments in rural development, environment, fisheries and
health were not free from material error in 2013, with a reduction in the most likely error rate to 6.7 % from 7.9 % in 2012. They noted that the
errors found by the Court of Auditors occurred mainly because beneficiaries did not respect the eligibility requirements, the procurement rules
were not properly applied and agri-environmental commitments were not respected.
Members asked for:
·

a calculation of separate error rates for market measures and direct payments in the CAP first pillar;

·

remedial actions with regard to the deficiencies in the control system applicable to Union aid for producer groups for fruits and
vegetables in Poland, Austria, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom;

·

demonstration of the Union added value of the agricultural market measures bearing in mind the risk of potential losses affecting the
budget of the Union: Members asked the Commission to consider their suppression if this risk was too high (e.g. poultry export
refunds in France);

·

draft proposals with a view to sanctioning false or incorrect reporting by paying agencies including the three following dimensions,
namely (i) inspection statistics, (ii) statements by the paying agencies, and (iii) the work carried out by the certification bodies.

Regional policy, energy and transport: Members stressed that from the total amount of payments in 2013 under this policy group (EUR 45 311
million), 96 % were for regional policy, mostly implemented through the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund, EUR 1 059 million were for mobility and
transport and EUR 758 million were for energy. They pointed out that for ERDF and CF expenditure the main compliance risks relate to: errors
in public procurement (39 %), ineligible projects/activities or beneficiaries (22 %), ineligible costs included in expenditure declarations (21 %)
and the non-compliance with state aid rules. They wanted to see new guidelines to assist Member States implement procedures. They
requested that the Commission and Member States paid particular attention to simplifying procedures, including those for beneficiaries, which
could have benefits for both auditing and decreasing error rates, while in parallel increasing the effectiveness of the management and control
systems. The committee wanted to see specific measures for the Czech Republic, Italy and Greece, which were affected by high levels of
ineligible expenditure.
In more horizontal terms, Members wanted to see Member States move to a performance culture in order to strengthen the efficiency, efficacy
and impact of cohesion policy as well as strengthening first level checks. Employment and social affairs: Members emphasised that the
reduction of youth unemployment was particularly urgent (more than EUR 12,4 billion from the ESF and the Youth Employment Initiative have
been earmarked). They noted the Court estimated the most likely error rate to be 3.1 % (slightly less than 2012) and he errors in this policy
area concerned, as in previous years, ineligible expenditure (93 % concerning overcharging of overhead costs, over-declaration of personnel
costs, and costs calculated incorrectly) and failures to comply with public procurement rules). They encouraged DG EMPL to pursue its aim
with regard to ESF to move further from the need to correct errors to a situation where errors are avoided. The committee also recommended
measures for setting up projects for Roma in Member States.
External relations: Members were gravely concerned that in the 2013 budget, payment appropriations managed by the Commission's
Directorate-General for Development and Cooperation (DG DEVCO) were short by EUR 293 million, and that the late approval of necessary
reinforcements caused a roll-over to the following year, thus putting more pressure on the already tight payment appropriations for 2014. This
situation entailed not only a high political and reputational risk for the Union's credibility as the world's first donor but might also endanger the
fiscal stability of partner countries by leaving financial gaps in their budgets. Members emphasised that 2013 was the second consecutive year
that humanitarian aid through the Union budget exceeded EUR 1.3 billion in commitments due to the occurrence of a high number of
humanitarian crises. They deplored the impact that the lack of payment appropriations had in this crisis year on DG ECHO's activities, which
could only be maintained through rearranging payment schedules, resulting in a carry-over of EUR 160 million in payment arrears at year end.
Members called on the Council to comply with the payment plan agreed with Parliament.
They also noted that the most likely error rate of the Court of Auditors was 2.6 % and that the residual error rate as determined by the second
study carried out by EuropeAid was estimated at 3.35 %. The committee observed that the nature of the instruments and payment conditions
in budget support and Union contributions to multi-donor projects carried out by international organisations limited the extent to which
transactions were prone to errors. It asked the Commission to submit a report on the added value of budget support and, in particular, on the
way it had helped developing countries in achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
At the same time, Members took note that OLAF had drafted a report on the humanitarian aid granted to the Saharawi refugee camp of
Tindouf in Algeria and called on the Commission to clarify the measures taken in response to the findings of that report. They urged the
Commission to ensure that the Algerian or Sahrawi individuals incriminated by the OLAF report no longer had access to aid funded by Union
taxpayers.
Research and other internal policies: Members observed that the spending in this policy group covered a wide range of policy objectives, such
as research and innovation, education, security, migration and measures to combat the effects of the financial crisis; the principal risk to
regularity remained that beneficiaries included ineligible or unsubstantiated costs in their cost statements, which were neither detected nor
corrected by the Commission or Member States' control systems. They called on the Commission to report comprehensively on the increasing

"policy-orientation" of the Directorate-General for Research and Innovation which was triggered by outsourcing the management of two-thirds
of the FP7's operational costs to non-Commission bodies. They also asked the Commission to provide an overview listing the policy progress
between FP7 and HORIZON 2020 for researchers and SMEs.
Administration: Members noted that the differences in pay levels for civil servants working for Union institutions and for those working for
national administrations, remained very high, leading, inter alia, to a lack of mobility between staff at a Union level and at national levels. They
called on the Commission to carry out an in-depth study on the reasons for these differences and to develop a long-term strategy to reduce
these differences.
They considered that in times of crisis and general budget cuts, expenditure on away days for Union staff should be reduced and that such
activities should, as far as possible, be confined to the places of work of the institutions, since the resulting added value does not justify such
high costs.
Getting results from the Union budget: lastly, the committee observed that in its 2013 report, the Court of Auditors concluded that Member
States, when selecting projects under shared management, had focused first on the need to spend the Union money available, rather than on
their expected performance. It requested that in order to reverse this incentive and to change towards a culture of good performance, an
independent high-level working group on the performance of the Union budget be convened in order to make recommendations to structurally
shift the incentive from spending to good performance, based on an assessment of Union added value. It also demanded that the Commission
included in the next evaluation reports provided for in Article 318 TFEU an analysis of the efficiency, the effectiveness and the results achieved
in terms of growth and jobs by the investment plan of EUR 315 billion.
Lastly, Members called on the Commission to manage its budget in such a way that there are no thematic policy overlaps and duplications
amongst its various DGs with similar or nearly identical competences.

2014/2075(DEC) - 29/04/2015 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament decided by 513 votes to 184, with 4 abstentions, to grant discharge to the Commission in respect of the
implementation of the general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2013, and also grant discharge to the Directors of the
Education, Audiovisual and Culture Executive Agency, the Executive Agency for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (formerly the Executive
Agency for Competitiveness and Innovation), the Consumers, Health, Agriculture and Food Executive Agency, and European Research
Council Executive Agency in respect of the implementation of their respective Agencies budgets for the financial year 2013.
Parliament closed the accounts of the general budget of the Union for 2013.
It confirmed its position in a resolution adopted by 565 votes to 121, with 12 abstentions, which contains observations which form an integral
part of the discharge decisions.
Strengthening the Commissions monitoring role: recalling that for the twentieth year in a row, the Court of Auditors was not in a position to give
a Statement of Assurance, Parliament believed it was unacceptable that payments remained materially affected by error.
II.The Court of Auditors Statement of Assurance:
Accounts and legality and regularity of revenue clean opinions: Parliament noted that the annual accounts of the Union for the
financial year 2013 presented fairly, and in all material respects, the position of the Union as of 31 December 2013 and revenue
underlying the accounts for the year ended 31 December 2013 was legal and regular in all material respects.
Legality and regularity of payments adverse opinion: Parliament regretted, however, the fact that the most likely error rate for
payments was estimated at 4.8%, being above the materiality threshold of 2% . It drew attention to the need for the continuous
improvement of the management and control systems in Member States in order to guarantee the better financial management of
Union funds and a decrease in the error rate in the respective policy sectors in the course of the programming period 2014-2020.
Reservations in agriculture and rural development, regional policy and employment and social affairs: in the general context, Members put a
series of reservations on some major EU expenditure, in the areas of agriculture, regional policy and employment and social affairs.
Financial corrections and recoveries: Parliament noted that the financial corrections reported as implemented dropped to EUR 2.5 billion in
2013, compensated by an increase of 27% of recoveries implemented in 2013 (from EUR 0.7 billion to EUR 0.9 billion). It reminded the
Commission and the Member States that they have a duty to take corrective measures to protect the Union budget in cases of ineffective
control systems or irregular expenditures. It stressed that the Court of Auditors found that in a number of transactions affected by error,
especially in the shared management areas, authorities had sufficient information available to detect and correct the errors . Members
demanded that the Court of Auditors therefore estimated in its future annual reports the level of error in the event that all corrective measures
had been taken. They regretted, furthermore, the fact that those measures had still a limited financial impact on the Union budget since more
than 40 % of the financial corrections implemented in 2013 were not considered as assigned revenue, but might be used by the same Member
States having caused these corrections in cohesion policy, thus undermining the preventive effect of financial corrections.
Unacceptable pressure on the EU budget: Parliament was concerned by the fact that due to the unacceptable position of the Council during
the negotiations of the annual Union budget and despite the high level of payments, the accounts showed that outstanding financial
commitments stood at EUR 322 billion and the figure is likely to rise in 2014, which was at odds with Treaty provisions. It stressed that in times
of economic crisis, financial resources were scarce and that the way funds were absorbed by Member States often became the main policy
objective (use it or lose it). It called on the Commission and Member States to promote a shift from spending to a performance culture
focussing on the results achieved.
On the matter of certain EU financial instruments, Parliament regretted their complexity and the lack of democratic accountability involved in
their use. It called on the Commission to be more transparent and to give a full overview of the number of projects financed under each of the
financial engineering instruments.
Shared management: again, Parliament recalled the fact that in accordance with Article 317 TFEU, the Commission was ultimately responsible
for the implementation of the Union budget , but that where the Commission implemented the budget under shared management,
implementation tasks were delegated to Member States, thereby engaging their political and financial responsibility. Therefore Member States
should act strictly in accordance with the principle of sound financial management and should not undermine their own responsibility in

managing Union funds. Parliament called therefore on the Commission and the Council to take concrete and meaningful steps to enable the
necessary progress in sound financial management, including the increased use of the instrument of national declarations, which in practice
did not require much extra effort. It called on the Commission and the Member States to publish not only the national declarations but also the
annual summaries and management declarations in order to give more insight in and achieve a real improvement of the financial
management. Plenary called for the publication. It considered it essential to promote full transparency in the use of structural funds through the
publication of the accounting documentation of assigned projects.
Parliament also pointed out the figures provided by the Court of Auditors as regards the amounts and percentage of funds at risk as to the
European Regional Development Funds, the European Social Funds and the Cohesion Funds, Slovakia, the United Kingdom and Spain had
the highest error rates. The figures provided by the Court of Auditors as regards the amounts and percentage of funds at risk as to the
European Agricultural Guarantee Funds and the European Agricultural Funds for Regional Development show that Romania, Bulgaria an
Portugal had the highest error rates.
II. Budgetary implementation by policy area measures to be taken: Parliament discussed budgetary implementation and made the following
observations:
Revenue: Parliament noted that the Court of Auditors audit did not find any substantial error in the Commissions calculation of Member States
contributions and their payment, most of which are based on forecast Gross National Income (GNI) data for 2013. It regretted that the Council
had not been able to make any progress so far on the reform of the own resources system on the basis of those legislative proposals, despite
a proposed global reform of the own resources system that was welcomed by Parliament. Measures in this matter were needed.
Agriculture: Parliament regretted that the most likely error rate at the European Agricultural Guarantee Fund (EAGF) payments were estimated
at 3.6% (3.8% in 2012). It was worried about the fact that the error rate with regards to agricultural market measures stood at 7.44%, with
reservations on the restructuring of vineyards in Spain. Members wanted to see recovery and corrective action.
Rural development, environment, fisheries and health: Parliament also noted that the payments in rural development, environment, fisheries
and health were not free from material error in 2013, with a reduction in the most likely error rate to 6.7% from 7.9% in 2012. It noted that the
errors found by the Court of Auditors occurred mainly because beneficiaries did not respect the eligibility requirements, the procurement rules
were not properly applied and agri-environmental commitments were not respected.
Parliament asked for:
a calculation of separate error rates for market measures and direct payments in the CAP first pillar;
remedial actions with regard to the deficiencies in the control system applicable to Union aid for producer groups for fruits and
vegetables in Poland, Austria, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom;
demonstration of the Union added value of the agricultural market measures bearing in mind the risk of potential losses affecting the
budget of the Union: Members asked the Commission to consider their suppression if this risk was too high (e.g. poultry export
refunds in France);
draft proposals with a view to sanctioning false or incorrect reporting by paying agencies including the three following dimensions,
namely (i) inspection statistics, (ii) statements by the paying agencies, and (iii) the work carried out by the certification bodies.
Regional policy, energy and transport: Parliament stressed that from the total amount of payments in 2013 under this policy group (EUR 45
311 million), 96% were for regional policy, mostly implemented through the ERDF and the Cohesion Fund, EUR 1 059 million were for mobility
and transport and EUR 758 million were for energy. It pointed out that for ERDF and CF expenditure the main compliance risks relate to:
errors in public procurement (39%), ineligible projects/activities or beneficiaries (22%), ineligible costs included in expenditure declarations
(21%) and the non-compliance with state aid rules. It welcomed the Commissions actions undertaken to mitigate those risks and encouraged it
to continue to give guidance and training to managing authorities on the risks identified. It expected that the new regulations and rules for the
2014 to 2020 programming period will contribute towards decreasing the risk of errors and better performance through greater simplification
and clarification of the procedures.
It also called on the Commission to provide further guidance and technical assistance to the Member States. It requested that the Commission
and Member States pay particular attention to simplifying procedures, including those for beneficiaries, which can have benefits for both
auditing and decreasing error rates, while in parallel increasing the effectiveness of the management and control systems.
Parliament wanted to see specific measures for the Czech Republic, Italy and Greece, which were affected by high levels of ineligible
expenditure. Parliament also covered the issue of the earthquake in
the Abruzzi region and that the European Union Solidarity Fund took charge of the establishment of up-to-date national disaster management
plans, the establishment of emergency procurement arrangements, the setting up of temporary accommodation in disaster-struck areas.
In more horizontal terms, it wanted to see Member States move to a performance culture in order to strengthen the efficiency, efficacy and
impact of cohesion policy as well as strengthening first level checks. Employment and social affairs: Members emphasised that the reduction
of youth unemployment was particularly urgent (more than EUR 12.4 billion from the ESF and the Youth Employment Initiative have been
earmarked).
Parliament noted that the Court estimated the most likely error rate to be 3.1% (slightly less than 2012) and the errors in this policy area
concerned, as in previous years, ineligible expenditure (93% concerning overcharging of overhead costs, over-declaration of personnel costs,
and costs calculated incorrectly) and failures to comply with public procurement rules). It encouraged DG EMPL to pursue its aim with regard
to ESF to move further from the need to correct errors to a situation where errors are avoided. Parliament also recommended measures for
setting up projects for Roma in Member States.
External relations: Parliament was gravely concerned that in the 2013 budget, payment appropriations managed by the Commissions
Directorate-General for Development and Cooperation (DG DEVCO) were short by EUR 293 million, and that the late approval of necessary
reinforcements caused a roll-over to the following year, thus putting more pressure on the already tight payment appropriations for 2014. This
situation entailed not only a high political and reputational risk for the Unions credibility as the worlds first donor but might also endanger the
fiscal stability of partner countries by leaving financial gaps in their budgets. It emphasised that 2013 was the second consecutive year that
humanitarian aid through the Union budget exceeded EUR 1.3 billion in commitments due to the occurrence of a high number of humanitarian
crises. It deplored the impact that the lack of payment appropriations had in this crisis year on DG ECHO's activities, which could only be
maintained through rearranging payment schedules, resulting in a carry-over of EUR 160 million in payment arrears at year end. Parliament
called on the Council to comply with the payment plan agreed with Parliament.

Members also noted that the most likely error rate of the Court of Auditors was 2.6% and that the residual error rate as determined by the
second study carried out by EuropeAid was estimated at 3.35%. Parliament observed that the nature of the instruments and payment
conditions in budget support and Union contributions to multi-donor projects carried out by international organisations limited the extent to
which transactions were prone to errors. It asked the Commission to submit a report on the added value of budget support and, in particular,
on the way it had helped developing countries in achieving the Millennium Development Goals.
At the same time, Parliament took note that OLAF had drafted a report on the humanitarian aid granted to the Saharawi refugee camp of
Tindouf in Algeria and called on the Commission to clarify the measures taken in response to the findings of that report. It urged the
Commission to ensure that the Algerian or Sahrawi individuals incriminated by the OLAF report no longer had access to aid funded by Union
taxpayers.
Research and other internal policies: Members observed that the spending in this policy group covered a wide range of policy objectives, such
as research and innovation, education, security, migration and measures to combat the effects of the financial crisis; the principal risk to
regularity remained that beneficiaries included ineligible or unsubstantiated costs in their cost statements, which were neither detected nor
corrected by the Commission or Member States' control systems. They called on the Commission to report comprehensively on the increasing
"policy-orientation" of the Directorate-General for Research and Innovation which was triggered by outsourcing the management of two-thirds
of the FP7's operational costs to non-Commission bodies. They also asked the Commission to provide an overview listing the policy progress
between FP7 and HORIZON 2020 for researchers and SMEs.
Administration: Parliament noted that the differences in pay levels for civil servants working for Union institutions and for those working for
national administrations, remained very high, leading, inter alia, to a lack of mobility between staff at a Union level and at national levels. It
called on the Commission to carry out an in-depth study on the reasons for these differences and to develop a long-term strategy to reduce
these differences.
It considered that in times of crisis and general budget cuts, expenditure on away days for Union staff should be reduced and that such
activities should, as far as possible, be confined to the places of work of the institutions, since the resulting added value does not justify such
high costs.
Getting results from the Union budget: Parliament observed that in its 2013 report, the Court of Auditors concluded that Member States, when
selecting projects under shared management, had focused first on the need to spend the Union money available, rather than on their expected
performance. It requested that in order to reverse this incentive and to change towards a culture of good performance, an independent
high-level working group on the performance of the Union budget be convened in order to make recommendations to structurally shift the
incentive from spending to good performance, based on an assessment of Union added value. It also demanded that the Commission included
in the next evaluation reports provided for in Article 318 TFEU an analysis of the efficiency, the effectiveness and the results achieved in terms
of growth and jobs by the investment plan of EUR 315 billion.
Lastly, the Commission was called upon to manage its budget in such a way that there are no thematic policy overlaps and duplications
amongst its various DGs with similar or nearly identical competences.

2014/2075(DEC) - 29/04/2015 Final act
PURPOSE: to grant discharge to the European Commission for the financial year 2013.
NON LEGISLATIVE ACT: Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/1616 of the European Parliament on discharge in respect of the implementation of the
general budget of the European Union for the financial year 2013, Section III Commission and executive agencies.
CONTENT: with the present decision, the European Parliament grants discharge to the Commission for the implementation of its budget for
the financial year 2013.
The Decision runs in parallel to Decision (EU, Euratom) 2015/1623 on the closure of the accounts of the general budget of the European
Union for the financial year 2013.
In its resolution attached to the Decision on discharge, the European Parliament Welcomes the fact that the annual accounts of the Union for
the financial year 2013 present fairly, and in all material respects, the position of the Union as of 31 December 2013 and notes with satisfaction
that revenue underlying the accounts for the year ended 31 December 2013 is legal and regular in all material respects.
However, Parliament regretted the fact that payments are affected by a most likely error rate of 4.7%, being significantly above the 2%
threshold for certain payments.
At the same time, Parliament underlined that the Commission has ultimate responsibility for the implementation of the Union budget while
Member States, especially under shared management of funds, have a special political and financial responsibility in implementing the Union
budget. Accordingly, Member States should act strictly in accordance with the principle of sound financial management and should not
undermine their own responsibility in managing Union funds.
Pressure on the budget: Parliament was concerned by the fact that due to the unacceptable position of the Council during the negotiations of
the annual Union budget and despite the high level of payments, the accounts show that outstanding financial commitments and other
liabilities continued to grow in 2013 and that at the year end, they stood at EUR 322 billion, a figure placing a question mark over the legality of
the budget.
Parliament stressed that in times of economic crisis, financial resources are scarce and required a shift from spending to a performance
culture.
Members made a series of other observations in the resolution attached to the Decision on discharge (please see the summary of 29 April
2015).
NB. Parliament also granted discharge to the directors of the following executive agencies on their budget implementation for 2013: Education,
Audiovisual and Culture, Competiveness and Innovation, Health and Consumers, European Research Council, Research and Innovation and
Networks.

