Procedure file
Basic information
2014/2005(INI)

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure completed

Negotiations on the MFF 2014-2020: lessons to be learned and the way
forward

Subject
8.40.10 Interinstitutional relations, democratic deficit, subsidiarity, comitology
8.70 Budget of the Union

Key players
European Parliament

Committee responsible

Rapporteur

Appointed

BUDG Budgets
(Associated committee)

PPE DEHAENE Jean-Luc

28/09/2011

S&D KALFIN Ivailo

28/09/2011

Shadow rapporteur
ALDE JENSEN Anne E.
Verts/ALE TRÜPEL Helga
ECR ASHWORTH Richard
EFD MORGANTI Claudio
Committee for opinion

Appointed

EMPL

Employment and Social Affairs

S&D BERÈS Pervenche

05/10/2011

REGI

Regional Development

PPE OLBRYCHT Jan

11/02/2014

LIBE

Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs

S&D GÖNCZ Kinga

12/02/2014

ALDE DUFF Andrew

17/12/2013

AFCO Constitutional Affairs
(Associated committee)
FEMM

European Commission

Rapporteur for opinion

Women's Rights and Gender Equality

The committee decided not to
give an opinion.

Commission DG

Commissioner

Budget

LEWANDOWSKI Janusz

Key events
06/02/2014

Committee referral announced in
Parliament, 1st reading/single reading

06/02/2014

Referral to associated committees
announced in Parliament

19/03/2014

Vote in committee, 1st reading/single
reading

26/03/2014

Committee report tabled for plenary,
single reading

14/04/2014

Debate in Parliament

15/04/2014

Results of vote in Parliament

15/04/2014

Decision by Parliament, 1st
reading/single reading

15/04/2014

End of procedure in Parliament

A7-0254/2014

Summary

T7-0378/2014

Summary

Technical information
Procedure reference

2014/2005(INI)

Procedure type

INI - Own-initiative procedure

Procedure subtype

Initiative

Legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 052

Modified legal basis

Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament EP 150

Stage reached in procedure

Procedure completed

Committee dossier

BUDG/7/15023

Documentation gateway
Committee draft report
Committee opinion

EMPL

Amendments tabled in committee

PE527.841

16/01/2014

EP

PE527.870

13/02/2014

EP

PE529.801

24/02/2014

EP

Committee opinion

LIBE

PE529.716

26/02/2014

EP

Committee opinion

REGI

PE528.070

05/03/2014

EP

Committee opinion

AFCO

PE528.017

12/03/2014

EP

Committee report tabled for plenary, single
reading

A7-0254/2014

26/03/2014

EP

Summary

Text adopted by Parliament, single reading

T7-0378/2014

15/04/2014

EP

Summary

2014/2005(INI) - 26/03/2014 Committee report tabled for plenary, single reading
The Committee on Budgets adopted the joint report by Jean-Luc DEHAENE (EPP, BE) and Ivailo KALFIN (S&D, BG) on negotiations on the
MFF 2014-2020: lessons to be learned and the way forward. The Committee on Constitutional Affairs exercising its prerogatives as an
associated committee in accordance with Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure, was also consulted for an opinion on the report.
Members recalled that the overall level of the next MFF (EUR 960 billion in commitments, EUR 908 billion in payments at 2011 prices). This
represented a cut of 3.5 % in commitments and 3.7 % in payments compared to the 2007-2013 financial framework , despite the growing EU
competences following the Lisbon Treaty and the enlargement of the Union to 28 Member States. Members stated that this level fell short of
EU political goals and commitments, in particular in relation to the Europe 2020 strategy.
The committee also recalled that the EU annual budget would continue to represent approximately 1% of EU GNI, a level well below the own
resources ceiling of 1.29% of EU GNI, as decided in 1992. It stressed that, faced politically with the impossibility of changing the overall MFF
figures decided by the European Council, Parliament had focused on improving the implementation of the MFF by successfully negotiating the
inclusion of new provisions that will help to make the new financial framework and the new EU annual budget more operational, consistent,
transparent and responsive to the needs of EU citizens. These provisions concerned, in particular, the new arrangements relating to the MFF
revision, flexibility, the unity and transparency of the EU budget, along with a further engagement on reforming the financing of the EU budget.
In general terms, Members regretted the fact that both the procedure leading up to the agreement on the MFF 2014-2020 and the political
debate surrounding these negotiations demonstrated a clear lack of shared vision as regards the EU budget and political priorities , showed
that there are very divergent approaches among the EU institutions, and fell short of Parliaments increased role and prerogatives under the
Treaty of Lisbon.
Accordingly, Members wanted to draw the necessary political and institutional lessons, which could serve as a basis for the preparation of
future negotiations.
Political considerations: whilst acknowledging the need for fiscal consolidation in Member States, the committee pointed out that the EU
budget was primarily an investment budget for enhancing national efforts made to regain growth, stimulate competitiveness and generate
employment in the whole EU. It was concerned at the fact that budgetary debates in the Council had been for many years poisoned by the
logic of fair returns instead of being driven by the logic of the European added value. Members considered that, while this debate had already
existed before the introduction of a GNI-based resource, the situation had seriously intensified due to the current system of EU financing,
whereby some 74 % of revenues stemmed from national contributions based on GNI instead of genuine own resources. This logic also
prevailed in the way the MFF agreement was struck by the European Council on 8 February 2013. Members criticised, in particular, the
increased number of special allocations and gifts granted in the course of negotiations between Heads of State and Government, which are
not based on objective and verifiable criteria, but rather reflect the bargaining power of Member States, which denoted a lack of transparency.

The report underlined that the European added value should prevail over national interests. Members strongly rejected this purely accounting
vision of the EU budget, and regretted the fact that some Member States seemed to regard national contributions to the EU budget purely as a
cost to be minimized.
They also considered that:
·

any decision on the financial framework should be preceded by and based on a genuine political debate on the role, function and
added value of the EU budget;

·

the EU should have a system of genuine, clear, simple and fair own resources, which would reduce the share of GNI-based
contributions to a minimum.

Institutional considerations: the committee recalled that Parliament was the first EU institution to present its vision on the MFF 2014-2020 and
the need to reform the financing of the EU budget. It considered it regrettable that: (i) prior to the European Council agreement on the MFF of
8 February 2013, no meaningful negotiations were held between Parliament and the Council; (ii) despite Parliaments strong objections, all
successive negotiating boxes presented by different Council presidencies and, ultimately, the European Council MFF agreement of 8 February
2013 contained a significant number of legislative elements that should have been decided under the ordinary legislative procedure;
Drawing lessons from these observations, Members wanted:
·

Parliament to use all means available to strengthen its influence on the spirit, calendar and content of the negotiations with the
Council, by making the Council better acknowledge Parliaments arguments and positions;

·

a more constructive attitude on the part of Council negotiators instead of forcing Parliament to struggle, including at the highest
political level, in order to engage in negotiations on every article of the MFF Regulation / IIA;

·

to significantly improve the modalities of any future MFF negotiations, in order to avoid deadlocks and save valuable time and
resources in the course of negotiations.

Members also called for a shift towards qualified majority voting for the MFF Regulation and stated the unanimity rule in the Council means
that the agreement represented the lowest common denominator, based on the need to avoid the veto of a single Member State. The general
passerelle clause (Article 48(7) TEU) could be deployed by the European Council to make the shift towards qualified majority voting and the
ordinary legislative procedure for the own resources and MFF decisions.
MFF 2014-2020: the way forward: Members declared their intention to ensure that all new provisions that were successfully incorporated into
the MFF Regulation and IIA were utilised in full in the annual budgetary procedure, particularly the new rules on flexibility. They stressed, in
this context, that the accumulated RALs had reached a critical level that might eventually lead the EU budget into structural deficit.
They recalled that the next Commission was due to launch a compulsory review and revision of the MFF 2014-2020 by the end of 2016, at the
request of Parliament. In this context, Members stressed the need for the next Parliament to reflect in good time on political priorities, to
identify areas for which more investments will be deemed necessary in the second half of the MFF 2014-2020, focussing on areas of proven
added value of EU spending.
At the same time, Members strongly believed that a five-year MFF cycle would enhance democratic legitimacy, and improve the prioritisation
of budgetary means.
The report underlined that the Commission proposals for the MFF revision should take full account of the latest macroeconomic projections
and include a thorough assessment of the operation of all special instruments, in particular the global margins in commitments and payments.
Members reiterated their intention to make the compulsory MFF revision a key demand in the investiture of the next Commission . The next
European Parliament was called upon make the election of the proposed candidate for President of the Commission conditional upon a strong
and non-ambiguous commitment to implementing the post-electoral review/revision clause and engaging in a genuine and deep political
dialogue on its content.
The issue of own resources: lastly, Members recalled that debate on Own Resources represented a unique opportunity to overcome the
deadlock that has arisen over the reform of the current own-resources system. They recalled that the High Level Group on Own Resources
had a mandate to examine all aspects of the reform of the own resources system. Members stated that Parliament was firmly committed to
working intensively at all stages of this process and counted on the Councils equal commitment to this process.

2014/2005(INI) - 15/04/2014 Text adopted by Parliament, single reading
The European Parliament adopted by 442 votes to 170, with 39 abstentions, a resolution on negotiations on the multiannual financial
framework (MFF) 2014-2020: lessons to be learned and the way forward.
Parliament recalled that the overall level of the next MFF (EUR 960 billion in commitments, EUR 908 billion in payments at 2011 prices). This
represented a cut of 3.5% in commitments and 3.7% in payments compared to the 2007-2013 financial framework , despite the growing EU
competences following the Lisbon Treaty and the enlargement of the Union to 28 Member States. Parliament noted that this level fell short of
EU political goals and commitments, in particular in relation to the Europe 2020 strategy.
It also recalled that the EU annual budget would continue to represent approximately 1% of EU GNI, a level well below the own resources
ceiling of 1.29% of EU GNI, as decided in 1992.
Parliament stressed that, faced politically with the impossibility of changing the overall MFF figures decided by the European Council, it had
focused on improving the implementation of the MFF by successfully negotiating the inclusion of new provisions that will help to make the new
financial framework and the new EU annual budget more operational, consistent, transparent and responsive to the needs of EU citizens.
These provisions concerned, in particular, the new arrangements relating to the MFF revision, flexibility, the unity and transparency of the EU
budget, along with a further engagement on reforming the EUs own resources.
However, in general terms, Parliament regretted the fact that both the procedure leading up to the agreement on the MFF 2014-2020 and the
political debate surrounding these negotiations demonstrated a clear lack of shared vision as regards the EU budget and political priorities ,

showed that there are very divergent approaches among the EU institutions, and fell short of Parliaments increased role and prerogatives
under the Treaty of Lisbon.
Accordingly, Parliament wanted to draw the necessary political and institutional lessons, which could serve as a basis for the preparation of
future negotiations.
Political considerations: whilst acknowledging the need for fiscal consolidation in Member States, Parliament pointed out that the EU budget
was primarily an investment budget for enhancing national efforts made to regain growth, stimulate competitiveness and generate employment
in the whole EU. It was concerned at the fact that budgetary debates in the Council had been for many years poisoned by the logic of fair
returns instead of being driven by the logic of the European added value. Parliament considered that, while this debate had already existed
before the introduction of a GNI-based resource, the situation had seriously intensified due to the current system of EU financing, whereby
some 74 % of revenues stemmed from national contributions based on GNI instead of genuine own resources. This logic also prevailed in the
way the MFF agreement was struck by the European Council on 8 February 2013. Parliament criticised, in particular, the increased number of
special allocations and gifts granted in the course of negotiations between Heads of State and Government, which are not based on objective
and verifiable criteria, but rather reflect the bargaining power of Member States, which denoted a lack of transparency. Parliament underlined
that the European added value should prevail over national interests.
Parliament strongly rejected this purely accounting vision of the EU budget, and regretted the fact that some Member States seemed to regard
national contributions to the EU budget purely as a cost to be minimized.
It also considered that:
·

any decision on the financial framework should be preceded by and based on a genuine political debate on the role, function and
added value of the EU budget;

·

the EU should have a system of genuine, clear, simple and fair own resources, which would reduce the share of GNI-based
contributions to a minimum.

Institutional considerations: Parliament recalled that it was the first EU institution to present its vision on the MFF 2014-2020 and the need to
reform the financing of the EU budget. It considered it regrettable that: (i) prior to the European Council agreement on the MFF of 8 February
2013, no meaningful negotiations were held between Parliament and the Council; (ii) despite Parliaments strong objections, all successive
negotiating boxes presented by different Council presidencies and, ultimately, the European Council MFF agreement of 8 February 2013
contained a significant number of legislative elements that should have been decided under the ordinary legislative procedure.
Drawing lessons from these observations, Parliament calls for:
·

it to be able to use all means available to strengthen its influence on the spirit, calendar and content of the negotiations with the
Council;

·

a more constructive attitude on the part of Council negotiators instead of forcing Parliament to struggle, including at the highest
political level, in order to engage in negotiations on every article of the MFF Regulation / IIA;

·

a significant improvement in the modalities of any future MFF negotiations, in order to avoid deadlocks and save valuable time and
resources in the course of negotiations.

Parliament also called for a shift towards qualified majority voting for the MFF Regulation and stated the unanimity rule in the Council means
that the agreement represented the lowest common denominator, based on the need to avoid the veto of a single Member State. The general
passerelle clause (Article 48(7) TEU) could be deployed by the European Council to make the shift towards qualified majority voting and the
ordinary legislative procedure for the own resources and MFF decisions.
MFF 2014-2020: the way forward: Parliament declared its intention to ensure that all new provisions that were successfully incorporated into
the MFF Regulation and IIA were utilised in full in the annual budgetary procedure, particularly the new rules on flexibility. It stressed, in this
context, that the accumulated RALs had reached a critical level that might eventually lead the EU budget into structural deficit.
It also recalled that the next Commission was due to launch a compulsory review and revision of the MFF 2014-2020 by the end of 2016, at
the request of Parliament. In this context, it stressed the need for the next Parliament to reflect in good time on political priorities, to identify
areas for which more investments will be deemed necessary in the second half of the MFF 2014-2020, focussing on areas of proven added
value of EU spending.
At the same time, Parliament strongly believed that a five-year MFF cycle would enhance democratic legitimacy by running in tandem with
Parliaments legislature.
Moreover, the Commissions proposals for the MFF revision should take full account of the latest macroeconomic projections and include a
thorough assessment of the operation of all special instruments, in particular the global margins in commitments and payments. Parliament
reiterated its intention to make the compulsory MFF revision a key demand in the investiture of the next Commission. The next European
Parliament was called upon make the election of the proposed candidate for President of the Commission conditional upon a strong and
non-ambiguous commitment to implementing the post-electoral review/revision clause and engaging in a genuine and deep political dialogue
on its content.
The issue of own resources: lastly, Parliament recalled that debate on Own Resources represented a unique opportunity to overcome the
deadlock that has arisen over the reform of the current own-resources system. It recalled that the High Level Group on Own Resources had a
mandate to examine all aspects of the reform of the own resources system. It stated that Parliament was firmly committed to working
intensively at all stages of this process and counted on the Councils equal commitment to this process.
It should be noted that two motions for resolution tabled by the Greens/EFA and GUE/NGL political groups respectively were rejected in
plenary.

